
























































June 24, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3047 
 June 24, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members of the Legislative Assembly, it gives me great 
pleasure this morning to introduce to you a group of eight 
young ladies that are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. These 
women are a group of eight women graduated 50 years ago 
from the College of Home Economics in the University of 
Saskatchewan and they now live all over North America and are 
travelling through our Saskatchewan and they got together on a 
reunion. 
 
And I understand they’re also touring the Motherwell 
Homestead, that you have a connection with that, graduated 
with one of the Motherwells or something. I’ve been there; it’s 
a wonderful place. On the way out there you will go through 
Qu’Appelle Valley and see some of Saskatchewan. We 
certainly welcome you here. Have a great reunion. I’m sure 
there’s been lots of talking, the jaws are likely getting a little 
sore. But do enjoy it and enjoy Saskatchewan and God bless 
each and every one of you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too take great 
pleasure this morning in introducing a group of students who 
are joining us. They are seated in the west gallery, filling up 
almost all of it by the looks of it. 
 
This is a group of grade 2 and grade 3 students, 58 of them, 
from St. Matthew School in my riding. Members of the 
Assembly will likely remember that St. Matthew is the school 
that is doing the innovative environmental project on their 
school grounds to help re-naturalize it and these students are 
playing an important part in that. 
 
So I’m very happy to have them here today and I hope to be 
able to get away to get a photo with them later. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also to you and 
through you to the members here, I’d also like to join in 
expressing hello to the grade 2 and 3 students of St. Matthew 
School here this morning, as did the member from Regina 
South. Seated in the west gallery is a number of children that I 
recognize, as they wander through my household in fact. And 
one of them in fact I had breakfast with this morning  my 
daughter Joelle, in grade 3. So I’d just like to join, and have you 
join with me, in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, we 
obviously have a great deal more to talk about when it comes to 
this particular Bill and to this particular Election Act. 
 
Up to about two or three weeks ago, Mr. Chairman, I thought 
that the most contentious issue contained in the Act had to deal 
with Crown corporations advertising during election 
campaigns. But given the revelations of the past two or three 
weeks regarding secret political funds and funds held by both 
the Conservatives and the NDP (New Democratic Party) whose 
main purpose is to skirt the law when it comes to full disclosure 
of political contributions, I truly believe that this requires a little 
more in-depth discussion and review before this particular Bill 
is passed. 
 
And I’ll refer to some previous suggestions that I’ve made, 
given that there is no urgency for this particular Bill to be 
passed through this House during this session. 
 
I have maintained, Mr. Chairman, and I continue to maintain, 
that what these parties have done contravenes the current 
Election Act. And I stand by that. And I stand by my call for an 
independent inquiry into this entire matter before any of this 
legislation does go through. 
 
After these revelations came to light, the minister proposed — 
only after these revelations came to light — the minister 
proposed amendments to the Act. These amendments did not 
seek to put an end to what has been going on with these secret 
funds and anonymous donations. Rather, these amendments 
seek to make these questionable practices legal. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that’s wrong. It’s wrong for us as members of 
this House to twist and manipulate the laws we pass so they  



3048  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

better suit our own political interest. And I think the members 
opposite know that it’s wrong. 
 
I think the members opposite do know what has been going on 
is wrong and in contravention of the Act, and their so-called 
solution is wrong. 
 
They need only look at the words of the Premier to know that 
their secret funds are not within the spirit of the law. The 
Premier himself stated in the ‘70s that politicians and political 
parties should not try to circumvent the law because such 
actions would defeat the very purpose of the law. Again, that’s 
according to our own Premier. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that the other two parties have . . . 
what they have done is precisely what the Premier said they 
should not do. By their own admissions, this whole issue isn’t a 
question of fixing a flawed law; this is a question of simply 
following a good law. That’s all. There’s nothing more. 
 
Now the minister vehemently disagrees with our interpretation 
of the Act. He says his lawyers are better than our lawyers, his 
accountants are better than our accountants. Of course he’d take 
that view, and of course I would disagree with his view. But, 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t think that’s for either of us to decide. In 
the face of the completely polarized views of the government 
and the opposition hold on this, we must have an independent 
interpretation of the Act as it stands now. 
 
That’s why we’ve called for an independent inquiry. That’s the 
only way we can effectively get to the bottom of all this. Let’s 
find out once and for all who’s right. I’m positive we are. The 
minister says he’s positive he is. Fine. Let’s find out once and 
for all. 
 
Let’s see if we can get someone in  an independent. Let’s get 
an umpire to break this tie. Let’s find out if their secret funds 
are legal. Let’s find out if any party  any party — is guilty of 
filtering money through their constituency associations with the 
purpose of escaping the disclosure laws as they exist in the 
current legislation. 
 
What’s wrong with finding out for sure, Mr. Chairman? That’s 
what I don’t understand. What concerns exist that will not allow 
and not support an independent  an umpire — to come in and 
review all sides of this situation? 
 
Well I suspect that the government just doesn’t want to, mainly 
because they know what the answer is. They are liable to get an 
answer that they do not want. Mr. Chairman, I already went 
through this in private member’s debate. But I don’t think it 
hurts to put our case in one more time. 
 
Section 207 of the current Act states that all monies provided 
by a person for the use of a registered political party shall be 
paid to a registered agent of the party. And then section B states 
that “no payment shall be made by or on behalf of a registered 
party other than by or through a registered agent of the party.” 
 
Mr. Chairman, it’s clear once again this section prohibits the 
payment of political contributions to a trust or to any other  

agency created by them to receive them on behalf of a 
registered party. Only the registered agent can receive those 
funds and only a registered agent can make payment by or on 
behalf of a party. 
 
More succinctly, Mr. Chairman, it is our determination that the 
Act simply does not allow for anonymous donations over $100. 
And clearly, the vehicle the NDP and the Tories have used to do 
just this is not allowed. Disclosure must be made. And if such 
disclosure is not made, donations to these trust funds cannot be 
used for the political use of registered parties. 
 
That is our interpretation, Mr. Chairman. And the minister says 
it all comes down to a matter of interpretation. While he has 
consistently stated he feels his party or the Tory Party have 
followed the law, I’d still like to hear his legal interpretation. 
He’s a lawyer and I am not. I’m just an old cop who used to 
catch people who broke our laws. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, if this government sees there are problems 
with the law in terms of clarity, I ask again: why don’t they 
bring in an amendment that absolutely makes it clear that 
what’s been going on in terms of hiding donations is clearly 
spelled out as against the law? Why go the other way? 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve called for someone to look at this, to 
determine if we are right. The government says it’s not 
necessary. But we think enough questions have been raised over 
this issue that we do indeed need someone to look at this and 
we will not rest until that happens. 
 
And we feel it’s vital that we have a mechanism in place . . . 
there is a mechanism in place; that we allow the opportunity for 
it to be handled in the appropriate manner. We have the Chief 
Electoral Officer with in fact his authority to call an inquiry. 
And I will be tabling, or at least presenting, some letters, Mr. 
Minister, that have already indicated there is a concern by 
officials who will be looking into the aspects and the 
perspectives of that particular statute. 
 
(1015) 
 
Mr. Chairman, the investigation by the Chief Electoral Officer 
that’s being proposed, inquiries . . . and I would like to just 
point out that we have received a letter from the Chief Electoral 
Officer asking numerous questions with respect to the funding, 
the donations, the transfer of funds. 
 
And I would like to pass this letter over to you, which is already 
an indication that this is not going to just be a matter that will 
take a week or two or a month or two, Mr. Deputy Chair  
those questions and that detailed inquiry. And I am assuming 
that the same letter has been sent to each of the parties. 
 
And until all those questions are answered, until the Chief 
Electoral Officer has an opportunity to review what’s been 
going on over the past six years  and that’s the content of the 
letter; I don’t believe there’s any need for me to read it into the 
record; it’s quite lengthy, as are the number of questions that 
are being asked  we cannot just ram through legislation 
without these types of questions being answered. 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3049 

I’d like to also send over a copy of a letter from the Provincial 
Auditor of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Chair, who also has 
indicated: 
 

When we audit the Department of the Executive Council 
for the year ended March 31, 1996, we will take into 
consideration the perspectives that have caused recent 
controversy. We will report our audit findings in our 1996 
fall report or our 1997 spring report to the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
What is wrong with waiting for these reports, for waiting for the 
results of the answers to the questions, serious questions that 
are being asked by the Chief Electoral Officer, who now finds 
himself in a position that he must, he should, carry out an 
investigation? There are some serious allegations and we 
believe there are some serious violations of The Election Act as 
it exists. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the government is always telling the official 
opposition to look into matters and look into problems that are 
raised. Well we have. We’ve brought it to the attention of the 
Provincial Auditor and we know now that the Chief Electoral 
Officer has the authority to call an inquiry when he sees fit, and 
that’s what he has initiated by virtue of the letters that he has 
sent to our party. I’m not aware of whether or not the other two 
parties have received a similar inquiry; I trust that they have. 
 
We’ve had good consultations on this Bill up to the point in 
time of the secret . . . of the revelations of the secret trust funds. 
Those secret trust funds are a grave concern. We’ve hit a rocky 
patch as a result of those secret trust funds. And, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, as I told the Premier last week, I don’t see why, given the 
controversy that’s arisen over the Act, that we have to rush this 
Bill through at this time. 
 
I believe we’re probably fairly close to the ending of the 
session. I think . . . I believe that the problems that have arisen 
need time for a great deal of further consideration. There’s no 
election in the offing, unless the minister has a secret he’d like 
to share. 
 
He said the other day this Bill won’t affect the upcoming 
by-election in North Battleford. So then why the hurry to get 
this Bill passed? There is nothing wrong with the law the way it 
sits; there’s no need for amending it. Let’s see it through until 
the next session, when we have answers from independent 
people with the responsibility to determine whether you’re 
right, Mr. Minister, or whether we are right, with all due 
respect. 
 
So I am asking once again  I’m pleading; I’m imploring on 
behalf of the electorate, on behalf of the people of this province 
 that we simply hold on to this Bill until we have a further 
chance to study these issues. It would be fair to you, it would be 
fair to the third party, and it would be fair to us. And it would 
be, most of all, fair to the people of Saskatchewan, to know that 
they can in fact trust politicians once again. Let’s bring some 
integrity back into this institution. 
 
A lot of work has gone into this Bill. I realize that; I know that.  

And I appreciate and I commend the people that have worked 
on it. But that work will not be lost simply by delaying this Bill 
until the next session for the very reasons that I mention. 
 
I believe that if, Mr. Deputy Chair, that if the minister takes 
time to consider all of these aspects and all of these proposals 
that we have talked about, I’m sure that he will agree that given 
the time, there will be some very productive responses; there 
will be some definitions. And there will be the interpretations 
that he and I are disagreeing upon and, that’s the way it works. 
 
I go back to what I said before — if there’s been a law broken, 
don’t just change it so that you can circumvent not having to 
pay the penalty for breaking that law. Let’s review all the 
details. Let’s wait till the Provincial Auditor gives us his 
perspective. Let’s wait till the Chief Electoral Officer gets all 
the answers from each of these political parties involved in this 
province for over the last six years; where that money has come 
from and how these secret trust funds have been set up; and 
who’s been benefiting from them and how they, in fact, in our 
opinion, in our very strong opinion, have very definitely 
circumvented a law that’s been in existence, that’s a good law 
and should continue. 
 
That’s what I ask, Mr. Chairman. Those are my opening 
comments and there will be some other questions that I will 
have of the minister after he’s responded to my opening 
comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I appreciate that the member 
has in a very comprehensive way laid out his position as it has 
developed over the past couple of weeks in the media and 
during question period. 
 
I take a very sharp exception on behalf of the New Democratic 
Party to the characterization of the Tommy Douglas House fund 
as being a secret trust fund. It is not a secret. It is a fund that is 
brought into existence primarily for the purpose of initially 
building and then maintaining Tommy Douglas House. Was not 
in any sense a secret fund or a trust fund, whatever the member 
has in mind when he uses that term. And I take strong, strong 
exception to his characterization of that. I take even stronger 
exception to the Leader of the Opposition describing that fund 
as having as its main purpose to skirt the elections law. 
 
The member knows that that is not the case. The member 
knows, Mr. Chair, that that is not the case and I take exception 
to him so characterizing that fund in those terms in this 
committee this morning. Having dealt . . . having addressed 
those remarks, let me now move on to the substance of the 
member’s opening statement, stripped of that unnecessary and 
unbecoming rhetoric. 
 
The member will remember that it was the government headed 
by Allan Blakeney that passed this law in 1974 over the 
objection and over the opposition of the Liberal Party of the 
day. So I think we can probably strip this discussion of any 
sanctimony also, because if it were up to the Liberal Party of 
the day, these provisions wouldn’t be in the law at all. And that 
there would be in effect no provisions respecting election 
expenses in the Saskatchewan election law. So lets just get our  



3050  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

feet on the ground with respect to this issue and discuss it in 
rational terms. 
 
The member has pressed consistently for an inquiry, Mr. Chair, 
from the very beginning, and the purpose of the inquiry, as I 
understand it, as I understand his representations, is to 
determine whether or not there has been any breach of the 
election law. Put another way, whether the opposition, the 
official opposition’s, interpretation of the law is correct or 
whether the government’s interpretation of the law is correct; it 
comes right down to a question of statutory interpretation. 
 
I know of no case in the history of this country where an inquiry 
has been constituted in order to determine a question of 
statutory interpretation. And the facts are not in dispute here; 
the question is the proper interpretation of the Act. And to 
repeat myself, I know of no case in the history of this country 
where an inquiry has been set up in order to answer the 
question, what does the Act mean? 
 
Now the member mentions that he’s a former police officer  
that wasn’t exactly his words  a very distinguished career 
with the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). And he 
knows that the court system in this province and in this country 
is set up to determine exactly that kind of a question. 
 
So if the member is so all-fired excited about whether or not 
these sections have been breached, there is one remedy that is 
available to him. Now I’m not an expert in election law but I 
would assume that the courts would be available in order to 
answer the question that the member puts forward. There may 
be other ways of doing it. It may be possible that the matter will 
be dealt with by the inquiry from the chief electoral office 
which the member has sent across to me and which I haven’t 
yet had the opportunity to read. 
 
I had a note sent in to me to say that this letter was also received 
by the New Democratic Party. So I assume that something is 
going on there. The member has also provided me with a copy 
of a letter from the Provincial Auditor dated June 17 and it may 
be that something will be going on there. 
 
All of those are concerned with the Act as it now stands and the 
question is whether or not there has been any violation of that 
Act. We obviously have a serious question of interpretation 
between the government and the official opposition, and the 
purpose for the proposed amendments to Bill 92, that has been 
in front of the member for some ten days or two weeks now, is 
to clarify what the law should be. 
 
Now the member suggests that we just leave the law as it is for 
another year while we go through another by-election, and not 
address this question of the argument about the interpretation 
until a year has passed. Presumably during that time it will have 
been determined whether there has been any violation of the 
law as it now exists. And I think that’s just a wrong-headed 
approach. I say that with respect. That’s just the wrong 
approach to this question. 
 
The proper thing for this Assembly to do, seized as we are of 
this controversy about the proper interpretation, is to clarify the  

Act. We have it right here on the Table in front of us now and it 
would be irresponsible of us not to deal with that question at 
this opportunity. We all know, I think, what the law ought to be. 
At least I have had no argument from either opposition party 
about the substance of the proposed amendment. The 
controversy we have is what does the 1974 law mean. And I see 
no reason why we should have to delay this Bill in order to 
decide that question before we proceed. 
 
The logical course is for us to clarify the law so that from this 
time forward there is no question about the reporting 
responsibilities with respect to political donations. We can duke 
it out somewhere else, in the courts or before the electoral 
office . . . Chief Electoral Officer or before the auditor, in order 
to determine whether in the past the law has been breached. But 
that’s no excuse for us not moving now to clarify the law, fix it 
up, get it into proper shape, so it will apply in the North 
Battleford by-election, and it will apply in the future. 
 
We’re quite prepared to do that. After all, we’re the people who 
first brought election expense law into this province, into the 
laws of this province. We take the position, and I want to say 
this again with all of the clarity that I can, we are advised by all 
of our advisers, that we are in compliance with the law. We 
have always been in compliance with the law, and we will 
continue to be in compliance with the law. 
 
We want now to make it tougher. And as I say, we can duke it 
out in some appropriate forum as to whether or not the law, as it 
was passed in 1974, has been breached. But that is no excuse 
for holding up this Bill. There’s no reason to hold up this Bill. 
 
(1030) 
 
This Bill has been the product of dozens  hundreds of hours 
of work, including work by the official opposition, including 
the member from Wood River, and including the third party. A 
lot of people put a lot of work into this and we had a document 
which was, in practically all respects, a consensus document  
in practically all respects, a consensus document with a couple 
of issues tagged as being unable to agree. 
 
Now with this, we’re now into our fifth or sixth hour of debate 
over the Bill that we’ve all agreed to. And there are, you know 
. . . comments could be made about that. But the committee will 
do what the committee will do. I mean this process has integrity 
and will play itself out. 
 
But it’s not a question of ramming this Bill through. It’s not a 
question of being in a hurry. It’s a question of taking advantage 
of all of the work that we’ve done, and the consensus that 
exists, I believe, around the proposed amendment as to what the 
law should be, that drives the government to want to complete 
this thing now rather than to delay it for another day. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the minister. I 
guess then for our own comfort, I would like to ask some very 
direct questions with respect to your view on some of those 
recent revelations. 
 
If I may, I would once again like to recall what the Premier, as  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3051 

attorney general in 1978, during an amendment to that law, 
stated: 

 
All contributions to, and payments on behalf of political 
parties and candidates must be handled through registered 
agents or the business manager. 

 
That’s perfectly clear in the legislation. 
 
I would like to ask then, why, in the minister’s view, have 
provisions been put into place that simply do not allow 
anonymous donations to political parties over a certain amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m not certain, Mr. Chair, that I 
understand the member’s question clearly. Under the Act as it 
exists now, which we’ll call the old Act, an anonymous 
contribution that exceeded $100 was prohibited. And under the 
Bill that is before us now, section 241, the anonymous 
contribution level is $250. Now I’m not sure whether that’s 
responsive to the member’s question or not. 
 
Mr. Osika:  In your view, Mr. Minister, I guess my question 
was, it was. . . The Act required for donors over $100 to be 
identified. Now that’s being changed to donors $250 and over. I 
was just wondering, in your view, Mr. Minister, why that 
provision is in the Act, why there is that restriction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  As to why the limit was raised from 100 
to $250, the proposal was made on account of the fact that $100 
back then is probably worth about $250 right now, having 
regard to inflation and that sort of thing, so that it seemed like a 
natural thing to do. It was also more or less in line with 
provinces in the prairie basin. So that we had no deeper purpose 
in mind and simply carried forward the law. 
 
And I think that, if I may presume to say so, I think that you 
agreed with that and the third party agreed with that. At least I 
can’t recall any discussion around this. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I’m sorry if I . . . I apologize for my 
unclarity if you wish. 
 
Why do we have those provisions? Why do you, sir, in your 
view, feel that these restrictions are in place, that you must be 
identified if you give over a certain amount of money to 
political parties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I think it was the then leader 
of the Liberal Party, Davey Steuart, that put the case during the 
debate during the 1970s, that there are, out there among our 
citizens, people who don’t want to be identified with a 
particular political party and yet wish to make a contribution to 
the party whose program they support. So that the setting of a 
limit, whether it’s $100 or $250, allowed them the opportunity 
to make a contribution without disclosing their support for that 
political party. 
 
There’s a lot of merit in that, you know. There is, as I have 
pointed out, a debate that has gone on in our country for 
generations about the principle of transparent political 
donations, that is to say, disclosing political donations. And I  

think it the case that none of the jurisdictions in Canada can 
hold themselves out as having the perfect law. 
 
The problem is the balancing of interests in our society. That’s 
a problem with respect to many issues that we have encountered 
in the past and will encounter in the future, where different 
interests are at play with respect to a question of public policy, 
and it falls to people like us to balance those interests and 
determine where we’re going to come down. And so we move 
from a system in which there was no disclosure at all and 
nobody knew where money was coming from and how much 
money was coming and that sort of thing, to a system where we 
started to say, these donations must be reported. 
 
Of course the arguments are well-known. I’ve given the one on 
behalf of the . . . of allowing people to make contributions at 
least up to a certain level without disclosing to the world that 
they’re making those contributions. On the other hand, it is a 
strong argument in the public interest that the source of political 
funding become public. 
 
Those are both valid principles. So we find ourselves at the 
junction of them, at the intersection, and asking ourselves 
whether that’s an appropriate intersection or whether we’ve 
misplaced it, whether we ought to place it differently. And 
we’re certainly prepared to have that discussion. 
 
It’s a hard and a question requiring a lot of thought, and we’ve 
given a lot of thought to it. We’ve given a great deal of thought 
to it, as no doubt the official opposition has. We have had our 
officials examine the laws of other jurisdictions and try and 
understand where they’re coming from and where they’re going 
to. We do that because there ought in this country to be some 
consistency across the piece, I think  not perfect consistency 
but relative consistency, and you like to know that you’re 
headed in about the same direction on these kinds of issues as 
other provinces. 
 
We are quite prepared to examine it, to make the law more 
transparent. And that’s really what our amendment is all about. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the minister. I’d 
just like to . . . It came as quite a shock when we learned about 
the PC (Progressive Conservative) metro trust fund. It came as 
quite a shock to everybody. My question to you, sir, is, do you 
believe that that fund is morally and legally right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t know. I mean it does not fall to 
me to pronounce on that, and it’s probably inappropriate for me 
to make any pronouncement on it, considering the documents 
that you have provided this morning, and the investigation and 
inquiries that are obviously going on. 
 
So it would be not appropriate for me to start pronouncing 
whether or not it is moral or immoral or legal or illegal. I just 
have to allow that to emerge from the various processes that are 
under way. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I guess that was . . . Some of the 
reasons for, I believe, the intent of the Act from some time 
previous very well had to do with what’s going on in the United  



3052  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

States. And any time you turn on American news broadcasts 
you see where their system has been so bastardized by the 
power of money — and it’s something that we certainly not 
want to have happen here — down there it’s almost turned into 
legal bribery. 
 
We constantly hear this government going on and on about the 
American health care system, which they clearly don’t want, 
and neither do we. So then why would they want to put our 
province in a position where our political system could 
potentially become as badly twisted as the Americans’  open 
to the highest bidders. And I believe that was the intent of the 
. . . not allowing anonymity to donations to various funds or 
different political parties by trade unions, by major corporations 
or companies. 
 
Because if in fact that was allowed, then no one would be wiser 
because of the anonymity, particularly of such kind of trust 
funds. I guess, and you’ve clarified, or at least you’ve indicted, 
that you do not . . . you distinguish the Tommy Douglas House 
from the PC metro trust fund. The intent for each, as you’ve 
indicated, is not the same  to filter money through a 
corporation. 
 
But is it in you view though that the donors, through that fund, 
that if there are political donations made through that Tommy 
Douglas House, or from that incorporated entity to 
constituencies, is that in your view within the intent of the 
current legislation? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Chair, I want to say that I 
agree with the member totally when he warns of the danger of 
slipping into an American kind of situation here. I think that it’s 
very sad to see what’s happening down there in the elections 
and in nominations as well, where the depth of pockets play 
such an important role, where a candidate can come from 
nowhere without a program that enjoys any broad consensus at 
all and simply buy his or her way into the process and almost 
win it. And it is something that we have to avoid here, and 
certainly election spending laws are an important element of 
that. 
 
We have tried in our proposed House amendment to deal in a 
straightforward, clear way with this question of the reporting of 
contributions. And I think the member will agree that it goes a 
considerable distance towards making those donations more 
transparent. 
 
I have an idea the member’s question is sort of addressed to the 
existing state of the law, and there we have a controversy. But I 
think  I’m being a bit presumptuous when I say this — but I 
think we have no controversy about the fact that this proposed 
amendment would move us a considerable distance in the 
direction that the hon. member wants us to go, judging by what 
he says about his interpretation of the existing law. So I think 
we  again I’m being presumptuous  I think we have a 
common approach to this thing. 
 
Where our disagreement exists is whether under the law of the  

1970s the political parties have or have not complied. And fair 
enough. I mean those things happen every day with respect to 
laws passed by this legislature. And it’s just almost to be 
expected they’ll pop up somewhere, usually where you least 
expect them. And they have to be dealt with. Not an attempt to 
sweep them under the rug or anything like that, but let’s take 
this opportunity to try and clarify what the law will be. And if 
we can make it better and tougher and clearer, let’s do that too. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I couldn’t agree with you more, Mr. Minister, 
and I appreciate that view. But before we change it, let’s deal 
with some of the questions that have been raised. What, in your 
view, might be the intent of the PC metro trust fund? Those are 
the issues that have raised very serious concerns about where 
did that money come from and how do you amass that amount 
of money. And it’s there and it’s been admitted to. The PC 
Party executive has said, hey, we don’t know about it. 
 
I think it’s important, and why deal with having to change the 
legislation until we find out perhaps, after a thorough review, 
once again there will be other areas and other issues that will 
need to be dealt with. There may need to be other amendments. 
It would give us more of a global opportunity than . . . once 
again, with all the hard work that I know that your people have 
done and good, hard work, and it’s muchly appreciated; that 
will not be lost. 
 
However, what the opportunity to go through the exercises that 
I’ve proposed, the ones that have already been initiated by the 
good people who have taken the responsibility to say yes, we 
will take a look at your perspective of what’s been going on . . . 
And that may then allow, once we get the reports, once we get 
some of those answers that are being asked, the opportunity 
once again with your good people, Mr. Minister, to sit down 
and for them perhaps also to identify, by golly, that’s something 
we didn’t think of. Since we just proposed these amendments a 
couple of weeks ago or whatever, we never thought of that. And 
that’s a good one. 
 
Maybe we can include that without then next session having to 
reopen the Act or reopen the Bill again  it can be all inclusive 
 and coming back to the session, next session and saying, 
now we have the entire package. We have the answers to the 
questions that were raised. We have the concerns of the folks 
about where all these monies have been amassed. Those have 
been answered. People have been dealt with. Those funds have 
been clearly identified as either appropriate or inappropriate, 
and whomever, whether it’s party, whether it’s individuals 
responsible, have been dealt with and things are going to be 
tightened up and perhaps beyond the amendments that we have 
here before us. 
 
Again, and I’m going to continue until we finish with this, Mr. 
Minister, plead for putting this Bill over to the next session 
because of the very serious nature of the questions that have 
arisen and our concerns for our political system not to get 
embroiled in a similar situation that exists across the line. We 
don’t want that here and you don’t want that here. You stated 
that. 
 
So it just concerns me that if there’s no problem as you see  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3053 

from your interpretation, from the government’s perspective, 
from the NDP Party’s perspective, then what’s the concern 
about leaving it over to the next session? Having the questions 
answered, having a mini-investigation if you wish, not a 
judicial inquiry. . . . That’s not what’s under way right now, 
although that might be the more appropriate, the most 
independent. However, still there is an investigation initiated. 
Let’s wait till we see the outcome of that, and then perhaps we 
can deal with this properly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  But, Mr. Chair, I don’t understand why. 
I mean the logic, with respect, falls apart. The fact of the matter 
is that there is controversy about the present sections. There is 
controversy . . . and I agree with that, not only because you and 
I say it, but because people like Emmet Reidy and Dick Proctor 
and Tom Lukiwski say it. And those are people who work 
elections all the time and who know. Not neophytes like us that 
maybe have been through one, two, four elections, something 
like that, as candidates, knowing very little about how the 
minutia, the details of the organization, work themselves out. 
And that’s why we have campaign managers and business 
managers. 
 
But when people like Emmet Reidy come forward with an 
interpretation of the Act that is different than Dick Proctor’s, 
that is different than Tom Lukiwski, then it’s time we, as 
legislators, got our act together and, rather than wait to see how 
that quarrel ends up, fix the law  fix the law. 
 
We can’t rewrite history. We’re not about to pass amendments 
to this law now that will be retroactive to 1974 or 1978. We’re 
going to pass laws that are going to go into effect probably 
January 1, 1997. And we will know then, that from that time 
forward the law will be clear. We can’t do anything about the 
past. We can’t rewrite it. 
 
As I said earlier  and pardon my choice of words  perhaps 
we’ve got to duke this out somewhere and find out who’s right 
and who’s wrong. And we’ll have Emmet Reidy and Dick 
Proctor and Tom Lukiwski take whatever path they consider 
appropriate in order to sort out these questions. Let that be. 
 
We’ve got all kinds of ways in this society to resolve those sorts 
of legal disputes. We’ve had them for years. It’s one of the 
strengths of our system. We can bring finality to these things. 
 
But you and I don’t have to sit around this House waiting for 
five or six years for some court to . . . for some case to work its 
way through to the Supreme Court of Canada, for example, if 
that’s the route that is taken, and certainly it is one of the routes 
that is available. 
 
We can move right now to fix the law and it won’t affect those 
cases at all. Nothing is swept under the rug; nothing has 
changed. It is simply that a new formulation of the law has been 
agreed to by this legislature and, from the time of proclamation 
on, will form the law of this part of this land. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I find 
this somewhat interesting, when you’re answering some of the 
questions on interpretation of a law, that in fact it was the New  

Democrat government that brought in the amendments to this 
Act in 1974, and as the Leader of the Opposition quoted from 
some of the 1974 Hansards, it was very clear what the 
interpretation was then and remains to be now. 
 
Now I know that you would like this to be a more confusing 
picture show in talking about some Tom Lukiwski, or whatever 
his name is, and Dick Proctor, and Emmet Reidy. And even 
they have differences of opinion on the interpretation of the 
Act. But one thing has been clear from the outset, is that Mr. 
Reidy finds the Act to be very straightforward, very clear, and 
in fact follows the Act the way it’s set out, follows that very 
clear and transparent Act. It just so happens it’s the other two 
that are, I guess, executive directors of parties that have secret 
funds that seem to have a concern with interpretation. 
 
Following up on some of the comments that the Leader of the 
Opposition had made mention, and in fact I think has made a 
very good point as to why this Bill should not go forward at this 
time. If we have investigations on the go . . . and who knows 
where this . . . I mean you yourself stated a few moments ago 
that this is going to proceed, it’s going to progress, go 
somewhere else. So why then, Mr. Minister, would you want to 
bring in changes to an Act before you know even what all the 
problems are? If you think there’s problems to the Act, why 
wouldn’t . . . for the life of me, I can’t see why you would want 
to have these changes brought forward until you know that 
everything has been uncovered. 
 
Now you’ve made mention that you had officials look at other 
jurisdictions when you’re looking at the Act. Can you tell me, 
Mr. Minister, what examples perhaps were in Alberta’s 
legislation that would perhaps take care of some of the 
problems that a few parties in this province ran into. Tell us 
what Alberta did to solve it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the 
member. Alberta has very little law at all covering this and has 
no system of the refund of political expenses, and they don’t 
have any law on their books that are helpful to us. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think you’re 
right on that because I looked into a little bit of the Alberta 
disclosure law and . . . Mr. Chair, if you could bring some of 
your own members . . . calm them down a little bit. It’s hard to 
hear in the House today. 
 
Mr. Minister, in Alberta, constituency associations have to be 
registered with the Chief Electoral Officer there, and yet it’s 
only the party in Saskatchewan that has to be registered. So if 
you’re having to register the constituency associations, that 
would go a long way in the reporting requirements, would it 
not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We have not taken the position in this 
province, Mr. Chair, that the constituency associations need to 
be directly registered, and I see little advantage in it. It is, I 
think, sufficient that we have the registered political parties 
working in the system that we have under the old law, and as 
that will be improved under the new law. 
 



3054  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

The key question is the reporting of contributions . . . the key 
question is reporting of donations and we’ve tried to take care 
of that with our House amendment. We would not agree to go 
to the Alberta election-expense law. We don’t think there’s 
enough law there. Certainly not enough for the member’s 
purposes, that’s for sure. 
 
And I just don’t see any purpose to be served in requiring the 
registration of 58 constituency associations from each political 
party. I don’t know what question of public policy that would 
address. The key question is the reporting of contributions, as 
the Leader of the Opposition has so eloquently put that point 
over and over again. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  But, Mr. Minister, you see, perhaps it’s 
not interpretation being the problem; it’s whether you have the 
will or the desire to nip something in the bud that is clearly 
wrong. And by your answer, I can only sense that’s perhaps 
what the problem is. 
 
And going back to the Alberta model, in Alberta, each 
constituency association must file a financial statement setting 
out the income, transfers from the party or elsewhere, donations 
and expenses, and all donators must be revealed, and that’s 
section 34(1)(b) of the Alberta Act. 
 
So if in fact the problem that your party and the Conservative 
Party are into is having monies, huge sums of monies, perhaps 
going into secret funds and coming through the constituency 
associations  because clearly that’s what’s been happening  
and not being reported as they should have under section 219 
. . . 
 
(1100) 
 
An Hon. Member:  Nonsense. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well it’s not nonsense. You’ve got a 
problem. 
 
Well your two parties have millions of dollars in bank accounts, 
so don’t tell me it’s nonsense. Now if other provinces . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s nonsense and you know it. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well it isn’t nonsense. And you can clear 
this up, Mr. Minister. You’re in the spot right now to clear it 
up. 
 
See the question really is, the question really is, why are you 
ramming it at the people right now? You’ve got three years 
before an election and you feel you must ram this through right 
now, with all these questions before the House. 
 
An Hon. Member:  We’re not ramming anything through. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  You are so. You are ramming it because 
the Deputy Premier tried some games here on Friday so that this 
wouldn’t be brought before the people to be voted on  one 
game after another. One game after another. And you’re going 
to have to answer to the people sooner or later. 

Now, Mr. Minister, answer the question as to why, if in fact 
Alberta sees it necessary to register constituency associations so 
that the disclosure is very complete, as it should be in this 
province under the existing Act, why wouldn’t you consider it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member will forgive me for 
responding from my seat, but I took exception to some of his 
excessive rhetoric. 
 
I want to say once again for the member, in case he hasn’t heard 
it before, that we have no difficulty with the present law in the 
sense that we understand it. We are the people who wrote it in 
the first place over the objections of your party, and we have 
followed it ever since. And our Mr. Proctor has a perfectly clear 
conscience so far as compliance is concerned. 
 
Now you can test that somewhere. Go ahead and do that. 
Welcome to it. Do your thing there; that’s just fine. But that is 
no excuse for not doing something about this law now. If we 
have people of the ilk of Emmet Reidy and Dick Proctor and 
their legal advisers disagreeing as to what is the interpretation 
of the law that we have on the books now, then surely it is 
important and incumbent upon us to fix it. That’s all there is to 
it  not a question of ramming anything through. It’s a 
question of taking the opportunity here . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Now you’re doing what I did. You’re 
badgering me from my seat. I think we should not do that. We 
can stand up and put our views on the record here. 
 
The opportunity is here right now to clear up this question, get a 
formulation that Emmet Reidy and Dick Proctor and Tom 
Lukiwski, who are the pros here, understand and agree upon 
and is not subject to interpretation by lawyers but is perfectly 
clear. We owe that to the people. That’s only the rational thing 
to do. Why would we leave the law in this muddied state until 
these external processes work their way through? Why would 
we do that? We can substantially clarify the law now as we 
understand the problem. 
 
If subsequent events shows that further clarification is needed, 
we meet once a year for 70, 80, 90, 100 days, whatever it is; we 
can go ahead and do that when the time comes if that’s 
necessary. But we can act now. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, the interesting part of your 
comment, when you keep bringing in the executive directors of 
the three parties into this, why would it . . . why is it in fact only 
Mr. Reidy that . . . When you’re talking about who has a certain 
interpretation of the Act, why is it Mr. Reidy the one that 
doesn’t have a concern with the interpretation of the Act 
because he clearly sees that disclosure is in section 219? And 
why is it Mr. Proctor is the one who’s fighting for 
non-disclosure? 
 
Now you’re in charge of this Act. Tell me why you aren’t in 
control of your own party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I’m certainly not in control of my 
own party. I mean the party exists as an organization that is 
probably not under the control of anybody. 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3055 

Now Mr. Proctor doesn’t have any problem with the 
interpretation of the Act. He’s just following the interpretation 
of the Act that has been given to the Act from the time it was 
passed. That’s all  from the time it was passed. 
 
Now Mr. Reidy, who I respect very, very highly  very highly, 
I regard him as friend of mine  has a different interpretation. 
Fair enough. That’s how . . . that’s what happens in our system. 
 
And we’ve got all kinds of ways to resolve that dispute. And it 
can be resolved in the fullness of time, and that’s appropriate 
and people should have to account for what they’ve done or 
haven’t done. But that’s no excuse for us to go into some state 
of paralysis here and not do anything with all of the work that 
we’ve done over the past many months and clarify the election 
law. 
 
Now another reason why we want to pass this law now is that 
the member will realize there are lots of things that have to be 
done under the new Act when it’s passed . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well by way of the administrative things, the 
things that have to be done by the chief electoral office  the 
preparation of forms, the preparation of guidelines, preparation 
of regulations, not to mention improvements to the system of 
enumeration. And we have many, many improvements in this 
Act that can be developed and be of great assistance to us as 
early as the next election, if we get going on this. 
 
If we delay it for a year, many of those things can’t be done. 
Certainly nothing can be done with respect to enumeration that 
will be of any consequence. So we want to do it now and we 
see no logical reason why we wouldn’t do it now. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, then you wouldn’t 
have a problem if in fact you want this Act to go ahead now . . . 
and you and I both know it doesn’t have to go ahead now. 
You’ve got three years before an election. You’ve got all . . . 
you’ve got a few years before this really has to be dealt with. 
 
If the problem is whether you’re making certain forms or, you 
know, some of the things you’ve set out, well then by 
agreement, we can agree that certain sections of this Act are 
going to proceed in the next session  go ahead and do your 
forms. 
 
Why would you want to though, if in fact we find out 
throughout the summer or fall, whenever the Chief Electoral 
Officer completes the review of the parties and sees perhaps 
there’s a certain problem, why would you want to start on 
something now and in fact spend all that taxpayer money if it 
had to be changed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  On the other hand, Mr. Chair, what is 
the problem with doing it now? Why would one not do it? We 
have some clear understanding of your position on the subject 
of political contributions. It’s a new position for the Liberal 
Party, but it is a position, and it can be supported by logical 
argument and that’s good. And with that understanding, we are 
proposing an amendment which we think moves a long way in 
the direction that we understand the Liberal Party wants to go. 
 

Why wouldn’t we do that now? Why do we have to wait for 
somebody to find out whether there was a violation of 
something in 1991 or 1982 or whenever? We don’t need . . . I 
mean those things have to be done but we don’t have to know 
them in order to make a significant improvement to this law. 
 
That may be, as the member says, that it would not be 
administratively impossible to do a lot of the things that have to 
be done under this Act. But a great deal more can be done, and 
done in a much more complete way, if we move in a timely way 
to amend the Act, to change the Act now; to adopt the new Act. 
 
And if we have to come back to it, we’ll come back to it. I mean 
there’s a good deal of will here, and in spite of the controversy 
that we’ve had over the last couple of weeks, a lot of goodwill 
between the parties so far as the formulation of this law is 
concerned. I personally have never seen anything like it and it 
has been a pleasure, up until two or three weeks ago, to be 
associated with this issue because it was a good, positive, and 
constructive environment in which to work. 
 
I think we should put what we’ve done on the laws of this 
province and understand that if new information comes to light 
we’ll come back and fix it up. That’s our position. 
 
We don’t understand the logic of waiting  waiting in case we 
might be able to draw a more perfect amendment to Bill 92? I 
don’t think so. I don’t think so; we can do that when the times 
comes. We don’t know that that’s going to happen. And if this 
thing happens to go to court, you know if somebody takes 
somebody to court here for an interpretation of the Act, we 
could be hung up for years waiting for a decision. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  You see the problem, Mr. Minister, with 
your argument is you’re letting on that something has got to be 
done now. Can you give me . . . first of all, I’d like to see an 
example of some of the forms that you think would take three 
years to have a printing company deal with. I mean I just don’t 
buy any of those arguments. But some of the arguments that are 
factual are such as, I guess it was a week ago, Bill No. 120 was 
brought in in the final days of the session. But when all parties 
see that there’s a benefit to having it move quickly through, it 
does move quickly through. And that’s exactly how this Bill, 
this Bill 92, The Election Act, the amendments to The Election 
Act, would be dealt with. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Minister, how you think you can proceed 
when the official opposition is not in favour of what you’re 
trying to do. I mean The Election Act . . . and I recall a 
conversation you and I had two, three months ago about this, 
that in fact unless we all agree, unless all three parties agree  
and I don’t for the life of me know how that would happen 
anyways because we can never seem to get the Conservative 
Party to sit in here long enough to agree to anything  but the 
fact of the matter is unless we can all agree, you wouldn’t be 
moving ahead with this Act. 
 
That’s why it was started long ago. It was the first piece of 
legislation I saw. And at that time I appreciated the fact that you 
included us in the meetings that you did. But now that this 
serious problem has arisen, you don’t think that perhaps we can  



3056  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

set it off to be the first order of business in the next session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the logic, in my respectful view, 
still is absent from the member’s presentation. The fact is that 
we have a consensus document in front of us. We have one 
little problem about pre-writ expenses that we’ll have to sort out 
and debate here. And we had a problem about Crown 
corporations advertising which may have gone away, may not 
have gone away. But at least we’re prepared to make an 
amendment to further clarify it. 
 
So with those two issues aside, or we agree they should be 
resolved here, we don’t have any controversy left. I mean, I 
think there is no . . . I have not heard any opposition, any . . . at 
least not any arguments against the House amendment that we 
have before you now. We’ve had no detailed response from 
you. 
 
We have heard the Leader of the Opposition say that they won’t 
agree to the amendment  opposed to the amendment  and 
that’s fine. But I’ve not heard any . . . and I’ve certainly not 
received any written material that indicates what the problem is. 
And if there’s a problem with it, let’s discuss it and let’s amend 
the amendment. 
 
But we’re trying to move the election law with this proposed 
amendment at least closer to where you apparently want to take 
it. So I don’t see any big controversy there. I mean I don’t know 
where the controversy is. So far as this law is concerned, this 
Bill 92, I don’t see where the controversy is. 
 
I understand there’s a controversy about something that may 
have happened in 1982, or what the proper interpretation of the 
law of ’74 was or ’78, but I don’t understand where the 
controversy is with respect to Bill 92. As far as I can see, there 
really isn’t any. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well let’s . . . you keep bringing us back 
to 1974, so let met quote here from Hansard, April 25, 1974: 
 

Mr. Speaker, a word about the corporations and others. 
Corporations and organizations or associations that are 
formed for the purposes of soliciting and obtaining moneys 
for political parties must obtain a record of the names and 
addresses of each person making a contribution and the 
amount thereof. Before any such body may make a 
contribution of any major amount to a political party, that 
party must reveal the names and addresses of each person 
making the contribution to the body and the amount 
thereof. No contributions may be solicited or received from 
any individual or corporation, association or trade union 
outside of Canada. 

 
Mr. Minister, do you find . . . Is that very clear? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well you know that’s an interesting 
debate in ’74. I’ve read it, as has the member, and . . . I mean 
they produced a law. I think it was a good law. It was a very 
substantial advance over what the law was previously. The 
member may argue that it’s not enough law or that it’s not clear 
enough or that he doesn’t agree with the interpretation of the  

New Democratic Party or the Progressive Conservative Party. 
Those are fair; fair things to do. 
 
But I don’t know how I can comment on the debate in 1974. I 
mean I think that they had a debate then as we’re having a 
debate now; and it may be that in 22 years from now someone 
will be bringing up our words and asking what we meant when 
we said one thing or another. 
 
(1115) 
 
I’ll say this to the member. I want to say it again. We have, I 
think, a consensus on what reforms should be made to the law 
to clarify it and we’re prepared to change it And the proposed 
amendment is a substantial change. And we’re prepared to 
consider other ideas for reforming it, amending it, toughening it 
up. We’re glad to do that. We’ve been trying to tell the Leader 
of the Opposition that for some considerable time now. We’re 
prepared to work with him to toughen up the law. And we are. 
So I extend that offer once again to the member and hope we 
can get on with this thing. 
 
I can’t change the law as it has existed. I can’t . . . I mean that’s 
going to have to be fought out somewhere before somebody to 
determine whether or not that law has been complied with and 
we can’t do anything in this legislature to assist in that 
argument, that argument. The NDP and its lawyers, we believe 
that the law has been perfectly complied with. We think that 
there is a novel interpretation that has come forward from the 
legal advisers for the Liberal Party but, as I say, we have great 
respect for Emmet Reidy and for Garrett Wilson and if they see 
a different interpretation of the law then it falls to us to correct 
it, and correct it as soon as we can and we’re right here. We’ve 
got the Bill right in front of us. We can do it now. We should 
do it now. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, I enjoyed your 
comments  and in fact if you could golf as good as you could 
confuse the issue you’d be on a world tour  but you were 
nowhere near the question with your answer, and we’re going 
to revisit it. And we will keep revisiting it, Mr. Minister, until I 
get a response from you. Okay? So you might as well as just cut 
to the chase here. What I read to you out of Hansard in 1974, 
do you find that to be clear or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member has me at a disadvantage 
because I don’t have the text in front of me and I’ve long since 
forgotten the details of his question. 
 
But it matters not whether I agree with . . . Mr. Chair, it matters 
not whether I agree with something which some member of this 
House said in 1974. That’s not the issue. That’s not going to get 
us anywhere. If the member can pin me down on whether or not 
I agree or disagree with that interpretation, that’s not going to 
advance the progress of the election law of this province, the 
reform that we’re proposing and that we’ve agreed to in Bill 92 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That may be relevant, although I 
can’t imagine who would be interested in what my views were. 
 
In a court action or in an inquiry by the Chief Electoral Officer 
or in the work of the Provincial Auditor, they may look around  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3057 

and say, I wonder what the minister thinks about this statement 
that was made in 1974. I can’t imagine anybody being 
interested in that. The member obviously is. And I can’t 
imagine for what purpose. But it doesn’t seem to have any 
relevancy to anything I can think of. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. There, you now 
have a copy. And I’ll get mine back too, please, and thank you, 
because I think we’ll be discussing this for awhile. 
 
Mr. Minister, read along with me now: 
 

A word about the corporations and others. Corporations 
and organizations or associations that are formed for the 
purposes of soliciting and obtaining monies for political 
parties must maintain a record of the names and addresses 
of each person making a contribution and the amount 
thereof. 

 
We’re going to break this up into some smaller segments for 
you, Mr. Minister. Tell me what you think of that first sentence 
and whether or not your party and Dick Proctor complies with 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Again, Mr. Chair, being genuinely 
perplexed about what the member is after here, the relevance of 
what we’re now doing before this committee, I think that’s a 
good sentence. I think that’s probably an appropriate thing for 
the minister at the time to be saying. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I would agree with you. 
Now can you tell me why Dick Proctor doesn’t comply with 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Dick Proctor is in perfect compliance 
with that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So then you can show us a list of the 
donations of those corporations and organizations and 
associations as the law has set out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  What I can say is that the NDP has 
complied with this election law over the years. I’ll say that once 
again  perfect compliance with the election law over the 
years. And that’s our position. So I assume that all that’s 
required in the law has indeed been done over the years. 
 
Now I can’t answer for the New Democratic Party or Dick 
Proctor. He’s going to have to answer . . . he’s going to have to 
answer himself. No more than that member can speak for the 
Liberal Party . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, come on, get 
real. Try and concentrate on what we’re saying, okay? Try and 
concentrate on it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well sure. 
 
Keep in mind we’re talking about a law that was passed in 
1974, amended in 1978, and has been followed ever since. My 
party alleges that it has been in compliance with that law over 
all those many years, and I believe that to be the case. No doubt 
you would say the same thing on behalf of your party. 
 
And here we are. We find ourself in some kind of controversy  

about the proper meaning of the law that was passed in 1974, 
amended in 1978. Let’s fix it. There are places where debates 
can be held, arguments made, submissions made with respect to 
whether or not that law was complied with. This legislature is 
not going to decide that question. This legislature can decide 
what the law should be and can write the law and pass the law, 
but we can’t determine whether or not a law has been broken or 
whether it has been complied with. That’s for somebody else. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, if you can’t determine that, 
what and why do you want to fix it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Precisely because really honourable 
people like Emmet Reidy and Garrett Wilson have an 
interpretation of the Act that is different than the one that has 
been in effect in this province for the last 22 years. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister, I will . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Is that so hard to understand? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well no it’s not hard to understand on our 
part, you see, but we’re trying to walk through a process so you 
can grasp why it is that your party doesn’t follow something 
that’s very clear. 
 
Now you agreed with me that the first sentence I read in that 
paragraph makes sense. Well that is exactly what Mr. Reidy and 
Garrett Wilson, as you want to bring in private people’s names 
into this legislature, do agree with. Now can you explain what it 
is in that sentence that you want to fix? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m not trying to fix anything in that 
sentence. I’m trying to respond to an issue that the Leader of the 
Opposition has raised with respect to the meaning of the law. 
That’s all. Just trying to fix the law. And while we’re at it, 
advance it. That’s all. 
 
I’m not trying to fix a statement by the Premier, who I think is, 
who is being . . . who spoke the words that we’re talking about. 
I’m not trying to fix that. You know that’s as may be. That’s 
part of the historical record. And the law speaks for itself. The 
member knows that. I mean the law is there. It’s on the books. 
It’s plain and simple, and we have been complying with it for 
many years. 
 
Now we have a question of interpretations raised this year by 
the Liberal Party, and on the advice of Mr. Garrett Wilson and 
by Emmet Reidy, and we have to take that seriously, look at the 
law and say, if those folks can find any contradictions in that 
law, any problems with it, a different interpretation than we 
have been following, then we’d better move to correct that law 
so that from now on the law will be more clear. 
 
We can’t rewrite what’s happened. That’s as may be. We’re 
going to have to duke that out somewhere else obviously. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is not going to rest on this 
question. Fine. We’ll be there; wherever it is that we have to go, 
we’ll be there in order to determine whether or not we’re right; 
whether or not you’re right; whether or not the Tories are right.  



3058  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

Those things will all be solved in the fullness of time. 
 
We’re not going to solve it in this committee. All we can do in 
this committee is to pass a law that will be perfectly clear from 
now on. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, well we’re back to my 
original question. In that paragraph . . . you’ve got a copy, you 
follow along now. Before any such body. . . I’m going to the 
next sentence: 
 

. . . before any such body may make a contribution of any 
major amount to a political party, that party must reveal 
the names and addressees of each person making the 
contribution to the body and the amount thereof. 

 
Is or isn’t that clear? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think anybody can understand those 
words. It seems to me to be perfectly clear, yes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, this is what the law 
was getting at, and yet you say that there’s some interpretation 
problem. And that paragraph really sums it up. 
 
So how do you get more than one interpretation out the 
paragraph of what then attorney general, now Premier, had to 
say about the law in 1974. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  What I repeat for the member, we are in 
compliance with this law. We are in compliance with that 
interpretation. It’s as simple as that. You may not be; I don’t 
know. I don’t know about you, but I know about us. We’re in 
compliance. We’re in compliance. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister, if you’re in 
compliance then you can tell me where I can get the list of 
names of the corporations, organizations and associations, and 
the amounts thereof. Right? You would be able to tell me where 
I could find that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Look at our election return. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  And those lists are on all of your election 
returns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That’s my understanding, yes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Now we’re talking about the provincial 
amounts, not the federal. Not the amounts that are run through 
the . . . for a tax credit through the federal, we’re talking about 
provincial donations from corporations, associations, 
organizations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We’re in full compliance with all of that 
law, including the federal end of the thing. I mean it’s all done 
according to the requirements of the Act. That’s what we’ve 
been saying right from the very beginning. That’s what we 
continue to say. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well then . . . 

The Chair:  Order, order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Bradley:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Deputy Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce through you and to the rest of the Assembly, a 
group visiting today, our Assembly, from Weyburn. The mental 
health association is here with 23 people coming . . . or have 
come. 
 
And I also would like to introduce their program assistant that’s 
with them today, Ruth Garinger, plus two volunteers. And I 
look very forward to meeting with you after and for a 
photograph. I’d like everyone to join me in welcoming them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1130) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, now 
we’ve went through this and you tell me, you’ve told the House, 
that you’re in complete agreement with what you read in that 
statement and that you comply with it, and it’s very clear. So 
then tell me why you want to fix it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Because Emmet Reidy and Garrett 
Wilson don’t agree that we’ve complied with it. So we want to 
clarify the law to make it certain so that all of us can be 
perfectly clear about what the law is. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you and I both know that 
you’re once again trying to confuse it . . . that somebody is in 
disagreement with this statement. We all are, as is the now 
Premier when he said this in 1974. But the fact of the matter is, 
your returns don’t show those lists, do they. And they don’t 
show the secret funds. And they don’t show the secret funds of 
the Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, explain why people in this province have got to 
open up the Leader-Post and see that you both have secret 
funds, if you’re complying with this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  If the Leader-Post is reporting that, it’s 
because you continue to use that term when you know very well 
there is no secret fund as far as the New Democratic Party is 
concerned. Tommy Douglas House is not a secret fund. I mean 
if there’s anybody in this province who didn’t know what it 
was, I from within the party can’t understand it. I mean 
everybody knew it. It’s no secret fund. 
 
Now I’m sure for political purposes, I’m sure for political  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3059 

purposes, the member characterizes it that way, hoping that that 
will be picked up and used as a way of describing that fund. But 
the member knows better. The member has a background that 
indicates he knows better. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, then if it’s very clear 
how your fund has been arrived at  and I don’t know how 
many millions or if in fact there’s another fund  just clearly 
state how that fund was built up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  You’re going to have to ask somebody 
else. I have been in the elected arm of the party and I have not 
been personally associated with the operations of Tommy 
Douglas House. But we’ve all known of its existence; we all 
know that it built the provincial office building down on 
Saskatchewan Drive; we know that it maintains it. 
 
And as I said, Mr. Chair, this member knows perfectly well that 
that is not a secret trust fund, and it does not become him at all 
to continue to describe it in those terms. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you just got done telling us, 
telling this Assembly, that it’s very clear what the fund was. 
Supposedly everyone in the province knows what the fund was 
and how it was built. And then you stand up and say, well I’m 
not the one to ask; you have to ask somebody else that helps 
build these funds. 
 
So is it clear or not? Because then what we’ll want to do is have 
you answer how, if it’s so clear, can this fund borrow the huge 
sums of money it does  from who? Who pays that back? 
Don’t you think when it’s used for election purposes, that that 
should be disclosed? Not even just the money that’s used in the 
election but monies that leverage other monies. Because that’s, 
when you come back to the 1974 arguments made by the New 
Democrat government, that’s why it was made. That’s why it 
was so clearly set out. 
 
In fact the problem that people have . . . when you take a look at 
the Dale Eisler article that showed up here a few weeks ago: 
 

Unlike the Tory’s private trust that very few seem to know 
about, the Tommy Douglas fund was well-known. 

 
So he’s agreeing with you. So you should have no problem 
telling us what it’s like. To go on, it says: 
 

Like the Tory’s trust, the Tommy Douglas fund collected 
money but never revealed its donors. In the past five years 
the fund has transferred $380,000 into party coffers and 
there is no public record of where 1 cent of that money 
came from. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, now this clear upfront fund that you’re talking 
about, can you tell us why Dale Eisler would have the view that 
it’s not that clear? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Can anyone? I mean, Dale is Dale and 
he will write what he will write. We all have great respect for 
him, but I certainly can’t stand in this House and answer for 
him. 

I can tell the member, as I have, that the New Democratic Party 
has been in compliance with the law. I am so advised by any 
number of people associated with the party, and I say it to this 
House as a fact. I personally have not been inside the 
organization doing every single thing that has been done over 
the many elections that the New Democratic Party has fought, 
so I am not able to provide that kind of detail. I have not been 
inside the operation of the Tommy Douglas House fund so that 
I am not going to, and nor should I as a minister, stand here and 
answer for a fund being operated by a political party. I mean 
that’s absurd. 
 
But I can tell you that my advice is that all of those events, all 
of those connections and whatever, have been in compliance 
with the election law. That’s my answer. I can’t answer for Dale 
Eisler. I can’t give the  nor should I  give the member 
details about the operation of a fund being maintained by the 
New Democratic Party. 
 
But I can say that this law should be clarified so that 22 years 
from now people like us aren’t standing here debating about 
whether or not a law passed 22 years ago has or has not been 
complied with. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, perhaps Dale Eisler is 
wrong. And you will set it out and clear the record right now, 
because you will be able to tell me then where I can get a list of 
all the donators of that $380,000 that was transferred into the 
party coffers to be used at election time. So you can tell me 
where I could find that list  right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No, I cannot. And if I knew, I wouldn’t, 
because I’m not here to answer for any of the funds of the New 
Democratic Party. I can tell you that all of my advice from all of 
the officials and people concerned with the party is that the law 
has been complied with, and I believe it to be so. 
 
Having said that, I simply can’t, as a minister, properly or 
appropriately say anything else. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, see, here in your 
comments lies the problem. Firstly, you don’t want to take any 
of the credit of the not so credible $380,000 not being 
disclosed. But you come into the House wanting to change an 
Act. You’re saying we got to fix something, but you don’t know 
what you’re going to fix because you agree with why it was 
brought in in 1974. 
 
And I know, Mr. Minister, that you do have a very good 
understanding of what is in this Act. And I know that your 
game is for the Premier to try and confuse the issue and make 
everybody guilty or everybody innocent, and this interpretation 
problem of Reidy or Proctor, or whoever is with the 
Conservatives now  Lukiwski? 
 
But see, the problem is, is that if you’re wanting to come in and 
make changes to an Act that we both agreed a while ago don’t 
need changing because you agreed with that 1974 statement, 
and that is essentially section 207 and 219 of the present Act 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it is. You’re a lawyer. 
Surely you can understand that it’s very clear . . . (inaudible  



3060  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

interjection) . . . It’s what? A mistake . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, then you explain where the mistake is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We have an election expense law which 
the government believes to be perfectly clear, and we believe 
that our party has been in compliance with it over all these 
many years. Now that’s a fact. 
 
Along comes, whoever  the Leader of the Opposition  and 
suggests that the law hasn’t been complied with. And when you 
boil it all down, it seems to be a question of the proper 
interpretation of the old Act. Fair enough. These things happen 
every day in our society. And no matter how hard we work on 
laws in this Assembly, it seems we’re always able to produce 
something that some lawyer can find fault with or can find 
some reason for another interpretation. And argument goes on 
in the courts and has from time immemorial as to what was the 
intention of the legislature in passing this law. 
 
Do you know that in the courts they don’t even permit the 
debates that go on in parliament or in this Assembly to be 
introduced as evidence of what the law means? Do you know 
that the judges in the courts look at the Act itself and interpret 
the words of the Act and will not admit into evidence and will 
not look at our debates here to try and ascertain the intention of 
the legislature? That seems incredible but that’s the way it is. 
And it has been so in the common law system for hundreds of 
years, and remains so. So we can have all the discussion we 
want to, but at the end of the day it is the law that we passed 
that will be interpreted. 
 
Now we thought the law is perfectly clear. We weren’t even 
thinking about that law, those sections as you know, because in 
all of our consultations it was never raised, there was no 
discussion about it. Everybody thinks they understand it and 
away we go. 
 
Then comes the revelation of the Tory fund and all of a sudden 
the issue erupts into public. Fair enough. What emerged from 
that perfectly clearly is that the Liberal Party and its advisers 
place a different interpretation upon the reporting 
responsibilities than do the New Democrats. We can’t speak for 
the Tories, but for the government party it’s clear. We have a 
difference of interpretation. 
 
We’re not going to be able to solve that here. You and I can 
keep picking at each other and shouting at each other in this 
committee and it’ll resolve nothing. There are places where that 
can be resolved. 
 
An Hon. Member:  So do it. So do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  You’ve done it. 
 
An Hon. Member:  And we’ve been asking for three weeks. 
Just do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member is going to have to get up 
and speak. Those questions are going to have to be resolved and 
we’re prepared to play our part in resolving them. There are 
established ways in which those matters can be done. We  

certainly don’t need any silly idea like a judicial inquiry to 
determine the meaning of a statute of this legislature. That is 
absurd. That is absurd. There’s other ways in which that can be 
done, and I’ve suggested what they are. 
 
But we’re here and we’ve got the election law on the Table in 
front of this committee, and it is our opportunity to amend that 
law in such a way that there can be no question what the 
reporting responsibilities are. 
 
Now how the member can suggest that that is not a good idea I 
cannot imagine. It will not make one wit of difference to what 
has gone before. People have to answer for what’s gone on 
before. But it will, for the future, make certain that everybody 
understands what a clear law is so they will know what their 
responsibilities are and we won’t have this kind of debate 22 
years from now. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, your argument is very 
confusing because the one that you’re giving to the Assembly is 
that your government found that the present Act is very clear 
and that you’re in compliance with it. But now you want to fix 
it. See, that’s confusing for the people out there. If it’s clear, 
and you’re complying, why are you concerned? 
 
I mean really, then the problem should lie with other people. If 
we’re concerned, we should do what we have to do. But if 
you’re following the law, what’s the problem? The fact of the 
matter is, it was the media that raised it first. And why did they 
raise it? Because the media, like the people of the province, feel 
and believe  and rightfully they should  that there is a law, 
and the law is very clear as it was set out on April 25, 1974 in 
the now Premier’s comments. 
 
But you, sir, now are saying we want to fix something. The only 
reason you want to fix it is to make it a very confusing issue. 
 
(1145) 
 
Now another argument that you bring forward is if it goes into 
the court system, if it goes to the court system, the courts will 
look solely at the law and determine whether it was 
contravened, right, laws are broken. Well why not let that 
happen? But instead, you’re trying to use this Assembly here to 
make a new law without even knowing if the old one works, 
works well, doesn’t work at all. 
 
I mean, just because somebody is found . . . the Conservative 
Party is found to have millions tucked away  from where, we 
don’t know . . . well let’s get to that. Do you think the 
Conservative Party followed the Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t know, Mr. Chair, and it doesn’t 
fall to me to decide that. I mean, it doesn’t fall to me to have an 
opinion on that. That’s going to have to be worked out, sorted 
out through the various mechanisms that are available to people 
who want to challenge it and look into it and inquire into it. No 
part of that is my responsibility, and the member must know it 
would be very inappropriate for me to get up here and start to 
pronounce about whether a particular fund is or is not in  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3061 

violation. I can’t help that. 
 
What I can do though is to clarify what is obviously a 
disagreement about what the law is. We thought it was perfectly 
clear. The Liberal Party, and as you say, the media, have raised 
questions about whether or not the law was clear . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, well you take exception, but let me tell 
you why I put it in those terms. 
 
We’re in compliance with the law. That is our firm belief. That 
is the sum and substance of all of our advice. Others are 
alleging that we are not in compliance with the law, namely the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Liberal Party. Now we take 
that seriously. 
 
We look at that and we say, there is another interpretation of the 
law. This law that we thought was so clear is being challenged 
in the sense that people who we respect are saying it is not 
clear. There is a different interpretation on the basis of which 
you are not in compliance with the law. Well that concerns us. 
We are going to be in compliance with the law, as we have in 
the past, as we will in the future. It’s the nature of our party. We 
will comply with the law. 
 
But we obviously have a serious dispute as to what is the 
meaning of the law that has been on the books for the last how 
many years. And we have the Bill right in front of us, and 
we’ve got a by-election coming up and we have a general 
election coming up. The years pass quickly. We can take this 
opportunity right now to amend this law in a way that will 
express the intention of this legislature. And we can clarify it so 
that people like Garrett Wilson and Will Olive and Emmet 
Reidy and Dick Proctor don’t have to trouble their minds about 
what is the proper meaning. We can set it out in such as way 
that it would be perfectly clear what is the proper meaning. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Through you, Mr. 
Chairman, to the . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. Could I just interrupt for a minute. 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  With leave, to introduce a visitor. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Chairperson, over on the gallery we 
have William Dumais from Southend. He’s from my 
constituency in Cumberland. Mr. Dumais, you know, has 
worked in the field of . . . in the area of municipal governments 
in northern Saskatchewan as well as in economic development, 
and is a tremendous volunteer for the youth in regards to 
recreation. And also his wife is also . . . Bella is a tremendous 
leader in the area of health development in the North. So I’d 
like all members to please welcome Mr. Dumais to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and through you to 
the minister once again. We need some clarification on how you 
feel about what’s transpired. That still has me somewhat 
concerned. As you indicated, Mr. Minister, this is an Act that’s 
been in place over the years. Simultaneously over those years, it 
has come to our attention that there has been a substantial  a 
substantial  amount of money accumulated in a trust fund for 
the use by a political party. 
 
Do you not see the danger in allowing those types of 
anonymous donations going into trust funds and ultimately 
being available to political parties? Do you not see a danger in 
that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I’ve indicated to the member the 
broad lines of the debate that’s been going on. And as the 
member knows, I am leaning in the direction of further 
disclosure requirements. And that’s what the House amendment 
is all about  further disclosure requirements. 
 
I can’t rewrite the law as it’s existed prior to now, but I can play 
some part in this Assembly in toughening up the law, indeed in 
increasing the reporting requirements so that it would be 
perfectly clear what will be required in the future. 
 
This isn’t just a matter of fixing up the law, which is a term that 
I’ve used several times this morning, but really of toughening it 
up, of introducing new ideas, new reporting requirements. 
That’s not . . . had nothing to do with what happened in the 
past, but is brought to all of our attention by the dispute, by the 
dispute as to the meaning of the section  what is the proper 
interpretation of that Act? 
 
And we’re going to have to sort that out somewhere. We can’t 
sort it out here today. You can complain about it and rail about 
it and insist we’re right and you’re right and so on and so forth, 
but we’re not going to solve it. That can be solved somewhere 
else. 
 
What we can do today is to clarify and advance the law and 
write it in such terms that succeeding generations will be able to 
interpret it without this sort of dispute happening. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I’d just like to refer to what the 
current Act already states, and again to ask whether there is a 
need for further clarification or expansion by way of your 
amendments. 
 
The current Act states that the names of each member of each 
class of persons mentioned in clause (a), that is individuals, 
corporations, societies, trade unions, unincorporated 
organizations or associations, or any other persons who made a 
loan, advance, deposit, contribution or gifts, that amount is to 
be reported. This clause was unchanged in the legislation we’re 
looking at today except for the amendments that have just  



3062  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

recently been put forward. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us your interpretation of this clause 
as it pertains to the PC metro trust fund and Tommy Douglas 
House Inc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The Leader of the Opposition will 
know, Mr. Chair, that this matter is being inquired into by the 
Chief Electoral Officer and we’ll await the results of that 
investigation. And as a cabinet minister, it is just not 
appropriate at all for me to step into that situation. I simply 
must stand by and let that investigation take place. 
 
Furthermore, I don’t know any of the details of that particular 
fund. It would be speculative on my part and it would 
irresponsible for me to speculate. The member can say what he 
likes about that fund, but I’m not in a position to confirm it at 
all. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
guess the question . . . I had to step out all for a moment, but the 
question was regarding the PC metro fund, whether in fact in 
your view the Conservative Party had been in compliance with 
the law. And of course you don’t know what the fund is 
consisting of, right? Well nor do we. And that’s the question. 
But being the minister that’s heading up bringing in changes to 
The Election Act, why then you wouldn’t you have instructed 
. . . or had your government look into that fund? Why did it take 
a couple of weeks of pressure from the Liberal opposition 
before it even became an issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well the Chief Electoral Officer is a 
position that enjoys some considerable independence, and the 
Premier explained this some couple of weeks ago by just saying 
that it’s not appropriate for us to be instructing the Chief 
Electoral Officer to do or not do anything. These matters were 
very quickly in the public domain. The Chief Electoral Officer 
would naturally have an understanding of his responsibilities 
and would be expected to discharge them in an appropriate way. 
It’s not up to us to be directing him. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, but you are in control of the 
Justice department. And can you tell us what instructions you 
gave to the Department of Justice in dealing with this Act that 
had been brought forward through the news media? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I hate to interrupt the conversation, but 
let me try and answer the question. 
 
The Chief Electoral Officer, I’m led to understand, has had 
conversations with the Justice department. I have no idea what 
those conversations consist of. I do not know whether anyone 
has referred this matter to the authorities or not, to the police or 
not. We have not because we don’t have any factual 
information that we could turn over to them. 
 
But I . . . Obviously if the law has been broken, there will be 
processes which will bring this to light. And I understand from 
documents provided by the Leader of the Opposition that one 
such process is already under way from the office of the Chief 
Electoral Officer and that at least your party and ours have  

received this letter. I still haven’t had an opportunity to read it, 
but it seems to be a comprehensive list of questions about . . . 
that touch on the matters we’re talking about. The reference on 
the letter is reporting of political party contributions. So that’s 
under way. 
 
Now whether that requires the Justice department or not will 
depend upon the judgement of the Chief Electoral Officer. But 
my understanding is that he’s already had contact with the 
Department of Justice on at least some of these questions. So 
that’s under way. 
 
And who knows what other processes we’ll take. I have said to 
the media and I’ve said in this Chamber that it seems to me, as 
a lawyer, if a law has been broken, there is a remedy in the 
courts. Maybe somebody will energize or at least initiate action 
in the civil courts to determine these questions. That’s an 
appropriate place. In my experience in practising law, that’s 
where questions of statutory interpretation were decided. It’s 
the only body in our society that has a general responsibility for 
the interpretation of statutes. 
 
The Chief Electoral Officer obviously has some jurisdiction 
with respect to his own Act. And so those are two processes 
that seem to be available, and we’ll see where they take us. 
 
Right now I just don’t have enough information to be able to 
deal with the previous question that the member put. 
 
(1200) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minster, then the question that comes 
forward from your comments is, you read in the newspapers 
and saw it on the TV the same time we did, that there were 
these huge . . . I guess millions of dollars in secret funds laying 
around. And you being the minister to bring in an Act dealing 
with The Election Act at that time, why wouldn’t it have 
triggered something for you to find out if in fact there’s 
problems with the current Act? 
 
I mean why would you say it’s best if we just wait and see if 
somebody brings it up in the civil courts? I mean don’t you 
think you have a responsibility when you see these sort of funds 
sitting around? And I now see the Leader of the Third Party is 
in here and I would love to hear an explanation from him. But 
don’t you think that you had some responsibility in finding out 
about these funds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well my responsibility as a cabinet 
minister is to see that things, you know, that matters are 
properly administered that are within my jurisdiction. And of 
course we have a number of cabinet ministers who are 
responsible for certain areas. 
 
The public debate that took place was an appropriate debate, 
and matters were brought to light. Each day seemed to bring out 
some further information, and we knew that the Chief Electoral 
Officer was aware of these things. That’s the person, that’s the 
official, primarily concerned with compliance with the election 
law. 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3063 

When I talk about court actions, I’m talking about one of the 
parties, or some other person that has some standing in the 
courts, to seek to bring this matter in front of the courts. Maybe 
that will never happen. Maybe that will never happen, but I just 
observe as a very, very important point in this whole discussion, 
that it is the courts of this land that have the general 
responsibility of interpreting the statutes of this province in an 
authoritative way. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I’m going to quote a little 
more from the Eisler article that ties in with things we’re 
discussing here: 
 

If people can make donations to political parties 
anonymously, especially when that party is in power, then 
there is a potential for all kinds of abuse. How do we not 
know, for example, that some large donor isn’t receiving 
preferential treatment from the government? What about a 
company making a large donation after it has received a 
multimillion dollar contract from government? 

 
So I think that statement really says it all. 
 
Now when you became aware of the PC metro fund being 
worth some millions of dollars and when officials from the 
Conservative Party refused to give any details on the fund, 
don’t you then as a member of Executive Council, executive 
arm of government, especially a member bringing in an Act 
dealing with those types of concerns, don’t you think that you 
should have taken action at that time? Especially a judicial 
inquiry, I think, would have been the minimum. But you chose 
to do nothing; you did nothing. 
 
Now you can laugh, you can sit there and laugh about it. You 
can sit there and laugh about it but . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes you are. But the fact of the matter is you did nothing. 
And it wasn’t until a few weeks of pressure from our party that 
we could even get the Chief Electoral Officer interested. 
 
And you and members of your cabinet thought it was funny. 
You heckled us continuously when we tried to ask the 
questions. Where does your responsibility start and stop on 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There may be something wrong with my 
memory here but my understanding was that the Tories had 
written to the Chief Electoral Officer raising the question of 
whether or not they were in compliance with the Act, and that 
they did that right up at the beginning of this when their fund 
was brought to light. Now my memory may be wrong but that’s 
certainly my clear recollection of the events that took place. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, let me refresh your 
memory because I do recall that it was some days after this first 
surfaced and raised by the Liberal official opposition before the 
other events unfolded. 
 
But really it’s you, Mr. Minister, it’s you that must explain  
you’re the minister bringing in an Act, especially one now that 
you’re saying needs fixing  to tell us why you didn’t take 
some action. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well I think all the action that could 
have taken place was taking place. I think that the electoral 
officer has been seized of this right from the beginning, from 
some early date. It’s not up to me to provide direction to the 
Chief Electoral Officer. It’s just as much the responsibility of 
any of us to bring to light any transgressions of the law of 
which we have knowledge. As far as I’m concerned, and this 
letter shows it, the matter is nicely under way, and I don’t know 
what in the world the member is complaining about. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well I think you do know what we’re 
complaining about, Mr. Minister. The fact of the matter is we’re 
into what, week 3, of some intense pressure by the Liberal 
opposition before we could get any movement, any movement 
at all. But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Minister, your response 
is, well there must be something wrong with an Act that  and 
this is where it gets confusing for everyone  that you say is 
clear and that you follow but we’ve got to fix it. 
 
And I’ll have . . . I’ll make another note here, is that it really 
wasn’t your party, your government, that took any action at all. 
In fact you and I both know it’s best for the New Democrats to 
sit, do nothing, ensure that the Conservative Party don’t 
completely fall off the map, political map, so that you can keep 
a split vote. And that’s about as far as it goes for you. Because 
it was the Chief Electoral Officer that, after a few weeks of 
pressure in the media and from our party, decided he better do 
something. 
 
So let’s take a look at some of the things that he’s getting into: 
 

Disclosure. Please advise as to amounts and dates of 
transactions of any and all loans, advances, contributions, 
gifts . . . 

 
You can read the sentence. And you know that is exactly what 
is in  I don’t have the Act here right in front of me  section 
219. 
 
So the Chief Electoral Officer of course, can see that the secret 
Conservative slush fund had to have been disclosed. Why, sir, 
didn’t you see the same? And why didn’t you, as a member of 
cabinet, and why, sir, as you as a member bringing in this 
amendments to The Election Act, do something about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the member is engaging in 
a nice try, but he’s not going to win any prize. This matter was 
raised for the first time in this House on June 4 by the Leader of 
the Opposition. And it is quoted in Hansard beginning on page 
2150  2150. 
 
And I was asked, or at least the Minister of Justice was asked: if 
the new PC Party have used a secret fund to aid an election 
campaign, what penalties would be imposed and would the 
election of such members become null and void? 
 
And I stood up on June 4 and said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I take this question because of the 
responsibility that I hold for The Elections Act which I 
have been discussing with the members opposite for some  



3064  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

months now. The situation raised by the member is, I 
understand, in the hands of the appropriate authorities 
including the Chief Electoral Officer. And our indication (I 
really said inclination) is to wait until we receive advice 
from him and from other officials who will be interested in 
the question. 

 
That was on June 4. I don’t know . . . that’s why I say I don’t 
understand what the member is complaining about. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s at that point then 
that I think some more confusion would come about because 
that would have been raised probably . . . and you’re the one 
sitting there with the news articles . . . no you’re not, I have this 
also  “Tory trust fund defended” All right. And that’s 
Tuesday, June 4. So that was then raised in question period that 
same day. We would have gotten this at about 8:30, 8:35, raised 
it in question period at 1:30 but you already knew that the 
appropriate authorities were looking into this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member will recall that the Leader 
of the Opposition tried to raise the matter on the previous day in 
this House by way of a motion and that the matter was not 
raised in question period on the day that it became public. And 
when the question was asked the following day, on June 4, after 
the member had failed to obtain leave for his motion, I was able 
to answer the question in terms that I have already quoted, 
namely that the situation is in the hands of the appropriate 
authorities including the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
So when I stood on June 4 it was already known to the Chief 
Electoral Officer and in his hands. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Excuse me, Mr. Minister, I was in a 
conversation with your House Leader so I missed some of your 
answer, most of your answer but . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  They weren’t very pertinent . . . 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well sure they were pertinent, but . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . please do give it again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I was saying that this matter first 
appeared on the floor of this Assembly on June 3 when the 
Leader of the Opposition at the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  . . . only go by your Hansard . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, well I’ve got Hansard here, and I 
haven’t got June 3 but it’s my memory it was the day before 
June 4 when the Leader of the Opposition raised the question of 
this issue, attempting to introduce a motion before orders of the 
day. And it was a motion that the Speaker said required leave 
and leave wasn’t granted. So then the following day, June 4, the 
Leader of the Opposition raised the question that I’ve referred 
to and I was able to answer it in the terms that I did, namely that 
the situation is in the hands of the appropriate authorities 
including the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, I guess we can even 
back this up a little further. You have the luxury of having 

Hansard with you and I don’t. But I have, on May 15, a letter to 
the Speaker from the Chief Electoral Officer, and it’s an 
addendum where in fact the Progressive Conservative Party, 
they talk . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it states right 
here: we’ve inadvertently not disclosed some of these funds that 
they’re talking about. 
 
See the problem is we still don’t even know if in fact there 
aren’t more funds by the Conservative Party. I mean they may 
have . . . they have a PC metro fund; they may have a PC rural 
fund and a PC northern fund and southern fund. But they 
clearly have a lot of funds. But then so do you, so does your 
party . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well you do. As Mr. Eisler 
stated here, there’s $380,000 that you and I are going to revisit, 
and it’s going to take some time I think, before we can figure 
out where the list of those people are. 
 
Now sticking to this addendum . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Oh no, I’m sorry, I don’t want to give him this sheet just yet. 
 
So you were then actually aware of this because you’re the 
minister, let’s keep in mind here, you’re the minister bringing in 
The Election Act, or changes to The Election Act. And you 
were aware, you had to have been aware, that there was 
disclosure problems back on May 15 . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . well you must have been, otherwise . . . Because this here 
was in fact . . . that was tabled on the 15th. You saw this; You 
saw this a few weeks before. 
 
An Hon. Member:  So did you . . . 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well of course so did I. But then what you 
. . . but even then. Let’s think about this, because . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  So did the Chief Electoral Officer. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well okay, okay, include him also then. 
But even at that time, even at this time, when it was clearly the 
problem was disclosing  disclosure, section 219  why then, 
Mr. Minister, didn’t you have any amendments to section 219 at 
that point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t recall having seen the document, 
although obviously all members in this legislature saw the 
document. If I had seen the document, I would have noticed 
that it originated from the Chief Electoral Officer, whose 
obligation it is, whose statutory obligation it is, to administer 
that law, and I would have been reassured that the matter was in 
the hands of the proper authority and that no further action was 
necessary on my part. 
 
(1215) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well further action is necessary on your 
part, Mr. Minister, because you then chose to not change or 
have changes brought into the Act regarding disclosure. At this 
point you didn’t. Well it was only after a couple of weeks of 
getting beat up in question period that you then  and it looked 
like it was a last-ditch, last-minute attempt  to write some 
proposed House amendments dealing with disclosure. 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3065 

But this is the point when you should have  at this point, Mr. 
Minister  got up and stated we must pull The Election Act. 
We’ll bring it back in the next session after we have a look and 
see whether or not it is  any laws have been broken. 
 
So why didn’t you take that action back then? The only reason 
you didn’t is because there was an amount of, I think, hope in 
the hearts and minds of some New Democrats that the 
Conservative Party would get through this and not be 
completely wiped off the political map. 
 
You know what I find interesting also, Mr. Minister, is in fact 
the very questions that are in the letter that we were talking 
about here today from the Chief Electoral Officer seem to 
follow  not seem to follow, they do follow the current Act. 
So it’s clear to the Chief Electoral Officer that there’s not a 
problem with section 207 or 219 of the current Act. 
 
So far, the only ones that I find that are able to stand up in the 
House and say, well we think the Act is very clear and we’re in 
compliance with it, but we must fix it so here’s something to fix 
it with is your party. Why would that be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The proper expression is toughen up. 
The proper expression is toughen up and improve, not fix. The 
proper expression is toughen up and improve; it’s not a 
question of fixing. What has to be fixed is this dispute between 
us as to the proper interpretation. It would be irresponsible of 
this Assembly and the political parties in it to allow this Act to 
move forward without clarifying what is obviously a matter of 
controversy. And it escapes me why the member thinks that is 
not a good idea. I mean, it just really challenges my ability to 
understand the language. 
 
I want to just say that I did not any time feel beaten up in 
question period. I came in here enjoying question period, and I 
just loved it. And any time the member wants to ask me those 
questions in question period, be my guest, because I loved every 
moment of it. As it went along, it just became obvious that you 
were trying to ride a political horse, to what end I’m not sure, 
but trying to ride it along as far as it would go. I wonder 
whether that’s not what you’re trying to do now. 
 
But the committee, ostensibly, is to consider the clause by 
clause  having already approved in principle  now 
considering clause by clause the contents of this Bill to 
determine whether or not it should be passed. And I think we 
should get at that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, I guess we’re going to have to start a 
little slower, Mr. Minister, because as you keep saying that, you 
know, the Act is clear. We have to fix . . . I’m mean I’m only 
using your own words which you have used many times. You 
want to fix something that you don’t think is broken after 
somebody’s been caught at something. 
 
Can you tell me in the interpretation then  your interpretation 
 what an agent is according to the present Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, pardon me for taking a 
moment to consult my officials. The term registered agent is  

defined in the present Act, the old Act as we’ve been calling it, 
under section 2(1), section or clause (gg.1) and registered agent 
in that clause means: 
 

in relation to a registered political party, a person whose 
name is registered in the register of agents of registered 
political parties maintained by the Chief Electoral Officer 
pursuant to subsection 206(1) and includes a chief official 
agent of any such party; 
 

That’s in the definition section of the Act. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I enjoyed that, but that 
wasn’t the question. I didn’t ask you what a registered agent 
was. I asked you what an agent was. And for you as a lawyer 
and a minister bringing in this Act knows that they’re not one in 
the same. So I’m asking you for your definition of an agent not 
a registered agent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m trying to be helpful to the 
committee, Mr. Chair, and I resent any implication that I am not 
trying to be helpful to the committee. Indeed I am, and I’m 
prepared to just hang in here and answer all these questions no 
matter whether they’re of any significance to what we are doing 
in this committee or not. 
 
The concept of an agent is well known in law. It is a . . . an 
agent is a person, or person in the legal sense, who is under the 
control of a principal . . . being directed by a principal. For 
example, the . . . in common everyday parlance, an agent may 
be employed by an insurance company to sell insurance. We 
call them insurance agents and they are under the control of 
their employer. They’re subject to direction. 
 
And the question for lawyers is always . . . well first of all, 
whether there is a relationship that’s capable of being an agency 
between a principal and an agent and whether the agent has 
sufficient independence to be considered an independent 
contractor. That’s the way in which it’s usually thought of. But 
an agent is someone who is authorized to act on the principal’s 
behalf and whose actions are subject to the control and 
direction of a principal. 
 
So that’s my recollection of the law. The member will 
understand it’s been some years since I practised. But this is a 
common question for lawyers to have to analyse and deal with. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister. Section 219 talks 
about an agent giving full disclosure to registered agent. So not 
in a general sense or in a general legal sense, but specifically in 
section 219, can you define an “agent”. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I have referred the member to what is a 
registered agent, which is a term that’s used in section 219, and 
I have just answered the question of what is an agent. I have 
just described in my rusty way how the legal system defines the 
term “agent”. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 





 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3067 
 June 24, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on behalf 
of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 
respect to closure of the Plains Health Centre, I have a petition. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from Pilot 
Butte, Mortlach, Moose Jaw, and a number from Regina. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Glentworth, 
Estevan, Regina, Regina Beach — mostly Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 
communities within my constituency, namely Canora, 
Buchanan, Preeceville, Norquay, Rama, Danbury, Sturgis, and a 
number from the community of Kisbey, which is not in my 
constituency. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are mostly from the 
city of Regina but also from Esterhazy, Stockholm, 
Churchbridge, and Dubuc. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The  

prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, has been signed by many residents 
from the community of Regina Beach as well as Lumsden, 
Buena Vista, Fort Qu’Appelle, and a number of them from the 
city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Aneroid, Montmartre, Glenavon, Peebles, 
and a number from the city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I rise again today 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from Regina here, they’re from Brownlee, they’re from 
Moose Jaw, from Saskatoon, from White City, and Emerald 
Park, from Copper Sands, from Emerald Park, from Balgonie, 
from Riverhurst, and all throughout Saskatchewan, including 
Rosetown. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues and people all throughout Saskatchewan in 
presenting petitions in their efforts to stop the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre, which was, as we know, initiated by the 
current Minister of Health. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition are mostly from 
the Kipling area and some from Regina. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order, petitions respecting the closure 
of the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and pursuant to 
rule 12(7) are hereby read and received. 



3068  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce a very courageous couple that have joined us in the 
Assembly today. They’re sitting in your gallery, Jan and Carol 
Markwart. We look forward to discussing a problem that 
they’ve been facing a little later. But I’d like to invite members 
of the Assembly to welcome them to the Assembly here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
notice in your gallery, Fred Heron, general secretary of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. I’d like to welcome Mr. 
Heron to the legislature this afternoon, and I hope he enjoys 
question period and all of the proceedings. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Internet Services 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased that the Minister responsible for SaskTel is finally 
started taking some of our advice about improving 
Saskatchewan’s Internet services. 
 
On several occasions we have stood in this Assembly to ask the 
minister to make Internet rates more fair to rural customers. We 
have told the minister that all people in Saskatchewan deserve 
equal access and fair rates for the Internet service. Up until 
now, SaskTel Internet customers in rural Saskatchewan were 
paying rates that were sometimes six times higher than the 
urban users. 
 
I am pleased that the minister and SaskTel officials have finally 
realized that all Saskatchewan people deserve equal access to 
the information superhighway. This is a good day for rural and 
northern Internet users. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Recreation Facility Opens in Weyburn 
 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My statement today 
is about yet another new and exciting happening in the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. On June 1 of this year 
Prairie Amusements of Weyburn opened its doors to the public. 
Incorporated last September, this brand-new Weyburn business 
has spent the last several months preparing an exciting, 
comprehensive recreation centre. 
 
Believe me, Prairie Amusements has something to offer all 
people of all age groups. Just listen to the varied activities that 
are available. There is an 18-hole miniature golf course and 
hockey and fooseball, 10 stationary competitive basketball 
games, which I am told is quite unique in Saskatchewan, and a 
children’s play area is being developed outside. 
 

And just in case all the activity gives you an appetite or leaves 
you parched, there is a tea room with both indoor and outdoor 
eating areas to provide quick and delicious sustenance. This 
facility is wheelchair accessible and employs two local people. 
One is hired through the Partnership program and the other is 
hired through Hire a Student. 
 
I would like to congratulate Beth Elder, owner of Prairie 
Amusements, for her initiative and hard work in bringing this 
initiative to Weyburn. The official grand opening for Prairie 
Amusements will be on Saturday, July 6, 1996. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you are wanting to do something different and 
relaxing on your holidays, I encourage you and all other 
members to drive to Weyburn and try out the games and 
activities at Prairie Amusements. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Junior Girls’ Volleyball Team 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
extend my congratulations to the junior girls’ volleyball team in 
my home town of Ile-a-la-Crosse. This junior girls’ volleyball 
team is following a rich history in provincial volleyball 
development and certainly championships for the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. Three consecutive championships in the 1980s 
for the senior boys’ volleyball team of Rossignol High School 
is something that the community is very proud of. 
 
And over the past several years, this junior girls’ volleyball 
team have had to overcome long distances and the lack of 
funding to compete in the Saskatchewan Volleyball 
Association. In fact the SVA (Saskatchewan Volleyball 
Association) recently awarded the girls’ coach and 
Ile-a-la-Cross teacher, Twyla Zinger, with a special award for 
helping develop and promote the volleyball program in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
Because our community is so remote, the volleyball team often 
has to travel lengthy distances in order to compete. The school 
division does not pay for the cost of volleyball programs, but 
the girls and Mrs. Zinger and the rest of the community 
participate in various fund-raising events to help fund the team. 
During the past four years, the team has competed quite 
successfully at tournaments around Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 
congratulating the Ile-a-la-Crosse junior girls’ volleyball team, 
their coach, Mrs. Zinger, and all their supporters who are 
promoting this great sport in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Employment Equity Week 
 Hire a Student Week 

 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week has been 
declared Provincial Employment Equity Week and it’s also Hire 
a Student Week in Regina. 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3069 

In 1995 employees from across government came together to 
plan and implement an employment equity strategy that would, 
among other things, create a positive climate for equitable 
opportunity in the workplace; and to educate and involve 
individuals and organizations in the task of removing barriers 
that have denied certain groups equal job opportunities. 
 
A number of events have been organized regarding 
Employment Equity Week. In Regina a luncheon was held over 
the noon hour today entitled “Diversity Equity in the 
Workplace” and the guest speaker was Chief Marie-Anne Day 
Walker-Pelletier of the Okanese First Nation. 
 
Sessions and meetings are planned for Saskatoon and Regina 
throughout the rest of the week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the human resources centre for students in Regina 
has planned a number of activities for Hire a Student Week. 
Tomorrow Z99 and CJME radio will be handing out mugs to 
employers who place orders for jobs. On Wednesday it’s Job or 
Jail in Victoria Park. Employers or co-workers will be taken to 
jail, and in order to get bail a job order has to be placed. A car 
wash will be held on Thursday, and on Friday a public barbecue 
will be held over the noon hour in front of City Hall with 
proceeds going to the Rainbow Youth Center. 
 
Congratulations to the student employment centre for creating 
awareness about hiring students and the services they’re 
providing for youth this summer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Air Show 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
commend all the people in Moose jaw and district, along with 
the officials at 15 Wing, who continue to work hard to ensure 
the survival of the Moose Jaw air show. 
 
The air show has gained an international reputation over the 
years and has become Saskatchewan’s largest spectator event. It 
draws hundreds of thousands of people every year. These 
tourism dollars are extremely valuable to Moose Jaw’s 
economy. 
 
Last Friday the director of this year’s Saskatchewan Air Show 
announced that the private sector will be contributing more to 
help sustain the show for years to come. There are corporate 
sponsors along with hundreds of volunteers to help run the 
event. 
 
I would like to commend all the organizers and especially the 
community and military leaders who are planning new ways to 
sustain this magnificent tourism event for years to come. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Public Service Union and Management Work Together 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, I want to report that I was  

privileged this past week to attend, along with the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission, a meeting of 
the Public Service Central Union-Management Committee and 
the Union-Management Committee Co-Chairs for all the 
departments of government. 
 
In early 1995, Public Service management and the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) committed 
themselves to work together to build a new, more positive and 
cooperative relationship. It was based on greater openness, 
trust, respect for their separate roles, and a commitment to a 
greater degree of employee and union involvement in 
workplace issues. 
 
Since that time, a focal time of this new relationship has been 
the establishment of union-management committees in all 
departments of government. The role of these committees are to 
apply the best knowledge of all involved to the resolution of 
workplace problems in order to provide improved public 
services, taking into account the needs of management and 
employees, and to improve working conditions. 
 
Last week’s meetings demonstrated significant interest and the 
enthusiasm of all involved in the union-management 
committees to make this process work to their mutual 
advantage. The government supports the initiatives taken to 
date by the parties in this cooperative venture. 
 
I am confident and hopeful that by involving our employees, 
management and union working together in a positive manner, 
we can continue to improve the delivery of public services to 
the people of Saskatchewan and make the Saskatchewan Public 
Service a better place to work. I would like to congratulate the 
SGEU and the Public Service management for their innovation 
in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

South-west Saskatchewan Terminal 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy to report to the Assembly today on a project that has 
been ongoing in my constituency for some time. The south-west 
Saskatchewan terminal is now a reality in a physical sense. It 
has been a dream of the people of south-west Saskatchewan for 
probably four or five years and maybe even longer in some 
people’s minds. 
 
But now the physical structure stands by itself, illuminating the 
beauty of the type of enterprise that it is. As you approach it 
from the Highway No. 1 from either direction, in a silhouette 
against the Cypress Hills or the Great Sand Hills, it depicts 
itself as something that is great and wonderful and new that the 
people of the area are looking forward to. 
 
The terminal itself, of course, is being built by the area farmers 
and their families along with the cooperation of Cargill. Now 
Cargill is a minor player and mostly it was done by the farmers 
ranging from Rosetown in the north to the U.S. (United States) 
border in the south, and from places east of Swift Current all 
the way to the Alberta border. 



3070  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

This is a dream, Mr. Speaker, that people have thought about 
for a long, long time, that certainly will tax the RMs’ (rural 
municipality) abilities to create road structures that will 
accommodate this facility, but nevertheless it is the wave of the 
future and the people in the area are on the wave. 
 
Construction is ahead of schedule, I’m happy to report, and it 
will be in production this fall buying grain from farmers as far 
away as they want to come. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re happy today 
to acknowledge the fact that this success story is well on its way 
in a physical manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Saskatoon Doctor 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize and congratulate Dr. Ali Rajput of Saskatoon, one of 
the world’s leaders in Parkinson’s disease research, for 
receiving the Tony Dagnone Spirit of Royal University Hospital 
Award. 
 
This award recognizes exemplary service to the hospital and the 
community. It was presented by former Royal University 
Hospital president, Tony Dagnone, and Bert Ayers, Chair of the 
spirit award committee. 
 
Dr. Rajput is recognized around the world as one of the top 
three leaders in understanding the mechanism of Parkinson’s 
disease. He joined the University of Saskatchewan College of 
Medicine in 1966 and has been head of the division of 
neurology since 1985. He founded the Canadian movement 
disorder group and Saskatchewan’s Parkinson’s Disease 
Foundation, and he helped establish Parkinson’s societies in 
British Columbia and Ottawa-Carleton. 
 
Dr. Rajput is truly a world leader in his profession and a 
community leader in Saskatoon who has encouraged the growth 
of organizations to help people with Parkinson’s and their 
families. 
 
Dr. Rajput is also a strong advocate of the University of 
Saskatchewan, Royal University Hospital, and the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
And so today I’d like to thank Dr. Rajput for his immeasurable 
contributions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Acute Care Services 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday in this House the Minister of Health stated, and I quote: 
“(He is) . . . proud of what this government has done in health 
care.” 
 
Well one person who certainly is not proud of what this 
government has done to our health care system is a Regina  

woman who I recently received a letter from, and I’d like to 
send a copy over to the minister, and who’s story appeared in 
Saturday’s Leader-Post, and chooses to remain anonymous. 
 
This woman’s 81-year-old mother was turned away three times 
at the Regina General Hospital this spring because she was not 
considered ill enough and was told there was no room for her at 
the facility. Finally, in late April, this frail woman was 
admitted, but it was too late, Mr. Speaker. She was left too long 
and without proper care and never recovered from her illness. 
 
On May 7 the end came, but not before she spent her final 
moments in agony. Her daughter writes, and I quote: 
 

I will never forget this total helpless feeling I had. I could 
not help my mother because of your new and improved 
health care system. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how he can be proud of 
what his government has done when it is our sick and our 
elderly who are forced to pay the price  and in this case of 
this elderly woman, the ultimate price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure the member 
knows, it wouldn’t be appropriate for me to discuss the 
specifics of any patient care situation publicly. 
 
But I think the member also knows that the question of whether 
a person should be admitted to a hospital is a question for a 
physician. And in this case, I understand that the physician 
concerned determined that the woman did not require 
admission to the hospital. 
 
These concerns have been raised with the Regina District 
Health Board, and the client representative is looking into them. 
And I know that Regina Health District will be looking into the 
concerns of the family and are doing so. And they will also be 
communicating with the family directly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the 
minister would try and blame yet another physician or 
somebody else for what he isn’t doing in health care. Right in 
the paper it states  this is a doctor being quoted  “Years 
ago, I could have admitted her, but now she doesn’t fit that 
criteria.” Well he sets that criteria. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one week after this 81-year-old woman passed 
away, her doctor informed the family that she had cancer of the 
liver. He also informed the family that if she had been admitted 
to hospital months ago, she may have been diagnosed, given 
proper treatment, and still be alive today. 
 
This case typifies what is wrong with our present health care 
system of which you should be in control of. This NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government has chipped away at it to the 
extent that people are not receiving the proper or appropriate 
care that they need or deserve. 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3071 

Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a reason for this government to 
rethink its decision about funding cuts, and what kind of quality 
health care that this province is going to have, well will the 
minister now learn from some of these incidents that we 
continuously bring to the House, and will he take action today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member should know, 
this is not a question of assigning blame; this is a question of 
simply stating the fact that physicians make a decision as to 
whether someone requires admission to the hospital. And if the 
member is suggesting that those who are in a state of dying or 
terminal illness, to the knowledge of a physician, or require 
emergency admission to a hospital, cannot be admitted to the 
hospital, then I take issue with the member because that is not 
true. Mr. Speaker. 
 

Cataract Surgery 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Even long-time 
supporters are fed up with this government’s treatment of health 
care, Mr. Speaker. In an article from The Globe and Mail, a 
78-year-old Moose Jaw woman who went to the Gimbel eye 
clinic in Calgary for a cataract operation said the same thing 
that we’ve been saying all session. 
 
This article says: 
 

Although Norma McLafferty and her family have always 
been fervent NDP supporters, and she speaks of Tommy 
Douglas as an old friend, she is now put off. McLafferty 
said that “I’ve reached this age and I’m a widow and I have 
to come to a private clinic in Calgary. They’ve wrecked our 
system totally. They’ve cut corners but they’ve balanced 
the budget.” 

 
Mr. Minister, you’re forcing people to go elsewhere in disgust. 
Is this what you were hoping to accomplish when you recently 
introduced The Health Facilities Licensing Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the goal of government, and 
indeed of the opposition, when it comes to ensuring people 
have treatment, should not be to promote a private system 
whereby people pay for their health care and the richer you are, 
the faster and better your health care. That should not be the 
goal of public policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say to the member, as the member should know, that 
in the last number of years  I’ll go back seven years, eight 
years  between 1988-89 and today . . . or ‘93-94 I should say, 
the latest statistics available, the number of cataract surgeries 
performed in Saskatchewan has more than doubled, and in the 
last few years it’s gone up by about 25 per cent, I believe, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And our goal as government should be, notwithstanding Liberal 
cut-backs to health care, to put more money into the public 
system so that we can better serve the people of the province. It  

should not be to prop up private health facilities in Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, three years ago the NDP 
government decided to stop reimbursing the Gimbel eye clinic 
for operations on Saskatchewan patients. And they said that by 
supporting a private clinic, public expertise would diminish. 
The question now is whether this government will reconsider its 
position and foot part or all of the bill when patients go to the 
Gimbel eye clinic for surgery. But I think, Mr. Speaker, a better 
question might be, is why won’t this government allow these 
procedures for people of Saskatchewan to have them in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well as I have already stated to the 
member, Mr. Speaker, we are performing many more cataract 
surgeries than we used to and we are putting more money into 
cataract surgeries. The matter has been studied by the Health 
Services Utilization and Research Commission, which has 
concluded that indeed the amount of resources put into cataract 
surgery in Saskatchewan is adequate. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll take their word as independent professionals before I will 
take too seriously what that member is saying. 
 
But what that member has been saying in this House and 
outside the House in this session, Mr. Speaker, is that the more 
money you have, the better health care you should get; the more 
money you have, the faster service you should get. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that that’s not good public policy. It’s the policy 
of the Liberal Party. It is not the policy of the New Democratic 
Party and it is not the policy of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Eaglestone Lodge 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week I brought to the attention of this House the fact that 
provincial funding to operate the Eaglestone Lodge in Kamsack 
runs out at the end of August. The community is in the midst of 
trying to purchase the facility and draw up a budget so that it 
can afford to operate the facility. 
 
The Minister of Health indicated last week that he would look 
into the situation. Mr. Speaker, if employees would be willing 
to reduce their wages to allow Eaglestone Lodge to meet an 
operating budget, will the Minister of Health indicate if he will 
intervene and provide an exemption or do what is necessary to 
ensure that Eaglestone Lodge continues to serve the seniors of 
Kamsack. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, there is a certified bargaining 
agent of the people that work at the Eaglestone Lodge. And if 
the member is suggesting that I as Minister of Health should 
intervene in labour-management matters as between Eaglestone  



3072  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

Lodge and the certified bargaining agent, the answer is no, I’m 
not going to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say to the member that in response to his 
question I did look into the situation and obtained further 
advice. And my understanding is that contrary to what the 
member said last week — that the union would have to be 
de-certified in order for discussions to take place — there is 
nothing stopping the union representing the employees there to 
agree to negotiate terms and conditions of employment that are 
more appropriate for the present employer or new employer. 
This kind of negotiation does not require any de-certification, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in any event, the question as to whether employees should 
be unionized or not unionized is not a matter to be determined 
in this House. It’s a matter to be determined by the employees 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon, first question anyway, is for the 
minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, on Friday we finally were able 
to make some progress on the union tendering agreement policy 
when the Deputy Premier announced that he would be 
appointing a mediator. However there weren’t many details 
announced at that time, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us some further details today? Who 
is the mediator going to be? What are the terms of reference for 
the mediation process? And when will this process be 
completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, there has been agreement by 
all the parties concerned that a mediator be established and they 
have begun to search out a mediator. They have some common 
agreements about whom it is they would like to see but they 
have not yet been able to confirm the availability of the 
mediator of their choice, so those discussions are ongoing. 
 

Welfare Reform 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
following two questions are for the minister responsible for 
Social Services. Mr. Minister, last week the Progressive 
Conservative government in Ontario fulfilled a campaign 
promise by introducing a new work-for-welfare program. This 
program is designed to help people on welfare break the welfare 
dependency cycle and move away from social assistance and a 
hand-in-mouth existence. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are currently undertaking a comprehensive 
review of the welfare system in this province. Will you give 
strong consideration to Ontario’s work-for-welfare program as 
part of your welfare reform package? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, we share I think, a common  

view and a common desire to move people from dependence in 
a welfare structure and a welfare system to independence. The 
issue of debate is how we should achieve that goal. 
 
The Government of Ontario has adopted a work-for-welfare 
program which, Mr. Speaker, members may be interested to 
know is having some difficulty getting going and that a good 
part of Ontario is saying, we want nothing to do with the 
work-for-welfare program. Mr. Speaker, we choose not a 
work-for-welfare, but work instead of welfare. That’s our goal 
 to provide the tools for individuals to become independent 
of the system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is quick to 
condemn this kind of welfare reform. I remind you, Mr. 
Minister, that under your government the number of people on 
welfare has grown by about 25,000 people. And there are now 1 
in 12 Saskatchewan people living on welfare. So I would think 
that you would be willing to consider innovative ideas from 
other provinces. 
 
Mr. Minister, under the Ontario workfare program, welfare 
recipients will work up to 17 hours a week on things like 
environmental clean-up projects. This program will not take a 
paid job away from anyone. Seniors, people with disabilities, 
and single parents with young children are exempted. But 
everyone else will have the opportunity to do some meaningful 
work that benefits their community. 
 
Mr. Minister, what’s so terribly wrong with that type of 
program? Why do you refuse to even consider that type of 
welfare reform? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, in those limited 
jurisdictions across the continent that have attempted 
work-for-welfare programs, find that at the end of the day 
everyone who was on welfare remains on welfare. No change. 
In the meantime, you’ve created an entirely new and expensive 
bureaucracy to have this happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we want to do is to free people from those 
disincentives that keep people on the welfare system. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask members to note that at the recent 
ministers’ meeting  first ministers’ meeting, including the 
Prime Minister  at the leadership of the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, a national child benefit has been proposed and 
has won almost unanimous acceptance at the first ministers’ 
meeting including, by the way, the minister of Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s this kind of movement, to support the children 
of Canada, to support their families, that will see people move 
from dependence to independence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

No-fault Insurance 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3073 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is to the minister responsible for SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) or his designate, as I 
note. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe you are aware of the problems faced by 
Jan and Carol Markwart, whose family was shattered when their 
car was struck by an ambulance, killing their daughter, and 
leaving Mr. Markwart disabled. 
 
It’s not enough that your no-fault scheme failed to compensate 
the Markwarts adequately for their losses due to this accident, 
now SGI seems bent on punishing Mr. Markwart. And 
incidentally, this accident wasn’t their fault. 
 
Recently SGI forced Mr. Markwart to take a leave from his job 
and undergo a gruelling schedule of physiotherapy that leaves 
him little time to spend with his family. The income 
replacement benefit that he receives covers only part of his 
previous wage, out of which he is expected to cover his own 
pension benefits. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Markwarts are not looking for a free ride. 
They are only looking for SGI to do its job, to help them get 
their lives back together, including 100 per cent of wage, the 
opportunity to spend the summer months together with the 
family, and prescriptions with their consent. Mr. Minister, will 
you consent or commit today to meet with the Markwarts, and 
see to it that SGI finally gives them the fair and honest 
compensation that they deserve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m replying on behalf 
of the minister. First of all I’d like to express of course the 
sympathy and sensitivity to the tragic loss in the situation. I 
think in regards to, you know, the accidents in the province 
throughout the history and in this particular case, it’s always 
very tragic. 
 
In regards to the specific issue, Mr. Speaker, the minister, I 
understand, and the officials have met with the family. And in 
regards to the programing, I know that the process had taken 
place. And in the new program, there was in the case of income, 
90 per cent of the take-home pay for people in that regard. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the door is still open I think, in regards to the 
minister, etc., and that type of thing, but I certainly believe that 
we will try and get the most fair and reasonable settlement in 
the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
unfortunate that the Minister of Economic Development or the 
Premier wouldn’t respond to this question, because it seems 
that the minister responsible and his designate continue to skirt 
the issue. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, all that the Markwarts have heard so far is 
the minister and his government citing the no-fault regulations 
to them, not listening or not heeding the very concerns that are  

a constant problem that they are facing. 
 
And it isn’t good enough. It’s time that this government 
recognized that the no-fault system is a disaster and it’s time 
that they stepped in and fixed the problem that is created with 
multiple injuries. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have accused . . . used the excuse that 
no-fault is saving SGI money. In the Markwarts’ case, it’s 
actually costing you money. Doctors’ reports show that Jan 
Markwart was making steady progress doing part-time therapy 
while continuing to work. Now you have forced him out of his 
job into a full-time therapy that is lowering his quality of life 
and which is costing you some of his income replacement 
benefit. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: quit making excuses. When 
are you going to stop punishing the Markwarts and when are 
you going to fix this no-fault system to address the problems 
that the Markwarts face and other families face? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Minister, when I look at the history 
. . . When I became the minister of SGI, I looked at the history 
of the situation. There was cases, legal cases in there, that 
spanned 20 years that were not settled. 
 
There was a situation where a person had settled for a million 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, and that person ended up being paid 
17,500 for himself and 17,500 for the lawyer, basically because 
the person who was at fault did not have the top-up insurance 
etc. And at that time, that is exactly what happened. 
 
In this particular case on SGI, when we introduced it, it would 
be 90 per cent of the take-home pay, you know, that was paid. 
At that time it was $200 week. 
 
And also when we look at the situation, you know, overall, I 
think that we put a clause in there that the Court of Queen’s 
Bench . . . you could always take the case to the Court of 
Queen’s Bench when there is problems of disagreement. And 
that was open to the situation. And I don’t know exactly what 
the persons will be able . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 
 

Political Donations 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I feel 
compelled to bring to the attention of this House a letter that the 
Saskatchewan Liberal Party has received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer. 
 
This letter, which I am told the Conservatives and NDP also 
received, requests information from the past six years to 
determine whether The Election Act has been complied with. 
The Chief Electoral Officer indicates that without such 
information, it is difficult, if not impossible, for his office to 
determine details relating to the disclosure of contributions and 
expenses. 



3074  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

He is of the opinion, and I quote: 
 

It is in the best interests of all concerned that we make 
every effort to cooperatively determine a specific . . . 
surrounding these events. 

 
Given the fact that the Chief Electoral Officer is now preparing 
to launch an investigation into this issue, will the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education admit there is no urgency to proceed 
with Bill 92 until the next session of this legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, all parties have spent 
dozens  in some cases hundreds — of hours in preparing Bill 
92 which is before the committee of this legislature now. There 
is simply no logical reason for stalling it. 
 
It is very important, Mr. Speaker, that we clarify the law so that 
from now on people will have a clear understanding of what the 
law is, and we will avoid this silly kind of debate that we’re 
engaging in as to whether or not the Act should be . . . should or 
shouldn’t be hoisted or should or shouldn’t be proceeded with 
 of course it should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate, and the hundred hours 
of work is commendable, that the staff of the Post-Secondary 
minister’s office has put into this. 
 
However, that is not the point. It will not be lost, Mr. Speaker. 
It has been the contention of our caucus that there is nothing 
wrong with The Elections Act as it exists. We have stated 
repeatedly that the current laws only need to be adhered to. The 
Chief Electoral Officer has now indicated that he fully agrees 
with our concerns and is launching an investigation into the 
disclosure of contributions and expenses. The Provincial 
Auditor has also indicated that there is a question about whether 
or not there has been a violation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly there is no reason that amendments to The 
Election Act have to be made at this time. In fact it would be 
premature until such time as the Chief Electoral Officer has 
conducted his investigation. 
 
Will the minister make a commitment in this House to postpone 
The Election Act until the next session of this legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I will not, Mr. Speaker. And the 
problem is that I haven’t heard a logical reason from the other 
side of the House as to why we should do so. We’ve all got a 
pretty fair idea of what the debate is about here  a pretty fair 
idea of what the argument is about. 
 
And our point is simply this — here we are with Bill 92 on the 
Table and it is entirely appropriate that we clarify that law, 
strengthen it, toughen it, so that there is no question about what 
it means. So that in 22 years people like us aren’t standing here  

arguing about the interpretation of an Act that’s been in effect 
for that long. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Fuel Rebate Program 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s exactly one 
month ago today that the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission ruled that this government’s farm fuel rebate 
program is discriminatory. The commission ruled in favour of 
four farm women who were not eligible to receive a rebate 
under the program because they were married to farmers, even 
though they are farmers in their own right. Mr. Speaker, this 
government was provided a 30-day appeal period in which they 
could challenge the decision. 
 
Will the Minister of Finance or, in her absence, her designate, 
tell this House whether the NDP government has launched an 
appeal of this decision, or are they prepared to abide by the 
ruling and recognize women as individual contributors to 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture sector? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I thank the member for that question as 
it is a very important question, not only for the producers of this 
province but also for the taxpayers of this province. And the 
fact of the matter is that the liability for this decision conjures 
up the question of whether the program can be continued. 
 
So what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, to the member, is that this 
program . . . this program has been a very valuable program to 
farmers, but in terms of the whole budget we have to be very 
careful of what we do. 
 
So what we’re doing is we’re reviewing the whole process to 
determine exactly what steps should be taken in order to 
alleviate the concerns and the decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporations Review 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, public 
meetings which are part of a review of Saskatchewan Crown 
corporations will wrap up this week. Last week a caller to the 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) Morning Edition 
expressed feelings that many share. She indicated how these 
meeting are a, and I quote, “calculated, corporate-administrated, 
fluff-but-no-scuff event.” 
 
This caller went on to describe how participants were handed a 
work packet, divided into small groups, discussed four 
questions, and then those comments were, and again I quote, 
“sanitized, generalized, and did not include any true form of 
comment or suggestion by individual people.” 
 
Will the minister explain why people attending Crown review 
meetings have not been allowed the opportunity to properly 
express views on the future of their Crown corporations? 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3075 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  The member opposite has not been 
renowned for the accuracy of the information he brings to the 
House. And again he is insulting to some very good, 
independent consultants and insulting to the people who 
organized, through the Provincial Action Committee on the 
Economy, these hearings. And he is so wrong with respect to 
the tone and the nature of those meetings. 
 
The process for establishing these meetings, for the information 
of the public  and maybe the member opposite could listen 
too  is that in the process of establishing how the discussion 
groups can work, there are community leaders taken and 
informed about the nature of the discussion; they have a 
pre-discussion about the issues so they will understand all the 
kinds of questions people will ask, and they are open to receive 
information on any other question, in addition to the four that 
are listed there. 
 
There’s an attempt to focus the discussion by providing a 
framework for the discussion. This is the most open, and 
recognized to be open, public discussion that has ever been held 
in this province. The member opposite is miles out to sea on his 
allegations, as usual. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New SaskTel Internet Service 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m proud to rise to tell the House that earlier today I 
announced an important new initiative at SaskTel. It always 
gives me great pleasure to introduce another SaskTel service 
that brings Saskatchewan people further into the technological 
world. Since its inception, SaskTel has always strived to 
provide quality services to its customers and Internet service is 
no exception. 
 
In the past, SaskTel was proud to be able to provide Internet 
service throughout the province. Today I am pleased that we are 
able to provide an enhancement to that service. Sympatico, an 
easy-to-use Internet service designed for families and 
businesses, is now available to the people of Saskatchewan at a 
fixed cost regardless of geographic location. 
 
While it is important for Saskatchewan people to keep up with 
technological changes, it’s also important that this be affordable 
for everyone in the province. So I’m pleased to announce that 
there is only one Sympatico price for both rural and urban 
users. Yes, that’s right. The same price no matter where in 
Saskatchewan you live. Sympatico and SaskTel’s high quality 
and reliable network will provide people with easy access to 
local and global information. 
 
The information that can be retrieved through Sympatico has no 
limits. For example, farmers can investigate farming techniques 
from around the world. Saskatchewan entrepreneurs can 
explore markets around the world. Families can make travel 
plans. Students can research topics from resources around the 
world. The Sympatico starter kit sells for $29.95 per month and  

includes 100 prepaid hours; the very popular software, the 
Netscape Navigator; and a toll-free 24-hour a day, seven days a 
week customer help line. 
 
Sympatico provides an ease of use, letting people explore the 
Internet and check for information without getting bogged 
down about how to get there. Because Sympatico is not difficult 
to use, it’s easier for people to become accustomed to new 
technology. As we know, Mr. Speaker, the Internet and its 
related technology are not slowing down but are accelerating at 
a phenomenal speed. 
 
SaskTel ensures that the people of Saskatchewan will not be left 
behind but will be leading the way. Sympatico provides a 
friendly forum that will enhance the lives of Saskatchewan 
people. I’m sure that the residents of Saskatchewan will soon 
discover and enjoy this. Summer is officially here, Mr. Speaker 
— let’s go surfing. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
find it’s been seldom throughout this session that I agree with 
the minister, but once again I have . . . I’m very happy today 
with the announcement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  I knew the members would appreciate that. 
 
But I want to commend the minister and I want to commend 
SaskTel because we’ve hit a turning point here where we’re 
again treating urban and rural equally. And again I must say I 
would commend the minister. Our small schools, our farmers, 
and our businesses in rural Saskatchewan, could not afford, 
under the old rate system, to compete with their larger urban 
competitors. So once again, Madam Minister, and to SaskTel, I 
commend you and this is a great day for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re happy to rise 
today to offer our comments on the ministerial statement with 
regards to this new project through SaskTel. While of course 
each one of us in the opposition benches, whether it be the 
official opposition or our party, will all want to join with the 
back-benchers over in the government side to go home to try to 
claim victory for having brought about the pressure that resulted 
in the minister making this decision, the truth of the matter is 
that the minister did see the light, not as a result of the things 
that we brought forward, but as a result of the pressure from the 
people of this province. 
 
Thousands of letters were written on this issue, and hundreds of 
people phoned every MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), I’m sure. I know I had many, many, many calls on 
this issue in my office and I’m sure that all of the other MLAs 
were the same. And so I guess the message here  while this is 
a positive decision and we acknowledge that  the message 
here is that if the people of Saskatchewan want change, if they 
collectively work together and approach the government, they  



3076  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

can get that change. And I think that’s the important message 
that should be taken out of this. 
 
It certainly is good for rural Saskatchewan to be treated equally 
to the urban centres, and I think the urban people can be very 
happy today that they are sharing something that is of value at 
an equal cost to rural Saskatchewan. Finally we found common 
ground to come together on, and we thank you, Minister, for 
doing that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I want to table a 
report from the Chief Electoral Officer pursuant to section 
222(1) of The Election Act, respecting the election expenses of 
candidates and their business managers and of registered 
political parties at the 23rd general election held on June 21, 
1995. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 76  An Act to 
amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union 
Hospital Act and The Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948 and 
to make consequential amendments to other Acts be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was having trouble 
hearing. I assume that we’re on Bill 76. Is that . . . Thank you. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When adjournment came on Friday, 
this certainly . . . the legislation that we were discussing and I 
was speaking to, and I would be happy to continue my 
comments on this Bill. And in light of some of the happenings 
Friday afternoon, I would like to also address those, Mr. 
Speaker, as it relates to this piece of legislation. 
 
A couple of weeks ago I did kind of wonder why the 
government was so intent on bringing forward extended hours 
and in ramming through a lot of this legislation that the people 
of the province have indeed a right to be aware of, and certainly 
aware of the ramifications as a result of the legislation being 
proclaimed down the road. 
 
And I wondered at the time what the reasoning was. And it’s 
come to light that certainly in the events that happened late 
Friday afternoon that this government certainly did not want the 
people of the province to understand what’s contained in the 
legislation and how it pertains to them. 
 

The health Bills that are before us, particularly Bill 76, an 
amendment to The Health Districts Act, is certainly an 
important one in the eyes of many people in Saskatchewan and 
certainly those that are concerned about health, and that would 
be the majority of the people of the province, as to what could 
happen with this amendment to The Health Districts Act. 
 
And certainly throughout all Saskatchewan, but as well in the 
Lloydminster area, Mr. Speaker, it became quite evident Friday 
afternoon that the government . . . the members opposite were 
not prepared to debate this Bill if they could get away without 
doing so, and consequently took some drastic measures late 
Friday afternoon to ensure that we could finish the session that 
evening and they could ram these pieces of legislation. 
 
It was interesting as I was awaiting to speak on this Bill, some 
of the antics that took place, Mr. Speaker. Visits from the 
member from Elphinstone, for example, in the lounge, a visit 
from the Minister of Post-Secondary Education from Saskatoon 
Fairview in the lounge. A visit from a member of the third party 
from Cypress Hills in the lounge, Mr. Speaker, and it became 
abundantly clear at that time that the government did not want 
to address this Bill 76. 
 
It went on further than that, Mr. Speaker, in the House as I 
received a visit from the member from Regina Centre, another 
cabinet minister offering some nice advice on what might be 
publicly acceptable in terms of how I proceeded in the House 
that day. 
 
The ultimate bit of shenanigans, Mr. Speaker, was when I 
received a visit from the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley bearing gifts and offering to visit with me and offer 
some advice possibly on my farming practice, if not on how I 
was handling myself in the House. 
 
It was quite ironic, at the same time as I was receiving a visit 
from that member opposite bearing gifts, that the member from 
Elphinstone was asking for leave at that very time to ask for 
extended hours, Mr. Speaker. I’m not saying that anyone was 
trying to take my mind off the House business, but it was 
clearly evident that the government was not prepared to deal 
with the issues of the day in an upfront manner with the people 
of Saskatchewan and come back today and proceed as we are. 
 
So having gone through a quick run-down of the events of late 
Friday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I will continue with my 
discussion on Bill 76 where I left off, if I might. And if I 
digress a bit back over some of the ground I’ve already covered, 
I apologize, but I haven’t had a chance to review Hansard so I 
will pick up the best I can from where I think I left off. 
 
I think I was discussing the health reform process as it related to 
the formations of the districts or the districtification throughout 
the province. And I think we’d come to a point where many of 
the people in the province, the health agencies and the health 
trustees, were about to make a decision on where they would fit 
in best in the whole scheme of things in the district process. 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3077 

And certainly as I had stated earlier, our community was no 
different, and my involvement wasn’t any different than any 
other health trustee across the province. And I think at about 
this point in time, the government had set down some 
guidelines, some time frames, as to when health facilities, 
municipalities, and boards would have to make a decision as to 
what kind of a district they were going to fit into. And at that 
point in time they did that. 
 
Our district or our area was no different, and at that point in 
time, with dialogue with councils throughout the communities 
that I served and with the people in general, the citizens of 
those communities . . . that it would be to our best advantage, it 
would make most sense for us, to join the Regina Health 
District. 
 
Of course the people a little further west, in through the Craik 
area and down through the Central Butte area, chose to join up 
with the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District, which did 
make some sense to them at the time or they wouldn’t have 
made that decision. 
 
Certainly the people in Davidson and west had discussions with 
many districts as well, and they of course chose to go and join 
the Midwest Health District. Meanwhile the discussions that we 
were having with the people north of us, in the Watrous area 
and the Nokomis area . . . made a conscientious decision to join 
up with the Living Sky Health District. 
 
Therefore the districts were basically formed up, Mr. Speaker, 
and we moved on, except of course for the Lloydminster area 
which has always been a sore spot in the Health department, 
particular with the former Health minister and the deputy 
minister of the day then and who continues to be the deputy. 
And I’m sure now the present Minister of Health is having 
some of the same anxieties with those. 
 
However the district process was taking on some momentum 
and people were joining up. The problem was the next step, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, was the fact that, how do we decide who 
should be represented on these boards. And certainly the 
government of the day decided that one of the only ways that 
they could ensure that the wellness model and the health reform 
process could proceed under the guise of health reform as to 
how the NDP government saw it, was certainly to get its people 
in place on those boards, so that they could ensure that the 
decisions that the government handed down were indeed the 
decisions that the district health board would make. 
 
Therefore the Minister of Health set about a process of asking 
for nominations for people to be nominated to the district health 
boards. Certainly many people were nominated and asked to sit 
on these health boards but the final decision did lie in the hands 
of the Health minister. The Health minister decided, under the 
guise of democracy I believe, that take a look at the list of 
people who were suggested to be board members and then the 
minister set about making the appointments. And that’s one of 
the first major stumbling blocks of the reform process, Mr. 
Speaker, were that the district health boards were all appointed. 
And that doesn’t sit very well in a country, in a province, where 
democracy reigns supreme, and therefore the battles continued  

over where we were headed with reform and wellness in this 
province. 
 
So the discussions continued to take place and the arguments 
and the dialogue  one-sided dialogue, if you would  with 
the government as to what right did these appointed district 
health board members have to make decisions on behalf of the 
people, the communities that they were apparently representing. 
And that rage continues today because there are still a number 
of appointed health board members to the district boards. 
 
The battles raged, of course, all across the province, not only in 
our community but elsewhere, as the government went about 
making its appointments to the boards and these people were 
trying to run the health system. As it became increasingly 
apparent that the districtification process was simply a 
downloading by the provincial government to the health 
districts, decisions became very tough for the health boards to 
make. And of course when you’re appointed, it’s even tougher. 
 
The boards were having to grapple with a shortage in funding 
away back then, as they are doing now, and therefore were 
having a tough time making these hard decisions that affected 
most often their neighbours and certainly their own 
communities when they were closing beds and closing agencies 
and facilities down. 
 
That problem continues today, and even though a number of the 
board members are elected, there is still that problem where the 
provincial government has done a considerable amount of 
downloading to the districts and it’s causing them a great 
problem. 
 
(1430) 
 
As we were going through this whole process of forming up the 
districts, there was another bit of a side issue that was having to 
be addressed by the local boards, the local trustees, and the 
government as well. And that was the issue of the significant 
amount of funds that had accumulated in some of these smaller 
agencies’ bank accounts from donations. Good people 
throughout the province had donated to their favourite health 
agency and certainly in small rural communities that was a 
significant part of funding the health system in the local 
communities, was by donations. 
 
I recall back, Mr. Speaker, to one such estate that was left to the 
Imperial Union Hospital of the day by a long-time resident of 
Imperial by the name of Russ Roney. This gentleman in his 
wisdom decided to leave a significant amount of money, and 
whether it was through dollars or land, what have you, but he 
did leave a significant amount of his estate to the Imperial 
Union Hospital. He had pride in that institution. He did spend 
some time in there in his last days and certainly recognized that 
it was an extremely important component of a small community 
and certainly as it pertains to health. 
 
Mr. Roney in his wisdom decided to leave the Imperial Union 
Hospital about a quarter section of land along with some 
antique cars and some other property that he owned as well. 
And of course struggling with the health budget, as we are  



3078  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

today, certainly there was problems back in those days as well 
with the always, ever-prevalent shortage of dollars for health 
care in the small communities. 
 
And so these types of bequeaths to health boards was a very 
large and much appreciated part of funding the health system in 
any of these small communities. 
 
The Roney family is a well-known family in the Imperial area, 
and certainly Mr. Roney’s sister, Joy Baht, certainly still lives 
there and certainly does as much volunteer work to the 
Imperial-Long Lake integrated facility as did many of the other 
volunteers throughout the years. 
 
So we’ve had the discussion about where will the volunteers 
take place and where will these donation funds and accounts 
end up at, Mr. Speaker. And of course I’m sure you’re aware of, 
as well as our other members of this House, that these funds 
needed to be left in the communities under the control of the 
local communities. 
 
That battle was itself raged on as the boards were forming. 
Many of the health trustee groups chose to go the foundation 
route in order to protect these monies from the deputy minister 
of the day who was bound and determined that they would be 
turned over to the district board and that money would be used 
to fund the deficit of the board because of the downloading by 
the provincial government of that day. 
 
The cost to set up many of these foundations was very costly, 
because I think most of the agencies proceeded to hire 
themselves some legal counsel, and we all know the price of 
lawyers. And so a lot of the money that was designated for 
health was eaten up by legal fees, both on the individual sides 
as well as the institutional side, and I’m sure the government 
had some extreme costs as well. 
 
So there was the issue of the foundations and how do we go 
about protecting the dollars that were raised in a community, 
and certainly there is another Bill on the Table these days under 
the guise of a Crown foundation as to how the provincial 
government once again can get its hands on donated money. 
 
The argument went a little further, Mr. Speaker, in regards to 
the donations, as to who should control those. It went further 
than that as to how an individual community would have input 
into district health board decisions. And that prompted myself, 
as a member of the provincial health association, to discuss this 
with the minister and certainly the deputy minister. 
 
And I did receive a letter from the deputy minister regarding 
that very issue. In the letter he talks about those issues, about 
the foundations and about locally raised monies. And he also 
talked about advisory boards to the district health boards, Mr. 
Speaker, from the different communities. 
 
He talked about it being a great idea and it was something that 
would give the people from these individual communities some 
input into the district boards and would let them feel as though 
they were having part in the decision, the health decisions, 
being made by the district health board. 

Now that letter went on for about three pages explaining that 
this was a great idea and that we needed to work toward that, 
and that the government was interested in that type of a 
proposal and we would pursue that. 
 
Unfortunately after the districts were formed and the 455 or 6 
or 60, whatever the number was, of local volunteer boards 
across the province were disbanded without so much as a 
thank-you by the minister of the day and the provincial 
government. Then of course the lobbying effect from those 
local communities was gone. The boards were disbanded, there 
was no one left to speak up on behalf of the communities, and 
therefore this business of having some input from the local 
communities into their district health board was lost. 
 
And so that brings us to, basically I guess, Mr. Speaker, in a 
nutshell, where we’re at today with the districts and all the 
problems that are associated with the cuts, the massive lay-offs 
that we’ve seen of front-line workers, the basic building of 
another bureaucracy out there throughout Saskatchewan. We’ve 
seen facility closures that I mentioned, bed closures. And so 
was the districtification process the right way to go? Well 
there’s many today, Mr. Speaker, that say no it wasn’t. 
 
This Bill does try and address some of those problems. As I 
mentioned, the Lloydminster Hospital issue has been a thorn in 
the side of government since this process took hold, and I think 
this is one way that they’re going to try and put an end to it. 
There are a number of concerned people up in that country that 
believe that this is not the way to go about solving it, and have 
had considerable input into our caucus and myself in particular 
as to what they’d like to see done. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, hearing that the third party is actually 
in the House today, I will take my seat and allow them to make 
some comments. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 114  An Act 
respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for 
District Health Boards and their Affiliates be now read a 
second time and on the proposed amendment thereto moved by 
Mr. Boyd. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The Speaker:  There is some confusion here; I’m going to 
call that question again. What is the member’s point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, although you may have 
heard some yeas from this side, being House Leader I said no. I 
don’t know if you heard me or not. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The Speaker had just begun to 
say there was some confusion and in consulting with the Table, 
I was about to call the question again. So I consider the point of  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3079 

order to be well taken. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, because . . . on a point of order, 
please. 
 
The Speaker:  Point of order. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, it appeared to me that the question 
was well presented to the Assembly and the vote was taken, and 
it would appear that the vote certainly was read correctly. And I 
think that vote should be adhered to and followed. 
 
The Speaker:  The member raises precisely the same point 
of order that has just been raised and about which the Speaker 
has ruled. And so the point of order is not well taken. 
 
Order, order. I want to call the attention of the House to the 
vote and I ask that all members assist the Speaker in avoiding 
confusion. The question before the Assembly is the motion 
moved by the Minister of Health and the amendment moved by 
the Leader of the Third Party. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 
(1445) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a 
Crown Foundation for District Health Boards  

and their Affiliates 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
was wondering if you could outline for us parts of this Bill 
where we’re discussing the actual donations part of it. And I 
guess a more specific question would be as to why do you need 
a Crown foundation to issue the type of receipt necessary to 
have an income tax deduction? And can you clarify that by the 
establishment of this Crown that there would be a 100 per cent 
amount of a donation that would be deductible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the purpose is for a deduction of the 
total donation. And in answer to the question, the reason why 
the Bill is structured as it is  and I should add that it’s the 
same as the University of Saskatchewan, Crown Foundation 
Act and the University of Regina, Crown Foundation Act  is 
that the only way that you can get the larger deduction is by 
making a gift to the Crown; therefore, the only vehicle that’s 
available for us to use is a Crown foundation. And also, 
therefore, the gift must go in the first instance to the Crown 
foundation. 
 
The Crown foundation has to be given some discretion in the 
matter, to be guided, but not be bound, by the decision of a 

testator in a will, for example. The reason being that if the 
Crown foundation doesn’t have discretion, there’s never an 
absolute gift to the Crown and therefore we can’t take 
advantage of the 100 per cent tax deduction. And the reason 
does not flow from provincial law or policy. The provincial law 
or policy is tailored to comply with the law and policy as set 
down by the federal government in the Income Tax Act. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Did the provincial government 
approach the federal minister in regards to that and ask if there 
could be some changes that would be facilitated to help along 
with this particular problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, it seems clear that the federal 
government has established its policy in the Income Tax Act. 
The federal government has recently made some changes, as the 
member will know, to let people have the bigger deduction for 
charitable contributions. And I think it’s fair to say that that is 
as far as the federal government would wish to go. 
 
At this point, it’s a matter of their policy. And the federal 
government, I’m sure, would prefer to have a policy consistent 
for each of the jurisdictions within the country with whom they 
deal on income tax matters. So it’s doubtful that the federal 
government would want to change the law and policy it has in 
these matters to accommodate a piece of legislation like this. 
 
Rather, I think the federal government would quite properly say, 
we expect you, Mr. Province of Saskatchewan, to have your 
legislation comply with our tax rules. And that’s what we’re 
attempting to do. 
 
Mr. McLane:  A number of the health facilities, or health 
agencies throughout the province, Mr. Minister, have 
foundations in place, and there are a lot of the smaller agencies 
throughout the province, and in particular rural Saskatchewan, 
that have these foundations set up as well. 
 
I guess I would ask then what would happen, for example  
and we’ll use a particular foundation board to make this point, 
and we’ll use the one that we have at the Long Lake health 
facility at Imperial where there is a foundation  if as an 
individual, someone wished to make a donation so that it went 
towards specifically the Long Lake Valley and its operations, 
what would happen if the member would submit that to this 
Crown foundation? 
 
Can those people be ensured that that money would indeed be 
returned and spent on the Long Lake Valley? And would the 
actual money itself be sent back either to . . . who would it go to 
 to the district board or to the foundation that’s attached to 
the Long Lake Valley? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  To answer the last part of the question first, 
the money would go to the foundation or the district board, I 
think, according to the wishes of the donor. 
 
The donor could be reasonably assured that the Crown 
foundation would respect the wishes of the donor in forwarding 
the money to the place where the donor wants the money to go. 
This is the system that operates for the two universities. 



3080  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

All I can say to the member, in addition, would be two points. 
Firstly, the local foundation would continue to exist 
notwithstanding this legislation, because this legislation doesn’t 
force anybody to give any money to the Crown foundation. 
People could keep giving money to the local foundation, and 
probably will in most cases, because it would be a rare case of a 
quite large donation where they would want to employ a Crown 
foundation. 
 
And the second point I would make is that in terms of 
absolutely tying up the donation  that is, saying in the 
legislation that you must simply follow the wish of the donor  
the problem with that is again that if you did so, it would not be 
an absolute gift to the Crown foundation. Therefore under the 
Income Tax Act, the donor would not be allowed to have the 
100 per cent tax deduction, which is what the donor wants. And 
so it would defeat the purpose of the legislation to word it any 
differently than it is. 
 
But I should say to the member, as I think the member will 
know because of his own involvement in health care, is that this 
legislation is welcomed by hospital foundations who see it as a 
way, in some cases, of obtaining larger gifts or bequests. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You talked about 
being reasonably assured, and I appreciate your arguments as to 
why you can’t have absolute reassurance. Is there any way then 
 and I almost hate to ask this — regarding the regulations, or 
through some other agreement with the individuals that will be 
donating this money, that they can indeed be assured that it will 
be able to go back to the agency of their choice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think the assurance people will have will 
be the experience that is garnered through the operation of the 
system in the same way as the university foundations have been 
operating. 
 
Beyond that, no, you can’t structure the legislation differently 
than it is because of the law and policy at the federal level that 
I’ve referred to and with which we, as any other province, must 
comply. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Are there any amount limits, Mr. Minister, as 
to minimum amount that a person can give to this Crown 
foundation or a maximum amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I am not aware of any minimum or 
maximum. Of course, the maximum would be determined by 
the taxable income of the donor in the sense that a . . . since the 
donor receives a tax deduction, the amount of the possible 
deduction would vary according to the level of income of the 
donor. 
 
Mr. McLane:  When we’re talking about the board of 
directors, just tell us how that board would be chosen and what 
type of per diems we would be looking at to them and how they 
would be paid for by . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Under the legislation the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council, in other words the cabinet, can make 
regulations respecting the nomination of individuals eligible to  

be appointed as trustees. And a foundation consisting of not 
more than 12 persons would be appointed. I stress that because 
it has been said in this House that, why 12 people? What this 
says is up to 12, so perhaps it would be less than 12. 
 
With respect to the remuneration, I think, these would be set by 
regulation. It is contemplated that any per diems that these 
people would receive would be paid from interest that the fund 
would earn. I think this would not be a money-making 
operation for anyone certainly. Some of the people that I would 
see serving on this foundation would be professionals and some 
research scientist/specialist-type people. 
 
And it is customary in cases where a specialist position, for 
example, is taken away from surgical practice for a day, to have 
that reflected in the rate of remuneration so that nobody actually 
loses money as a result of serving on a foundation like this. But 
it would certainly not be anybody’s goal to be earning a lot of 
money by serving on this foundation. 
 
The important question would be getting together a level of 
expertise with respect to matters pertaining to research and 
where money ought to go in cases where the money is not 
clearly earmarked by the donor, which will occur in some 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Just to revisit the actual travelling 
of the donation as it comes from a donor to the Crown 
foundation, and then I would assume directly back to the 
agency of choice, in the instance of a district and a particular 
agency within that district, if a person designates their donation 
to go back to that particular agency, it would go to  just 
correct me if I’m wrong here, Mr. Minister  it would go to the 
Crown foundation. The Crown foundation then would turn 
around and send the money back to that agency or to the district 
board, or could it go to the foundation of the donor’s choice as 
well? And what would the time frame be of getting that money 
back to the designate of the donor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, I can’t comment on the time frame. 
One would think that it wouldn’t take a lot of time. But 
according to section 5 of the Bill, the foundation would, among 
other things, provide grants and transfers of real and personal 
property to district health boards and their affiliates for the 
purpose of supporting and promoting the provision of health 
services. 
 
So I would think the foundation would in the first instance 
acquire the money, and in the second instance, would transfer 
the money to a district or an affiliate of the district which would 
then apply the money to the purpose that the donor had in mind. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Not all agencies in the district of course are 
affiliates, and I guess the question I’m asking is, where’s that 
money going to end up at after it goes to the Crown, it’s been 
designated by the donor, where will it go to? Will it go to the 
district board or can it go to that foundation that an individual 
agency that is not affiliate might have set up? 
 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3081 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I have to correct the answer that I gave 
the member earlier, and I apologize. I see that the money would 
go from the board . . . or the foundation to the district board or 
an affiliate of the district board. So that if an institution was 
operated by the district, it could go to the district for that 
institution. If the institution is operated by an affiliate, then it 
could go to the affiliate. 
 
I don’t see in the legislation that it says that the money would 
go to a foundation, but on the other hand if the money was 
earmarked for a particular purpose, then either the district or the 
affiliate could obtain the money for that purpose. It would not 
be necessary for the money to go to the foundation in the sense 
that the foundation would not be the ultimate beneficiary. It 
would be some other purpose within the district. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Then I guess that begs the question, why 
couldn’t the money go back from the Crown foundation to the 
foundation that’s connected with the individual agency? The 
foundation itself do have an agreement . . . or do have 
agreements with the district health boards as to how that money 
will be spent. Of course we wouldn’t want to see an individual 
foundation going and buying a piece of equipment that an 
agency couldn’t use. So there has to be some discussions with 
the district health board, I understand that, but I see no reason 
why that money couldn’t go back to the individual foundation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I should, by the way, introduce an official, 
Barry Lacey, from the Department of Health, and he works in 
the finance management services in the department. 
 
And the reason why you can’t give the money directly to a 
foundation goes back to what we were talking about earlier, 
namely the federal income tax and regulations. And specifically 
the law at the federal level requires that the ultimate beneficiary 
of the money be an organization/institution that receives a 
majority of its funding from government. Therefore a 
foundation, such as a hospital foundation in Imperial or 
elsewhere, would be ineligible under the law because the 
foundation, by its very nature, does not receive any, I suppose, 
or certainly not very much, of its money from government. It 
receives its money from private donors and fund-raising 
activities. 
 
Therefore the law requires that the money go to an institution or 
service that is publicly funded in order to get the kind of tax 
break we’re talking about. Therefore the money must go to the 
foundation, the foundation must then give the money either to a 
district health board or to an affiliate. The reason being that 
those bodies, district health boards and affiliates, are publicly 
funded. 
 
Mr. McLane:  What will there be then to ensure the 
individual that once his donation has gone through the 
foundation and back to the district health board for an 
individual agency within that district to hold the district board 
accountable to that member’s wish? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  What will hold the district health board 
accountable will be simply honesty and respect for the person’s 
wish. And the experience of the system, I think, will result in  

that level of trust being built up in the same way as it has been 
built up in the university sector and in other provinces that have 
this kind of Crown foundation legislation. 
 
But going back to my previous answers, there is no way that 
you can tighten it up any more than that and still comply with 
the federal law. You either have the system set up so that the 
Crown foundation has the discretion and gives the money to a 
district health board or affiliate which are publicly funded, or 
alternatively you do not have the kind of system we have. 
 
And of course to think of it this way, nobody is obligated to 
make any donation to a Crown foundation. So that those who 
do not have faith that their friends and neighbours and fellow 
residents of Saskatchewan who run the foundation will respect 
their wishes, will undoubtedly not be making donations to 
Crown foundations. But those who realize that their wishes will 
be respected to the degree possible will make use of this 
vehicle. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I recall one of your 
predecessors talking about the integrity of communities and 
people in Saskatchewan when it came to the wellness model 
and the health reform process itself, that we would indeed not 
have communities fighting amongst communities, neighbours 
against neighbours, which we now have on these district health 
boards. 
 
So I’m not so sure that the general public out there is going to 
have the faith in this process that I’m hearing you say that they 
will have. People are becoming very sceptical, and given that 
there’s been a lot of broken promises over the last three or four 
years, I’m a little sceptical about how the general public will 
view this. 
 
I guess the question would be then, in your mind, have your 
department given you any guestimates as to the type of dollars 
that you might be looking for in the first year of operation of 
this Crown foundation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Then in your own mind, Mr. Minister, what 
would you foresee making this thing a success in the first year 
of operation in order that you might leave it in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, we haven’t set any minimum. Of 
course if the legislation’s passed and the foundation is set up 
and it isn’t used, then we won’t be going to any expense with 
respect to it. So we would then be reviewing the legislation. 
 
But I should say to the member, that despite his misgivings 
about the legislation, the hospital foundations themselves and 
people in the fund-raising community have very anxiously 
asked government to pass this legislation. This is not something 
that is driven by myself as Minister of Health or the New 
Democratic Party, although both myself and the New 
Democratic Party are supportive of this legislation. This is done 
at the request of the volunteers all across the province who are 
out raising money, and it is their assessment that this legislation 
will assist them. 



3082  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

And we are anxious to take their advice and involve the 
communities and be of assistance to them if we can be. I know 
the member is aware of the work of people like the hospital 
auxiliaries, and we are very supportive of people who do 
volunteer work in the province and so we are putting the 
legislation forward. 
 
They are confident that this legislation will in fact be of value in 
our communities. And we’re taking the advice of our volunteer 
sector and people in communities throughout the province. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, with your legal background, 
what recourse would people have if something happened where 
their wishes are not followed through in directing their 
donations to the choice of institution or agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  They would not have legal recourse for the 
reasons which I have already explained to the member. 
 
Mr. McLane:  You mentioned as well, Mr. Minister, that the 
board members’ per diems, whatever they may be  again laid 
out in regulations  would be probably paid by the interest off 
that money. I guess the concern that would be raised would be 
that we wouldn’t want to see the money sitting in an account 
accruing interest in order to pay the per diems of board 
members, or for any other reason, and that the money should be 
turned over as quickly as possible to the agencies that it’s been 
requested to go to. 
 
However, the dollars that are going to be there that don’t have 
any designation to them, is it going to be the wish of you or 
your department or of the foundation that those monies might 
remain in an account payable to the Crown foundation for an 
extended period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, that would not be our wish nor would 
it be of any particular benefit to myself, the Department of 
Health, or the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
followed with interest your debate with the member from Arm 
River, but I’m still quite concerned about the fact that we have 
a process of forming another appointed board. And while you 
can argue and will argue that it’s not costing the province 
anything, certainly the cost is going to come from funds 
generated through interest that is collected on the funds that 
have been donated by individuals towards specific health care 
projects or for the purpose of providing health care or health 
services in their area. 
 
And I guess the concern I have, Mr. Minister, and I’m not sure 
if I followed clearly why you’re arguing . . . why we need to set 
up the special foundation, why the specific foundations or even 
the health district boards that are already in existence, that are 
already being paid per diems right now, could not be the format 
that would handle, or the individuals that would handle, these 
funds, and therefore those funds we know for sure would stay 
and would remain in that district to be utilized in that district. 
 
And I’m wondering what your response is. As I said, just in  

following the response I didn’t get a clarification of what you 
really meant or what you were really talking about as to the 
reasons for the formation of a new board. 
 
Now I understand you have referred to this board . . . 
foundations Act as being somewhat similar to the universities 
both . . . in Saskatchewan here, the U of R (University of 
Regina) and U of S (University of Saskatchewan). The thing is, 
Mr. Minister, that each university has their own foundation. So 
the funds that are donated to the U of S stay and are utilized by 
the U of S. The funds to the U of R stay and are utilized 
because they have their own foundations. 
 
However, as I read the Act here, we have a group of people that 
are going to determine whether or not to send these . . . any 
funds that come to this foundation back to the district from 
which it came, or even to the community from which this 
money came from. 
 
So I’m wondering if you could explain the rationale and why 
we have to move to a formation of another appointed board 
versus using the district boards that are already in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  To the member, Mr. Chair. We cannot use 
the district boards that are in place because by . . . under the 
federal income tax law you must, if you’re going to give 
somebody a 100 per cent deduction off their income, you must 
have a law in place that sets up a Crown agency. 
 
A district health board is not an agency of the Crown for that 
purpose. Therefore, by federal law, you have to set up a Crown 
foundation such as is proposed in this legislation. And then the 
question becomes: do you have one . . . a foundation for all of 
the districts or do you have a foundation for each district, as is 
the case, as the member has correctly pointed out, at the 
universities? 
 
With the universities, you can have two foundations and they’re 
both covered off. The problem with the health districts is, 
because there are 30 of them presently  and I suppose one or 
more being set up for the North, more than that  you would 
require more than 30 separate Crown foundations. And the 
administrative costs and the boards and so on with respect to 
those would be worse than what the member’s party has 
complained about, which is yet another board. 
 
But I would direct the member’s attention to section 14 of the 
Bill which says that, where somebody gives money intending it 
to go to a district, it says that: 
 

the foundation . . . shall notify the district health board or 
affiliate receiving the donation of those directions. 

 
So in other words, when money is given by the foundation to a 
district health board or affiliate, any directions that the donor 
has must be passed on to the district health board or the 
affiliate, and in that way it is thought that there will be 
compliance with the wishes of the donor. 
 
The answer is, quite frankly, that I personally and the 
department and the government would have no objection to  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3083 

structuring the legislation in some other way. But what we’re 
trying to do is comply with the federal law as it is, and if you 
don’t do that, you can’t have a Crown foundation and give this 
kind of deduction. In order to give this kind of deduction, 
which the people who run the hospital foundations say they 
want — this is in effect their Bill — you have to set up a system 
whereby the money goes to a Crown foundation. 
 
(1515) 
 
There’s no particular benefit to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. If anything we would lose some tax revenues as 
a result of the Bill, although we think that both the government 
and the communities benefit from volunteer giving, as they 
always have, to the health care system, and too we’re certainly 
supportive of the legislation, but it’s something primarily that 
the hospital foundations themselves think is a good thing to do. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, and we’re not 
disputing the fact that this opens up the door for individuals 
who would probably donate a little more given the ability to get 
a tax credit. The unfortunate part, Mr. Minister, I think . . . you 
made a comment something about the foundation would notify 
a district board if they received a donation from that district to 
this foundation’s group of trustees or this committee. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, if I understand you correctly, you’re 
just notifying them to let them know that there has been a 
donation received and it’s been designated as received from a 
certain board towards a certain project. There is no guarantee 
though that that money will get back into the hands . . . or 
indeed be used or be able to be utilized by that district. 
 
What guarantee do you have that it will be? And if it is to be, 
why wouldn’t it then be allowed to . . . why wouldn’t the 
foundation transfer the funds to a foundation in the direct 
control of the district board so that the funds are then available 
for them to use immediately. Or does a board, if you will, based 
on the information they’ve received from the foundation, that 
information that says we have received . . . 
 
And let’s . . . using an example, maybe 50 or $100,000 from 
your district designated towards projects. Does the board then 
apply to the foundation if there’s a project in their board . . . in 
their district that they would like to undertake? Do they then 
apply . . . do they make a formal application since the money 
isn’t in their control? Mr. Minister, what’s the process that’s 
involved? 
 
First of all, why can’t that money be returned to the district 
board so that they can manage it. Secondly, if it’s your 
impression that this money must stay in the hands of the 
foundation, the board’s aware of what’s there, what process do 
they follow to make sure that the funds that were designated to 
be used in their district are available and how do they apply for 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, there is no guarantee, as I explained 
before, because there cannot be both a guarantee and 
compliance with the federal law. The federal law requires us to 
have the money going to the Crown foundation and being held  

by it, and it having some discretion in the matter as well. And 
I’m not in disagreement with the member that it would be nicer 
to have a guarantee in the legislation, but my advice is that 
that’s not possible to do within the legislation and comply with 
the federal law. 
 
Then the next question is, if there’s no guarantee, as a practical 
matter, how would the district board be properly notified. Well 
as a practical matter, if somebody leaves money to a district 
board or an affiliate for a certain purpose within a district, if 
that person is living, that person would, in making 
arrangements with the Crown foundation, obviously tell the 
district board or affiliate that he or she was making this kind of 
donation. 
 
Firstly, if it was by virtue of a will that the Crown foundation 
was benefited, then the executors of the estate, in carrying out 
the wishes of the maker of the will, would undoubtedly get in 
touch with the district or affiliate to say an X amount of money 
has gone to the Crown foundation for the benefit of your 
district or affiliate. 
 
I think it would be impractical to assume that people, either 
living or dead, who are making substantial donations and 
wanting to benefit a district or some activity within a district, 
would not themselves bring that to the attention of the district 
or the affiliate. And that being the case, the district or the 
affiliate would obviously be going to the foundation asking 
about the status of that gift or bequest. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, does this Act take away from the 
ability of individuals to continue to donate to their local district 
board today on the basis of the 20 per cent tax credit? Is that 
still in place, or does this one overrule that and the 20 per cent 
tax credit is not there any more and therefore everything has to 
go through this new foundations Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, this is totally voluntary. It doesn’t have 
any effect on one’s ability to donate to a district health board or 
to a hospital foundation or an affiliate or any other organization. 
And it does not affect one’s ability to make that kind of 
charitable donation and get a tax deduction. 
 
What this does is add a 100 per cent tax deduction, if one 
wishes to go through the process of giving to a Crown 
foundation. But people will be able to do whatever they can 
now do. This simply provides one more option to those who 
wish to take advantage of it. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 14 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, when it comes to clause 14, there 
are a couple of things about this clause and some of the 
wording that we feel quite strongly about and we’d like to move 
an amendment to. And the minister talks about the fact that . . . 
clause 14 reads: 
 



3084  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

When providing grants or transfers of real or personal 
property to a district health board or an affiliate, the 
foundation shall consider the directions of the persons who 
have made gifts to the foundation and shall notify the 
district health board or affiliate receiving the donation of 
. . . (these) directions, 

 
And that was some of the debate that we had just a few minutes 
ago. Here’s the part we have a problem with. We don’t disagree 
with the fact that there is a process in place that informs 
districts of the funds that are available as a result of 
contributions that have come from those districts, and 
contributions that have been given to the foundation that 
individuals would like to see utilized in their district. 
 
The problem we have is the next part of the paragraph which 
reads: 
 

but the foundation and the district health board or affiliate 
are not bound by . . . (these) directions. 

 
And that’s where we have a problem. We feel that based on 
what the minister has been telling us, that it would be important 
that the words “but” and “not” be removed from clause 14. And 
that the word “but” be replaced by the word “and”. So that it 
would read: and the foundation and the district health board or 
affiliate are bound by those directions. 
 
I think, Mr. Chairman, that then gives us the assurance and 
gives anyone who is making a donation, based on the 
information that the minister has given to us, the assurances that 
indeed their wishes or their desires will be followed through. 
The fact that you use the words “but” and then you put the word 
“not” and indicate they’re not bound, it says to an individual 
who would make a donation or would like to make a 
contribution, it would say to them, well from what I see of this 
legislation it doesn’t really hold the foundation responsible to 
make sure the monies are put back to where they are intended. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would like to hear your response because 
that’s where our major concern has been with the Bill all along. 
It just seems that this last line contradicts everything we’ve 
argued and everything we’ve talked about and I’d like to have a 
response before I move an amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well actually, Mr. Chair, this last line is 
consistent with everything I have said about the Bill. And as 
I’ve tried to explain to the member, you cannot word the 
legislation in the way that the member is proposing, and comply 
with the federal income tax law. In order to have a gift which 
applies for 100 per cent treatment in terms of the tax deduction, 
the federal law says that the gift must be a gift to the Crown. 
 
The problem with what the member is saying is . . . well simply 
put, a gift has no strings attached. And if you attach strings to 
the gift by saying that the foundation must obey the wishes of 
the donor, you cannot have the favourable tax treatment. So that 
would defeat the purpose of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, we just seem to be arguing a  

bit in circles here, because you’ve just told me that a person has 
the ability to give directions as to how they wish their funds to 
be utilized. Then you go and tell me that your Act is based on 
the federal Income Tax Act. Well maybe the federal Income 
Tax Act needs to be . . . there need to be some revisions. Maybe 
something has to be raised with the Minister of Finance 
federally. 
 
But it would seem to me that if you’re telling a person that they 
can donate  they can make donations; they can get 100 per 
cent tax credit  and that they can designate where they would 
like these funds to be used, what I don’t understand, Mr. 
Minister, how can you say on one hand they can be designated 
and the Income Tax Act says that’s fine for a person to indicate 
. . . that they can designate those funds to a certain project or a 
certain health district. But on the other hand you have to have a 
bit of a clause in here that says, however the foundation is not 
necessarily bound by the desires or the wishes of the individual, 
whether it’s a person making it via their estate or prior to their 
estate. 
 
And I guess that’s the part that I have difficulty in 
understanding. Because, as I read clause 14, it really says to the 
foundation that they really do not have to follow the directions 
of the person making the donation. And yet we’ve been arguing 
in this Assembly, we’ve been pointing it out time and time 
again, that a person has the ability to make a designation as to 
where they would like their donation to be utilized. 
 
And I think there’s just a bit of a conflict I guess, if you will, 
with regards to the Department of Finance and the federal 
legislation in regard to how credits are assessed regarding 
charitable donations. And I think there’s certainly a discrepancy 
there. And I have a difficult time understanding why you would 
need to word it this way to fulfil the way the Act reads, while 
on the other hand it would seem to say to a person, but it 
doesn’t necessarily mean your wishes will be followed out. And 
I guess that’s the part I’m having a hard time understanding, 
and I’m wondering if you can clarify that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, as I tried to explain to the House, Mr. 
Chair, I sympathize with what the member is saying, that one’s 
wishes should be respected. And I’ve had a fairly lengthy and 
detailed exchange with the member from Arm River. I’ve tried 
also to explain this to the member from Moosomin. 
 
The simple fact of the matter is that we in this legislature do not 
make the federal income tax rules. Those are made in Ottawa by 
the federal government. I sympathize with the member when he 
says, well maybe we should tell the federal government to 
change the rules. But as the rules are, and we have to comply 
with the rules, the rules say that in order to have a larger tax 
deduction, the wording has to be as it is in the Act. 
 
For those who are not comfortable with that wording and who 
therefore do not wish to make a donation to the Crown 
foundation, it is their right to decline to do so. 
 
I sympathize with what the member is saying, but I’m trying to 
explain to the member that if you worded the legislation as he is 
proposing, that would not comply with the federal tax laws and  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3085 

therefore you would not get any tax deduction. 
 
When people give a gift to a Crown foundation, what they want 
is a tax deduction for 100 per cent of their gift. What the 
member is proposing would deprive them of the tax deduction, 
which is not what the people want and it is not what the 
hospital foundations want. Therefore for that reason we cannot 
support the member’s amendment. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I guess there’s only one thing a person can 
do then is, based on this legislation, if they feel that the board 
may not follow their wishes, then rather than making one large 
contribution for 100 per cent in one given year, is to make five 
or a number of smaller ones for the 20 per cent per year that 
would allow them over a period of five or six years to actually 
get the credit of 100, and make that contribution locally. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, while I’m having a difficult time  
and I realize we’re dealing with something that is beyond our 
control as far as federal legislation  I still feel that it would be 
. . . I don’t understand why changing a couple words in the 
clause would really affect what the federal legislation is saying. 
And therefore I move that clause 14 of the printed Bill be 
amended, that we: 
 

Amend Clause 14 by 
 
(a) deleting the word “but” and replacing it with the word 
“and”; and 
 
(b) by deleting the word “not”. 
 

Amendment negatived on division. 
 
The Chair:  I recognize the hon. member from Wood . . . or 
Arm River. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, those rivers are confusing. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We too, as we discussed earlier, 
have some concerns about the wishes of the people that are 
donating money, and also have an amendment to clause 14 of 
the printed Bill. 
 
And I will be moving that, Mr. Speaker, to: 
 

Amend clause 14 of the printed Bill by deleting the words 
“, but the foundation and the district health board or 
affiliate are not bound by those directions” and substituting 
the following: 
 
“and the foundation and the district health board or 
affiliate shall be bound by those directions unless it would 
be contrary to the established rules and principles of trust 
law to follow those directions”. 

 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 14 agreed to on division. 

Clauses 15 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I 
want to thank the opposition for their questions, and also Mr. 
Lacey for his assistance today. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to as well thank the 
minister and his officials for giving us the time to at least 
debate the Bill and listen to our concerns. Certainly we trust 
that as a result of this piece of legislation many communities 
will be assisted and we trust that it will indeed work towards 
the improvement and betterment of health care in this province. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill on division. 
 

Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of 
Labour Relations between Health Sector 

 Employers and Employees 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
know I’ve had discussions with the Saskatchewan Association 
of Health Organizations, who is the major representative of 
most health agencies in the province, which would include the 
30 health districts. They talk about this being a step in the right 
direction; however at the time of our discussions with a 
representative of the board of SAHO (Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations), they had yet not received 
feedback from their member agencies which again would 
include the 30 health districts. 
 
I’m wondering, has your department undertaken a discussion 
with a number of health districts, and if you have, which 
districts have you talked to and what have those discussions 
been about in recent months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, it is not the protocol or procedure that 
the department . . . actually the Department of Labour is 
responsible for this legislation and the Minister of Labour. But 
I’m very happy to deal with the legislation today. 
 
But it would not be the protocol that the Department of Labour 
would communicate with the individual health districts. It 
would be the correct protocol and procedure, which has been 
followed, that the department would deal with SAHO which is 
the official representative of the districts and also that the 
department would respect the directions of SAHO. And my 
understanding is  and I’ve talked to some officials from 
SAHO myself  that SAHO, representing the districts, 
indicates support for this Bill. It would not be appropriate for us 
to question the word of SAHO, to go directly to the districts, 
and we have not pursued that course nor do we propose to 
pursue that course. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m rather happy to 
hear you say that. A question I would have . . . Of course we’ve 
talked about the agencies themselves, SAHO and its 
representation of the health agencies across the province, and as 
well the unions seem to be supporting this legislation as well. I 
would question however what . . . Our biggest concern is what  



3086  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

does this do for health care in the province in terms of some 
consistency when you bring some unions together? 
 
And I recognize that there has been a problem and a number of 
years ago our association then tried to address the situation at 
the start of health reform. As I stated earlier on this Bill, that 
your government was reluctant to deal with the union problem 
at the time of the districtification process, in particular when 
agencies were starting to amalgamate and work together. 
 
So our biggest concern is, what happens to health care in the 
province? How will this affect in your mind what can happen of 
course if you have unions coming together and probably going 
to result in less unions in the province, health unions in the 
province? What happens to the standard of care then as you see 
bumping because of seniority and the possibility of a loss of 
probably some pretty fair front-line workers in lieu of someone 
that has a great number of years of service in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think that the problem is, as the member 
can appreciate, that when The Health Districts Act was brought 
in a few years ago and brought about the 30 health districts, it is 
a new administrative structure superimposed upon an old labour 
relations structure. Because prior to the 30 health districts, we 
had the 400-plus boards, each with separate arrangements with 
the unions. And what this does is to bring the labour relations 
structure in line with the health districts. And I appreciate what 
the member is saying about feeling that this is in fact overdue. 
 
And what I see this legislation doing is allowing for greater 
integration of the delivery of health services, and to also 
facilitate, over time, consistency as between employees, in 
terms of their terms and conditions of employment. 
 
The practical problem is you get situations whereby in 
Saskatoon, for example, dealing with people that work in the 
mental health field, I believe there are eight separate bargaining 
units. In other words, eight collective agreements, eight groups 
of people working within the mental health field in one district, 
namely Saskatoon. And when you get these kinds of problems 
it’s very difficult, not just for the unions but for the employers, 
to properly manage and plan and integrate services. 
 
So at the end of the day this will save money in terms of having 
to work one’s way through what is really a bit of an 
administrative and labour relations nightmare and put those 
issues aside and concentrate on what we should be 
concentrating on, which is how to best use the resources we 
have to integrate the delivery of the health services and provide 
good services to the public who are consuming health services. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I realize you’re not 
the Labour minister, but we are talking about labour within 
Health. I’m wondering if you have any statistics on the number 
of unionized employees that were in the health system in 1991 
versus the number that weren’t as compared to what there are 
for unionized employees today as compared to what are out of 
scope. 
 
(1545) 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I don’t have those numbers with me at the 
moment although I would be happy to send them over to the 
member when I do have them. 
 
But I can tell you that the latest figures that we have available in 
the Department of Health, which are only recent up until 
October of ’94, but I don’t think the situation has changed that 
dramatically, is that the number of in-scope employees  in 
other words, unionized employees  who have been laid off in 
the health care system is roughly about 4 per cent. I believe it’s 
about 3.8 per cent outside of Saskatoon and Regina and about 5 
per cent within Saskatoon and Regina; so somewhere close to 4 
per cent. In terms of numbers, I can’t give you the number at 
the present time. 
 
The number of administrative staff has gone down an average 
of about 18 per cent outside of Saskatoon and Regina and about 
22 per cent in Saskatoon and Regina. I suspect that the figure 
for Saskatoon would be higher right now because Saskatoon 
just went through a process of, I think, taking 12 
vice-presidents down to 7, if my memory serves me correctly. 
 
So to put it another way, I believe that with the layoffs, about 3 
per cent of the tens of thousands of people that work in the 
health care system in the unionized sector, 4 per cent, have been 
laid off. What you have to remember however, is that people 
within the health care system who are in unions have what are 
known as recall rights, so that if I’m laid off at, you know, 
Shaunavon special care home or wherever, I have the right to be 
recalled to work usually for about two years, so that when 
somebody retires I may go back. 
 
And what you tend to find in the health care system, because 
it’s a fairly large system, is that most of the people who are laid 
off eventually are recalled back to work. It doesn’t mean that 
they don’t have a rough time of it because they may be on 
unemployment insurance for awhile and may go back to 
part-time work initially and so on. 
 
I would suspect that the job losses in the health care field are 
probably less than many other industries. For example, you 
would find that the percentage of people laid off or the absolute 
numbers of people laid off in some sectors like the railway 
sector, some of the retail service sector where a lot of full-time 
jobs have been lost, and many other sectors, are actually greater 
than the health care sector. 
 
I’m sorry I don’t have the absolute numbers, but the number of 
people who have lost their jobs in the health care sector would 
not be a large percentage of people; it would be quite a small 
percentage of people. And I hope that answer is of some 
assistance. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we got off a 
little bit on the wrong track there and maybe I didn’t make my 
question quite clear. I would appreciate the numbers as it relates 
to say 1991 to present day  the in scope, out of scope, and 
union versus non-union. What I was asking would be in 
positions that would be in-scope positions, how many of those 
positions would have there been in ‘91 that were not unionized, 
people that were not in a union and held those positions? 



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3087 

There were a number of . . . for example, there were a number 
of health agencies around the province that were non-unionized. 
There were a number of institutions that were non-unionized, 
and those are the numbers . . . I’d like to know what’s 
happened. In my view, that one of the things that 
districtification has done in this health reform has pressured 
more people to belong to a union than there were before this 
process took place, starting in 1991. Those are the numbers I 
would like to know. As well I guess is the number of shops, 
unionized shops, that there were then as compared to what there 
are now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. I don’t have that information at the 
present time. Certainly I can try to get that information for the 
member. The member probably knows that the health care 
sector . . . I’m not saying that what the member says isn’t 
correct; there may have been some bargaining units that weren’t 
unionized before that now are. But going back to 1991 or 
before that, the health care sector just happens to be one of the 
most unionized sectors of society. 
 
Most of the nurses are members of the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses, and most other employees that work in the health care 
sector are members of CUPE( Canadian Union of Public 
Employees), or SEIU (Service Employees International Union), 
or SGEU, or the health sciences association, and in one case in 
Regina, the RWDSU (Retail, Wholesale and Department Store 
Union). 
 
None of them are members of the NFU (National Farmers 
Union ) that I know of  the member will be disappointed to 
hear that. But it is a fairly heavily unionized sector and always 
has been. But I will attempt to get fuller and better information 
for the member. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, regarding the commissioner that 
you will be appointing, can you give us some idea of what 
you’re looking at, what possibly . . . where he might come from 
or where this person might come from, and what are some of 
the qualifications that the commissioner might . . . that you 
might want the commissioner to have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The qualifications that I would want the 
commissioner to have would be that the commissioner would 
be independent of the government or either of the parties, being 
the employer or employers or the unions; that the commissioner 
would be experienced at labour relations; that the commissioner 
would be neutral as between employers and unions and would 
be acceptable to both employers and to unions. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, just regarding . . . I 
mentioned a little earlier about seniority amongst the 
employees. I guess I would ask you: do you think that this will 
be an issue for the commissioner to . . . that will cause him 
some problems in getting a settlement or some sort of an 
agreement amongst the unions as it relates to seniority through 
the different unions as he is trying to bring them together? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I should introduce Brian King, 
who’s the deputy minister of Labour, who’s assisting me today; 
and also Allan Barss, who’s a lawyer who works within the  

Department of Labour on legislation. And I’m advised that the 
fact of this legislation and the commissioner’s work would not 
affect seniority per se, that collective agreements would 
continue to operate, and that it is not the intent of the legislation 
that the commissioner would be interfering with the seniority 
system as it presently operates. And I will leave it at that for the 
time being. 
 
Mr. McLane:  In the past when attempts were made, Mr. 
Minister, to try and bring some consensus to this issue, it was 
always viewed by many, in particular a lot of the unions, 
different unions, that this would indeed just be another round of 
bargaining. Have you had those discussions with the unions and 
is that a cause for concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I apologize, but could the member repeat 
the question? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, as I was saying, Mr. Minister, in the past 
when this problem that you’re trying to address with this 
legislation has been attempted to be solved, there’s always 
concern, in particular from the union side of things, that this is 
another round of negotiations. Another . . . we’re at the table. 
Has that been a concern with the unions as you’re bringing 
forward this legislation, and do you think that will be a cause 
for some concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I suspect that the unions would have been 
happy had they been able to agree amongst themselves with 
respect to the changing to the bargaining unit. But having failed 
to achieve agreement, the unions, like SAHO, are supportive of 
appointing a commissioner to resolve the issue. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, has there been any discussions 
with the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) regarding a 
bargaining council for them? Will this commissioner be looking 
at all aspects of the health sector other than just the health 
workers? Would that include the medical profession as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, because the SMA is not a certified 
bargaining agent under The Trade Union Act. This legislation 
deals with the employees who are subject to The Trade Union 
Act. The SMA is set up by a separate piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Regarding the commissioner, have you 
indeed . . . I notice again . . . I’ll express my disgruntlement at 
the amount of meat being put into the regulations again, as I 
have over the course of the session, have a real problem with 
the way this government is trying to bring forth legislation 
through the regulations. Can you give us an idea when the 
commissioner might be appointed, and will there be a mandate 
for him in terms of a time frame that he will have to rectify the 
problem and bring forth a set of recommendations for you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The parties have agreed  that is SAHO 
and the unions  that they would like to have the process 
completed by the end of this year, that is December 31, 1996. 
So it is thought that after the Bill is passed, assuming it’s 
passed, and proclaimed into law that a commissioner would be 
appointed sometime this summer by the Minister of Labour and 
the Act itself says, in subsection 5(2), that: 



3088  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

. . . the commissioner shall complete the examination on or 
before the date set by the minister. 

 
And it goes on to say “. . . the minister may extend the time . . .” 
in subsection 3 of section 5. But it is the hope of the parties that 
this will be completed by the end of the year. It is not the hope 
of the parties, I think, that they will be working through the 
summer with respect to this process. I think they see it 
unfolding in the fall, after people have had their various 
summer breaks throughout July and August. 
 
Mr. McLane:  We do have the Labour Board in this 
province, Mr. Minister. And I was just wondering, in regard to 
the regulations, in particular of this Bill I guess, will the 
commissioner have complete control to putting something into 
regulations without consensus from the board or will there be 
some workings there between them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think it would be fair to describe this as a 
process whereby some of the jurisdiction of the Labour 
Relations Board is carved away from the Labour Relations 
Board for the time being and given to the commissioner, the 
reason being the complexity of the issues and the cost 
associated with going through this process on a 
district-by-district basis. 
 
Clause 1 agreed. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe this 
is Bill No. 120 that we’re on, is it not? 
 
The Chair:  Yes, it is. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  And I do have some concerns about this 
particular Bill in this clause. You’ve outlined and defined a 
number of other definitions for words in the Act. Later on in the 
Bill you allow the minister, or your Lieutenant Governor in 
Council, to define words that are not defined under this Act. 
 
So I believe there is one word in this particular Act which has 
been missed and the definition has not been provided for, and 
that definition is the word “employee”. No place in the Act does 
it define the word “employee”. You use the word “employee” 
as it’s defined in The Trade Union Act, but because it’s not 
defined in this particular Bill, it would allow the minister or the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to provide a specific definition 
in this Act for the term “employee” as the minister or the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council would like to have. 
 
(1600) 
 
Therefore, Mr. Minister, I believe it would be important to put 
that definition into the Act, as to what is an “employee” as it’s 
referred to in this particular Bill; therefore I would like to move 
an amendment to this section. And my amendment would read: 
 

Amend subsection (1) of clause 2 by adding the following 
clause: 

“(e) “employee” means a person who is an employee 
within the meaning of The Trade Union Act and is 
employed by a health sector employer;” 

 
I so move, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, there is some . . . I think there is 
some merit to what the member says. We haven’t had a lot of 
time to look at this amendment since it just came over. 
Employer is defined in the present configuration, clause (e) . . . 
oh I see, and I suppose clause (e) and (f) would become . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  That was supposed to be part of it, yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, would become (f) and (g). 
 
If this amendment were passed, what we would be prepared to 
do, because employer is already defined, is to agree to insert 
other words, namely I would . . . If it’s in order, Mr. Chair, I 
would propose a subamendment to this amendment which 
would take out the words after the words “The Trade Union 
Act” so that it would read: 
 

Amend subsection (1) of clause 2 by adding the following 
clause: 
 
“(e) “employee” means a person who is an employee 
within the meaning of The Trade Union Act;” 

 
And I think I would go on to suggest in the subamendment that 
the clauses (e) and (f) be renumbered clauses (f) and (g). So I 
would propose that subamendment to the amendment. 
 
The Chair:  Order. The Minister of Health has moved a 
subamendment to the amendment that reads: 
 

That the amendment be amended by deleting all the words 
after “Trade Union Act”. 

 
Subamendment agreed to. 
 
The amended amendment before the committee is: 
 

Amend subsection (1) of clause 2 by adding the following 
clause: 

 
(e) “employee” means a person who is an employee within 
the meaning of The Trade Union Act. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I 
have an amendment to propose to clause no. 6, 6(a), and it 
relates back to the amendment we just made in clause 2 in 
giving the minister and the order in council . . . not order in  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3089 

council, Lieutenant Governor in Council the ability to define 
the words as written in this Act. 
 
And I believe that sets a . . . I realize it may be in another Acts, 
but I think it’s very dangerous to allow the minister or the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to make interpretations as to a 
meaning of a word. 
 
It doesn’t say it has to be a reasonable interpretation of the word 
as you would interpret it. You could simply say that under this 
Act I’m ruling that black is white. And it’s legitimate to do so if 
this clause is included. 
 
I don’t believe that that should be included in there, Mr. 
Minister. I believe that the wording and the phrasing of the Act 
should be clear so that there are no need for the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to make definitions for words. 
 
Therefore I would move, Mr. Deputy Chairman: 
 

Amend subsection (6) of Clause 6 by deleting clause (a). 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, just to indicate, Mr. Chair, that I 
appreciate what the member is saying. Actually if the member 
would look at most of the legislation that goes through this 
House, in terms of the regulation-making power this actually is 
a standard provision. It is not unique to this legislation. It 
doesn’t mean the member has to agree with it, but it is a 
standard provision that is part of the standard legislative 
drafting procedure that we use, have used, in this legislature. So 
we are unable to support the amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the 
opposition for their questions and also thank the officials for 
their assistance. And I move that Bill No. 120 be reported with 
amendment. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we know 
the minister’s officials who are with him and welcome them 
again here today. 
 
Some questions, Mr. Minister, on this particular Bill, and I 
think there will be a number of them as I’m sure you’re not 
surprised. The first one I would like to talk about certainly 
would be the licensing of a particular health agency. And I’m 
just wondering, to start things off, if you might enlighten us as 
to what we have in this province today in terms of health  

agencies and/or facilities that are not licensed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  We have no health facilities in this 
province which would provide insured services at the present 
time and which would be required to be licensed pursuant to 
this legislation. 
 
Mr. McLane:  So there are no agencies in the province 
which provide insured services that are licensed. Are there any 
agencies in this province that provide uninsured services that 
have to be licensed? And if that is indeed the case, are there any 
that have licences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  This Bill applies only to insured services. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s many 
definitions and descriptions on the first page or two of the Bill, 
and some of them are quite broad. The first one of course is the 
accreditation program. Now when I think of an accreditation 
program, I think of a program whereby a number of agencies 
participate freely in an accreditation process with some 
standards laid out across Canada. And yet this seems to mean 
something different. Can you tell me what the difference would 
be and why you have it listed here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The intent of the legislation is that we will 
hire the college of physicians and surgeons to provide 
accreditation. 
 
Mr. McPherson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. In response 
to the question just asked by the member from Arm River, in 
clause 2(1)(k)(i), it states here “ . . . other than an insured 
service that is designated in the regulations.” Now if you’re 
talking about insured services, there is a list somewhere that 
you have, and could you provide that for us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, there is no list at the present time. The 
Act contemplates that a list could be prescribed, by regulation, 
of services that would not be caught by the Act in the event that 
it was desired, with respect to very minor procedures, to allow 
those to be operated by a private facility. 
 
And I should say to the House and to the member that we have 
consistently said since the throne speech that this legislation 
does not outlaw private clinics. What this legislation says is that 
private clinics would operate in Saskatchewan only in 
accordance with public policy and that they would be required 
to be licensed. 
 
Now that is the intent of the legislation. It is not the intent of 
the legislation to say that there shall never be any private 
clinics. It may be the case at some point that one would decide 
that service could be delivered as effectively through a private 
clinic as through a public institution. The question would be 
whether the clinic delivered the service as an insured service, in 
other words, within the medicare system. 
 
But having said that, there may be some procedures that are 
insured services with respect to which exceptions might be 
made in regulation, but no such exceptions are contemplated as 
we speak, but with some flexibility in the regulations, might  



3090  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

ensue at some point. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  You see, Mr. Minister, the problem that 
we’re having with this Bill  and we’ve had with many Bills 
that your government has brought forward  is the amount that 
comes forward in regulations. And here once again, you’re 
wanting us to deal or pass through a Bill that is quite extensive. 
 
In fact there’s a serious problem, you see, because this Bill 
gives the minister, yourself, just about total control in health 
care. Especially when you look at it in tandem with the other 
health Bill that you’re going to be dealing with tomorrow. 
 
You have total control. And in fact when we see, Mr. Minister, 
that it is you that becomes the sole person for picking  oh 
where did I see that in your Bill  the accreditation program 
operator, it is you, sir, that decide who gets the licence, who can 
renew a licence, who can apply, what’s an insured service, 
where that service will be performed, and you’re doing all of 
this, Mr. Minister, by regulation  basically all of it is in 
regulation. 
 
And I mean, it’s for you to determine, according to your Bill, 
whether or not things that you’re going to do by regulation is in 
the public good and the public interest, if in fact what the intent 
of this Bill was to stop a two-tiered health system. And well if 
that was the intent of the Bill, why then couldn’t you bring in a 
Bill that didn’t have to do everything in regulation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I disagree with the characterization of 
the Bill by the member, Mr. Chair. I don’t think the 
regulation-making power in this Bill is far out of regular 
practice in legislation. 
 
I would refer the member to section 6, which indicates that 
when an application for a licence or a renewal of a licence is 
received, the application should be forwarded to the appropriate 
accreditation program operator and the district health board of 
the health district in which the health facility would be located 
or is located. 
 
And so I would say to the member that by the legislation itself, 
it’s contemplated that the accreditation program, which we 
contemplate would be the college of physicians and surgeons, 
and the health district board, would be consulted. It certainly is 
not the intent that these decisions would be made behind closed 
doors by the Minister of Health. Rather these are decisions that 
by their very nature, as I’m sure the member can see, would 
have to involve some consultation with the community. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we 
talked about the licensing, and you mentioned that anyone 
providing an insured service does not have a licence. What 
prompted you to bring this legislation forward regarding the 
licensing aspects of it, to require a health facility to have a 
licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It is the policy of the government, Mr. 
Chair, that the services that are insured, health services, that is  

services covered by the medicare plan and which are performed 
in hospitals, should be performed within the medicare system 
and should be paid for through the tax system as opposed to 
private clinics. 
 
And because that is the policy of the government and we think 
the wish of the majority of people in our province, we wish to 
state as a matter of public policy in our legislation, which 
reflects the public policy of the province, that we favour the 
medicare system over the private model, which involves a 
two-tiered approach somewhat akin to the system they have in 
the United States, which is mainly a two-tiered approach which 
we think is inferior to the medicare system that we have within 
the province. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, I’m not sure if I didn’t 
understand your answer or maybe you didn’t understand my 
question. It could be government policy to have these facilities 
licensed. Now I’m just wondering, what prompted you to do so 
at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  This is a preventive measure, Mr. Chair. 
We want to state as a matter of public policy that health care is 
going to be delivered through the public system in 
Saskatchewan, as it has been. And we feel that it is right and 
proper that this public policy be expressed. We believe in the 
medicare system, and the model we have chosen for 
Saskatchewan is the public medicare system. 
 
We have difficulty understanding, in view of the history of 
medicare in the province, why that would be a controversial 
notion. We believe that the majority of people in our province 
would like to keep the medicare system, and that is the policy of 
this government. 
 
And so we are going to enshrine that policy in legislation to 
ensure that as between the medicare system and the American 
system  which some in this legislature espouse and some 
outside the legislature espouse  that we choose the medicare 
system that we have over U.S. style health care. We think it’s 
working in the interests of the people. 
 
There’s no question there are some problems in any system. But 
I would say to the members opposite that if they would take the 
time to seriously examine the American system where 40 
million people are not covered by medicare, they surely would 
agree that it’s best to keep the public system of medicare we 
have than to go to the private system which inevitably results in 
those who have more money getting better service and quicker 
service. That is not the way that the people want us to go; that is 
not the way that we will go. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Can you explain to me then, Mr. Minister, 
before you brought forward this legislation by having these 
agencies not licensed, how did that jeopardize the publicly 
funded health system that we have here in Saskatchewan? I’d 
like to know what kind of scared you into doing this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  At the present time there is nothing in our 
law to prevent the establishment of a private facility which 
would charge fees and provide an insured service. And we do  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3091 

not believe that that’s good public policy. 
 
There should be legislation that sets out that our policy is the 
public medicare system and that insured services  that is, 
services that are part of the medicare system as opposed to 
services that are not  should be delivered within the public 
system and should be paid for through the tax system. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Under the licensing application 
. . . or renewal section of the Act, section 4(1)(c) states: 
 

provide the minister with any information or material that 
the minister requests and considers relevant to the 
application. 
 

That’s pretty wide-flung. I’m wondering why you wouldn’t 
have defined that down a little bit more, Mr. Minister, and had 
some specific criteria laid out as to what it takes in order to get 
a licence. I’d ask that as one question. 
 
The second question in regards to that would be, what are you 
looking for? What will you be asking of these agencies to 
provide to you before you will grant a licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The most important matters would be 
questions of competence, safe care, and need for the service 
within the individual health district. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I was 
a little distracted there. Could you repeat that for me? I 
apologize for not listening. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the most important factors would be 
questions relating to competence, safe care, and need for the 
service within the individual health district. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Then could that not be laid out 
specifics within this Act as to what you’re going to be asking 
for so that everyone knows then what the minister will be 
requesting instead of saying, any information and material that 
the minister requests and considers. That’s pretty wide scope. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The minister would be subject to advice by 
the accreditation program and we contemplate that would be the 
college of physicians and surgeons. They would undoubtedly 
have something to say about what matters should be taken into 
account. 
 
I would also remind the member that the provisions like this 
and decision making by ministers is always subject to judicial 
review. And if the minister or some other public official takes 
into account matters that ought not properly to be taken into 
account and which really are irrelevant, that within 
administrative law would always be subject to judicial reviews. 
So in that sense there always is a safeguard from what the 
member’s referring to which is some foray into matters that are 
purely irrelevant, and such a foray would not be tolerated by our 
legal system. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
will be, at the appropriate time, moving an amendment to clause  

4 of the printed Bill. I’ll just make the House aware what that is 
at this time, and when we go through it at the end we’ll be 
making the amendment. The amendment to the clause 4 of the 
printed Bill would be to: 
 

Amend clause (1)(c) of Clause 4 of the printed Bill by 
adding the word “reasonably” before “considers relevant to 
the application” 
 

Mr. Minister, as well in the licensing section of this Act you 
talk about there’s a nine-month period in which a licensee must 
make application for renewal of her licence. Can you tell us 
how you came up with nine months? Do you think it’s a little 
long? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The explanation for the nine months is that 
if you turn to section 7(3), it reads that if the minister refuses to 
renew a licence, then the licensee should be given at least six 
months notice of that. The reason for that I think is obvious. 
And because one would want to give the licensee six months 
notice that the licence wasn’t going to be renewed, the 
application for renewal is made nine months in advance so that 
in the three-month period that decision could be made and the 
licensee would be given fair notice of the decision, either 
favourable or unfavourable, so that all concerned could do the 
appropriate planning at the end of the six-month notice period. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Can you give us some examples, Mr. 
Minister, as what reasons you might use as minister not to 
renew a licence? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, these actually are set out specifically 
in the Bill, if the member would refer to section 7(2), clauses 
(a) to (f). Yes, section 7(2), clauses (a) to (f), they set out that a 
licence may be renewed if the minister is satisfied that . . . and 
then certain criteria are set out. And presumably if these criteria 
did not apply, i.e., if the minister was not satisfied that these 
were met, that would go into making the decision as to whether 
to renew or not to renew. 
 
And I would refer you also to section 15, which sets out further 
criteria to use in making a decision whether to amend, suspend, 
or cancel a licence. But that is different from the question of 
renewal, which you’re referring to, and the criteria that one 
would look at is set out in that clause. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, the question that would follow that, and 
I realize that it is laid out in section 7(2), but it also talks about 
the regulations as well in there, things in the regulations, and 
we’re not privy to the regulations. I guess that’s what I would 
be asking. What else is there that would cause you not to renew 
a licence? That’s something that would be laid out in the 
regulations. What do you . . . I guess I should’ve asked the 
question earlier; maybe I’ll ask it now. Do you have a set of 
regulations to go with this Bill at this time, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, we do not. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Have you compiled any portion of a list of  



3092  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

regulations at this point in time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, we have not. 
 
Mr. McLane:  So can then you give us some idea, Mr. 
Minister, as what you might be referring to in that section 
where you talk about the regulations and anything else laid out 
in the regulations that would cause you to not renew a licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The regulations would deal with matters 
similar to what is set out in this section 7(2); namely, that there 
be compliance with the laws of Saskatchewan and Canada, that 
there is a need for the health facility and the procedures 
delivered at the facility, that the regulations be followed. 
 
And I suppose the question is, what about the regulations? I 
think the regulations would flow largely out of what the 
accreditation committee would say, to ensure the quality of 
services and public safety. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, we’ll 
stay on section 7 just for a moment because I agree with my 
colleagues; you’ve got far too much latitude with what you can 
do in regulations. 
 
But beyond the regulations, which I guess really could cover 
everything, couldn’t it, Mr. Minister, and then we have 7(2)(e) 
and this would read then: 

 
The minister may issue or renew the licence only if the 
minister is satisfied that: 

 
(e) the licensing of the health facility constitutes an 
effective and efficient use of public resources; 
 

Can you give me an explanation on this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, as a matter of public policy, it is 
important for the government of the day to determine that 
public money is spent effectively and efficiently. And we will 
be looking for the most effective and efficient use of public 
monies. And if it makes sense to deliver a service in a particular 
way, such as in a hospital as it’s now done, then that would 
influence the decision whether to license a private facility. 
 
If it makes more sense, if it’s more cost-effective to deliver a 
service through a private facility and if that can be done within 
the public system, then consideration should be given to 
licensing a private facility. 
 
I should say, for the benefit of the Liberal Party, Mr. Chair, that 
the province of Alberta has recently decided that even the 
private operators there must operate within the medicare system 
and must be paid for by the regional health authorities they have 
within the province of Alberta. 
 
And what you’re going to see happening this fall, for example 
with respect to the Gimbel clinic, is that the Gimbel clinic will 
no longer be allowed to charge people a facility fee. The 
Gimbel clinic . . . with respect to an insured service, the Gimbel 
clinic will be paid for by regional health authorities. Those  

authorities will have to make a decision whether it makes sense 
for them to pay money to the Gimbel clinic or whether it makes 
sense for them to go about their business in another way. 
 
But the point is that a decision will have to be made in each 
case, whether it’s cost-effective to deliver services through a 
private facility or whether it is not. And obviously that’s a very 
important factor that anyone would take into account in 
deciding whether we should be licensing a private facility to 
deliver an insured service. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, but with your argument, 
let’s . . . the chelation therapy for one. I mean  what’s some 
other examples . . . really is still going to come to you. You’re 
talking about regional authorities having some discussion 
making power, but still, it comes right back to you and your 
department as to what you’re going to determine as effective 
and efficient use of public resources. Now if this goes contrary 
to what a regional authority is asking for, or a district board or 
the people of the province, it still is you that’s going to have 
that power to determine whether or not a service is ever 
provided here. Right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct. What I was trying to explain 
to the member is simply that in the province of Alberta, as a 
result of the pressure being put on the province of Alberta by 
the federal government, they have arrived at a situation whereby 
regional authorities are going to be paying private facilities like 
the Gimbel clinic. 
 
And even in Alberta they are adopting the principle that is 
expressed in this legislation, albeit quite reluctantly and in a 
different way. In Saskatchewan, licensing would be done by the 
province. 
 
I’m not suggesting that licensing is being done by the regional 
authorities in Alberta either. I’m simply making the point that 
the payment is going to come from the regional authorities. And 
what Alberta is going to do is do away with the principle that 
you can go to a private clinic as the consumer and pay money to 
get an insured service, because the federal government has told 
them that that’s contrary to the Canada Health Act. And we are 
trying to enshrine that same principle in this legislation. 
 
With respect to chelation therapy, this legislation would not 
affect the question of whether we should have chelation therapy 
or not because chelation therapy is not an insured service. 
 
This legislation deals with insured services that are carried out 
in the province of Saskatchewan, in hospitals at the present 
time, basically. And what it says is that you can’t set up a 
private clinic which charges people direct payment in 
competition with that public sector, unless you are licensed by 
the province. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, give some examples then as 
to how that would affect the Gimbel Eye Centre here, I guess 
it’s in Saskatoon? Tell us how that would play out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The Gimbel Eye Centre in Saskatoon, and I 
believe there may be a new one called the Horizon eye centre,  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3093 

would not be affected because they do not provide insured 
services. An insured service would be cataract removal because 
it’s paid for by medicare and carried out within hospitals. 
 
The eye centres we have in Saskatoon are involved with 
corrective vision, corrective surgery, so they will do laser 
surgery on your eyes to correct your vision. That’s not an 
insured service therefore it wouldn’t be caught by the 
legislation in the same way that, for example, if I want to 
undergo cosmetic surgery  and maybe the member would 
suggest that I do so  that is not an insured service. So if 
somebody is a plastic surgeon and they want to set up a private 
clinic in Regina, or Saskatoon, or elsewhere to perform that 
kind of surgery, they are free to do so. 
 
However if I’m severely burned or I’m disfigured as a result of 
a birth defect and there are medical/psychological reasons why I 
should have surgery then that is an insured service because it’s 
considered to be medically necessary. A plastic surgeon could 
not set up a clinic to do that kind of service because it’s part of 
our public health care system. A plastic surgeon could set up a 
private clinic to do cosmetic surgery because it’s not part of our 
public health care system. Gimbel can set up the clinic to do 
laser corrective surgery because it’s not an insured service. 
Gimbel cannot set up a clinic to do cataract surgery under this 
legislation, because it’s an insured service, unless the minister 
decides that Gimbel should be licensed to do so. 
 
And what the minister would decide, in consultation with the 
district health board, would be whether it made sense to deliver 
that service through a private facility, and if so that facility 
could be licensed. 
 
And to return to what I was saying earlier, in effect we have 
arrived at the same position now within the province of Alberta 
because they, in response to pressure by the Liberals in Ottawa 
who believe in this kind of legislation I would venture to say, at 
least in terms of their words if not their funding of our system 
. . . have pressured the province of Alberta to adopt a system 
whereby you can’t have direct payment to a private facility. 
 
So we are not exactly alone in terms of trying to enshrine the 
principle of this legislation in legislation; nor is what the 
legislation says some new and radical policy. This policy is 
consistent with the public policy of the Canada Health Act and 
is consistent with the public policy that, up until recent times, 
nine out of ten provinces embraced and in the last few months 
the province of Alberta has embraced. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, with your own 
argument, if we’re looking at the laser corrective surgery 
performed at the Gimbel Eye Centre in Saskatoon . . . a service 
that isn’t being provided in the province elsewhere? Or is it? 
Well answer that first. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I don’t believe laser corrective surgery 
would be provided elsewhere. This is a fairly new type of 
surgery and I believe it’s provided by one or two private 
companies in Saskatchewan. Their ability to provide it is not 
affected one way or the other by this legislation because laser 
corrective surgery is not an insured service. Therefore it isn’t  

affected by this legislation. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Yes. Okay, you made my argument, Mr. 
Minister, because now if . . . as you’re saying, this laser 
corrective eye surgery isn’t provided by the province; it’s new; 
it’s obviously necessary so you have a private operator move to 
the province to provide a service that the people here obviously 
need and want and are prepared to do what they have to do to 
receive it. Now because it’s uninsured you’re saying it’s not 
affected by the legislation, and yet if we take a look at clause 
2(1)(f)(i) and (ii), there you have the ability to make this an 
insured service yourself. I guess you could do it through 
regulation. 
 
So here would be the concern, that as we’re moving into the age 
of technology and new things are being developed each and 
every day, what then is going to entice someone to come here 
and provide a service, set up shop, significant cost involved, if 
in fact at the whim of the minister you can make it an insured 
service and put the breaks on this thing? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Where I differ with the member, Mr. Chair, 
is that laser corrective surgery is not in fact a needed service or 
medically necessary service as the member implies. Laser 
corrective surgery takes away the need to wear eye glasses or 
contact lenses. It is not a medically necessary service. 
 
Cosmetic plastic surgery, likewise, is not a medically necessary 
service; it’s something somebody makes a choice with respect 
to. For example, somebody goes for what is commonly referred 
to as a nose job. That’s something that isn’t paid for by 
medicare and if somebody wants to get their nose job, and some 
plastic surgeon wants to set up a clinic to provide nose jobs and 
other cosmetic surgeries, those are not caught by the legislation. 
 
The reason that I think people would choose to set up or not set 
up is simply because they would exercise their own common 
sense and intelligence. And common sense and intelligence 
would dictate to Gimbel or Horizon that it’s okay for them to 
set up a private laser surgery clinic if they wish to, because that 
is not something that is likely to become an insured service. The 
same would go for, for example, cosmetic surgery. 
 
If on the other hand, the government decided that it should be 
an insured service for some reason, then the government might 
also decide that that service should be performed in an existing 
facility, within the public system, as indeed the province of 
Alberta has recently decided with respect to the private clinics 
that are operating there and that are being rolled into the public 
system, in so far as payment goes, at the present time. 
 
So this notion that is enshrined in this legislation is not 
something that is some variation from public policy. This is 
something that the Canada Health Act promotes, and nine 
provinces have promoted, and now even the province of 
Alberta, very reluctantly, also promotes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, obviously you’re trying to 
alleviate our concerns by stating that if it’s medically necessary  



3094  Saskatchewan Hansard June 24, 1996 

then of course it’s going to be an insured service and that’s all; 
these other technologies aren’t going to fall in. And when I look 
at the Bill, I see nowhere here where it’s stating anything about 
medically necessary. All I see is that you, by regulation, have 
the ability to decide yourself what is uninsured or insured, and 
what . . . Well that’s enough. Answer that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The definition, section 2(1)(f) defines a 
diagnostic or therapeutic medical procedure as an insured health 
service. And an insured health service is defined as an insured 
service within the meaning of The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act. So the question of whether something is 
medically necessary and should be considered an insured 
service does not arise pursuant to this legislation; it arises by 
virtue of the terms of this legislation under The Saskatchewan 
Medical Care Insurance Act. 
 
Those decisions would be made in the same way as they are 
now, regardless of whether this piece of legislation was passed. 
This is a determination that would be made under The 
Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act, which is an Act that 
has been around for a long time. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, though what you didn’t 
finish when you read 2(1)(k)(i), you left it as just an insured 
service within the meaning of The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act. But then it is: comma “other than an insured 
service that is designated in the regulations;” So there again, to 
come full circle on your answer, it still comes down to you 
deciding what’s medically necessary, or you deciding what is 
going to be insured or uninsured, right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, that’s correct. The member had asked 
me that question before and what the member is saying is quite 
correct. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, this 
morning in question period . . . or this afternoon in question 
period, I asked you about the services being provided in Alberta 
through a Norma McLafferty by virtue of what she was 
receiving when she went there. 
 
Can you explain to us then why such a great number of these 
people are having to go to Gimbel’s clinic in Calgary to receive 
that particular service? And what is that that they’re actually 
receiving? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The number of people that are going to 
Calgary to receive that service I think, would be considerably 
down from what it was a few years ago just because the number 
of people receiving their cataract surgery here in Saskatchewan 
has gone quite dramatically up in the last number of years. I 
believe that, as between say 10 years ago and today, the number 
of people obtaining cataract surgery in Saskatchewan has 
almost tripled. It’s really gone up quite dramatically. 
 
But . . . Well in fact I’ll give you these figures. In 1988-89, the 
number of in-province cataract procedures was 3,082. In 
1995-96, the number of procedures was 8,236. I’ll give you 
those figures again  3,082 in 1988-89; 8,236 in 1995-96. 
 

So I would suspect that although anyone is free to go to Alberta 
or the Mayo Clinic or wherever else they would like to go to get 
a certain procedure even if it’s an insured procedure in 
Saskatchewan, the number of people that would leave the 
province, I suspect has gone down quite considerably from 
what it was prior to 1991, at which time the Government of 
Saskatchewan was actually paying people to go to the Gimbel 
clinic by paying part of the fee. 
 
We decided, when we came into government, to stop paying the 
Gimbel clinic at the rate that we pay for the procedure in 
Saskatchewan, and instead to put our resources into our own 
system. And as I’ve indicated, the number of people undergoing 
the procedure in Saskatchewan has risen very, very dramatically 
over the last number of years and I think in the last few years 
has gone up by about 25 per cent. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  So, Mr. Minister, if in fact, as you’re 
saying, the eye surgery has dramatically risen, are you or your 
department considering bringing in your own laser corrective 
eye surgery program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Just getting back to 2(1)(f) and (k), I’m 
just wondering how this January 1, 1996 date will affect in fact 
(k), The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act, as far as 
that list of insured services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I don’t think it will affect (k) one way or 
the other. The date is simply a date designed to deal with the 
question of what are insured services provided within hospitals 
and what are not. And the member will know that technology 
and medical procedures are changing constantly, so you have to 
choose a date at which you want to define the range of services 
or procedures that this Act applies to, and so the date has been 
chosen to provide a method for doing so. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, in the . . . following your train 
of thought on insured services and that possibly preventing 
someone from coming in and setting up a private clinic to do an 
uninsured service, what guarantee would someone have that 
would come into the province and set up a practice that would 
involve an uninsured service and at some point in time you 
would deem that maybe they shouldn’t be doing that particular 
type of service in the province. And it would be at your 
discretions to then say simply that that would be an insured 
service, which would actually put that person out of a business. 
So how will we ever attract those types of people into the 
province if there’s that sort of control by the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It’s very unlikely that that situation would 
occur or that this is a major problem in the sense that if you are 
talking about coming into the province and providing a service 
that is an uninsured service such as laser surgery or cosmetic, 
plastic surgery, that means that we have made a decision within 
the province that those things are not part of the medicare 
system. 
 
And arguably if we’ve come to the point today where things are 
not part of the medicare system, it’s not all that likely that we  



June 24, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3095 

will be adding them in a hurry to the medicare system. And I 
think what you will find is that those who wish to be in the 
business of coming into the province of Saskatchewan to 
provide an uninsured service will know, as a result of the 
exercise of common sense and business experience, that it is 
highly unlikely that uninsured services would become insured 
services in the short run because there's a reason why they’re 
not insured services, and usually that is because they are not 
medically necessary. 
 
The Chair:  It now being 5 o’clock, this committee stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. later this same day. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Flavel .........................................................................................................................................................................................3047 
Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................3047 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................3047 
Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................3058 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................3061 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3068 
Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................3068 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................3067 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................3067 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3067 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Internet Services  

Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................3068 
New Recreation Facility Opens in Weyburn  

Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................3068 
Ile-a-la-Crosse Junior Girls’ Volleyball Team  

Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................3068 
Provincial Employment Equity Week  Hire a Student Week  

Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................3068 
Moose Jaw Air Show  

Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................3069 
Public Service Union and Management Work Together  

Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................3069 
South-west Saskatchewan Terminal  

Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................3069 
Congratulations to Saskatoon Doctor  

Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................3070 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Acute Care Services  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................3070 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................3070 

Cataract Surgery  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................3071 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................3071 

Closure of Eaglestone Lodge  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................3071 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................3071 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3072 
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................3072 

Welfare Reform  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3072 
Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................3072 

No-fault Insurance  
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3072 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................3073 

Political Donations  
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................3073 
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................3074 

Farm Fuel Rebate Program  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................3074 
Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................3074 



 

Crown Corporations Review  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................3074 
Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................3075 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS  
New SaskTel Internet Service  

Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................3075 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................3075 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................3075 

TABLING OF REPORTS  
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................3076 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster Hospital 
Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts  

McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................3076 
Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for District Health Boards and their Affiliates  

Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................3078 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3079 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................3079 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections  

Osika ................................................................................................................................................................................3047, 3061 
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................3049 
McPherson ......................................................................................................................................................................3053, 3062 

Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for District Health Boards and their Affiliates  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................3079 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................3079 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................3082 

Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of Labour Relations between Health Sector Employers and 
Employees  

McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................3085 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................3085 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................3088 

Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities  
McLane ...........................................................................................................................................................................3089, 3094 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................3089 
McPherson ......................................................................................................................................................................3089, 3092 

 
 


