
























































May 27, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1847 
 May 27, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition are from Yorkton, from Regina, and 
other small communities in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Forget, 
Francis, Creelman, Regina, and other places throughout 
southern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the names that are on this petition are from the 
city of Regina and from Craven, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from the 
city of Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, 
Redvers, Gainsborough, Maryfield, Weyburn, Hudson Bay; all 
over southern Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, the vast 
majority of them, are from the community of Kipling, but we 
also have some citizens from Langbank, Lumsden, and 
Kennedy. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petition of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Regina here. They’re from Balgonie. They’re from 
Wadena, Alameda. They’re all from throughout Saskatchewan, 
and I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
day no. 59, the 59th time I’ve been up with my colleagues in the 
House and the people of Saskatchewan trying to save the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it looks like most of the people that have signed 
this petition are from the Regina area and in particular from 
Regina Albert South, where in fact he should be doing 
something as well to save the . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Now the hon. 
member knows that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order, 
order. The hon. member knows that debate is not in order when 
presenting petitions. I’ll ask him to conduct himself 
accordingly. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 



1848  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I have a number of guests to introduce today. As you will know, 
this has been designated Saskatchewan Mining Week and we 
have a number of guests in your gallery. And I would like to ask 
them to stand as I introduce them and hope members will give 
the appropriate response upon completion of my introductions. 
 
I’d like to introduce Lorne Repka, the vice-president and 
general manager of Prairie Coal Ltd.; Bill Eatock, general 
manager of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.), 
Lanigan division; Raoul Gauthier, general manager of PCS, 
Allan division; John Tosney, president of the Cigar Lake 
Mining Corporation; Richard Kusmirski, senior geologist with 
Cameco; Eric Beaumont, general manager of ICM Canada Ltd.; 
Bill Henry, manager of Sask Minerals; Al Shpyth, manager of 
public relations with Uranerz Exploration and Mining; Jim 
Murphy, senior geologist with Uranerz Exploration and Mining; 
Brian Palmer, senior mining engineer, Uranerz Exploration and 
Mining; Tim Gitzel, vice-president, corporate affairs, 
COGEMA Resources; Norm Beug, manager, refining and 
shipping, Kalium Canada Ltd.; Rob Plosz, manager, mine field 
and engineering with Kalium Canada; Ron Kryzanowski, 
human resources officer, Kalium Canada; Jim Bubnick, senior 
vice-president, potash operations of PCS Inc.; Lou Coderre, 
vice-president, marketing, Big Quill Resources; Bob 
Cunningham, executive director of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Association; and with them is Dawn Redmond, who has 
organized Mining Week on behalf of the Saskatchewan Mining 
Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are truly the people who are involved in a 
very important element of our provincial economy and I would 
ask all members to acknowledge the work that they do in their 
corporations, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, in the 
appropriate way. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Minister of Energy and Mines on behalf of the Liberal 
opposition in welcoming the members of SMA (Saskatchewan 
Mining Association Inc.) here today. I won’t go through and 
name them individually but I recognize a lot of friends up there. 
Sorry I couldn’t make it to the kick-off this morning. I guess 
we’ll be meeting with some of you later and look forward to 
dealing with your issues. Thanks so much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Joining with the 
opposition and the government members, we too would like to 
welcome the members of the SMA here today. We look forward 
to our meeting later this afternoon and the important issues that 
I’m sure they want to present to us as an opposition party and 
then in turn to the government. 

So welcome certainly to the SMA members here today and we 
look forward to our talks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Legislative Assembly today, an outstanding group of women 
seated in the west gallery. 
 
As you know, the Women’s March on Poverty is making its 
way to Ottawa from both coasts. The march was in 
Saskatchewan over the weekend to raise awareness of the 
important event in the history of our country and it has taken 
numerous hard-working and dedicated volunteers obviously to 
launch a march of this magnitude. 
 
I want to introduce today Florence Hackett, Aboriginal 
Women’s Action Network — if you would stand, Florence; 
Marjorie Beancage, Aboriginal Film Video Art Alliance; 
Bonnie Morton, National Anti-Poverty Organization; Mirta 
Rivera, Nandita Sharma, NAC (National Action Committee on 
the Status of Women) representatives; Heather Nicholas, who is 
filming the march. 
 
And other members in the legislature will introduce some of the 
other women; so please join me in welcoming these women 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to join my colleague in, through you and to you to 
all members of the Assembly, welcoming a number of women 
involved with the March on Poverty that are in the House today. 
We have Sylvia Maljan and Eden Guidroz who are from CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees); Anthea Whittaker, 
Gretchen Zimmerman, and Centime Zeleke, who are working 
with Women on Wheels and are from British Columbia  I 
had an opportunity to have luncheon with the women and had a 
talk about a number of the issues that have an impact on their 
lives  Mary Praizinger from Eastside Women’s Centre in 
Vancouver. 
 
I would also like to greet and have you welcome Sarah Dorsey, 
Beth Long, Jean Hildebold, as well as a number of other 
women on the march. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Join with me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I extend our very warm 
welcome also to all who are here and involved with the 
Women’s March on Poverty. We welcome you to the legislature 
today and we wish you very well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to 
complete the introduction of individuals who are involved in  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

the Women’s March on Poverty, I’d like to introduce to the 
House: Kris Alvarez; Vivien Seegers; Elsie Dean, who is with 
the Women’s International League for Peace; Diane Clair, who 
is with the Aboriginal Women’s Action Network; Susan Stout, 
with Canadian Auto Workers; and no stranger to many of us, 
Deedee Daigle with the CLC (Canadian Labour Congress) 
prairie region. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, all of these guests are seated in the west 
gallery. Most appropriate, they’re close to Moose Jaw  or 
closer to Moose Jaw now. The march will be in Moose Jaw 
later this afternoon and we look forward to seeing you there. 
 
Again, I ask all members to greet these important people. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the third party caucus, we’d certainly like to extend a warm 
invitation to the women who have taken up a cause and we’re 
pleased to see that you’ve looked at coming through 
Saskatchewan as well and presenting your cause. We wish you 
well in your further endeavours. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, and all members of the House, it’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly, 
seated in your gallery, two very special guests from Ukraine, 
who have joined us today in Saskatchewan. I’d ask them to 
stand as I introduce them. They are, first of all, His Excellency 
Dr. Volodymyr Furkalo, who is the ambassador of Ukraine to 
Canada. Please, Mr. Ambassador. And Mr. Mykhalylo 
Tytarenko, counsellor for economic and commercial affairs 
with the embassy of Ukraine, who’s joined the ambassador. 
 
Mr. Speaker, His Excellency, and Mr. Tytarenko, met this 
morning with the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, and 
joined a number of ministers, the leaders of both the official 
opposition and the third party, and myself, at a luncheon 
meeting with the Saskatchewan business people who have 
business interests in Ukraine. 
 
This afternoon His Excellency, and Mr. Tytarenko, will meet 
with the Minister of Municipal Government and with officials 
in Justice before leaving for Saskatoon, where they will spend 
the day tomorrow. I might add this is not a complete itinerary; 
His Excellency is extremely busy with a very full agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members of the House will know that our 
province’s economic, governmental, and trade relations with 
Ukraine are very, very important to all of us. And if I may so, 
perhaps somewhat immodestly, it’s also very important on a 
very cultural level because of the nature of the settlement of this 
part of the world. We appreciate the presence of our guests and 
their effort to work with us in strengthening those ties. 
 
Ukraine is embarked on an exciting venture of democratization 
and market-place reforms  an adventure which will lead it to 
strength and independence, and a contributing country of the  

highest order in the world’s orders of countries. 
 
And these are not easy times, but they’re exciting times. And 
with the presence of people like the ambassador, and his 
commitment and his country’s commitment, and with the 
partnership of people like the people of Saskatchewan, the 
people of Canada, I know that they will be very, very 
successful. 
 
I look forward to future return visits, and I ask all members to 
join me in welcoming His Excellency, and Mr. Tytarenko, 
today. And may I just say very briefly in Ukrainian . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian). 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to, with 
the permission of the Premier, add the welcome to His 
Excellency on behalf of the official opposition. And may I just 
say, very cautiously as well . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian) 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  I would like to join with the Leader of the 
Opposition and the Premier in welcoming the ambassador and 
his delegation to Saskatchewan here. I was very interested, in 
the brief minute we had to talk, about the similarities between 
Saskatchewan and the Ukraine and the agricultural economy, 
which is very important of course to the Ukraine and of course 
to Saskatchewan. So we would like to add our warm welcome 
to you, as well, to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Among the other 
distinguished guests that we have in the gallery today, I’m very 
pleased, as always, to welcome a group of school kids here. 
They are from Dr. A. E. Perry School in my riding. They are 32 
grade 8 students, accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Wilson. 
And I’m looking very forward to meeting with them after to 
discuss the workings of the Assembly. If you’d join with me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to this House, a number of students 
from St. Angela’s Academy at Prelate, Saskatchewan, sitting in 
the east gallery. There are 20 of them, grade 12 students. And 
welcome you to Regina and to this House, and we hope that 
you find what you see interesting and informative. And I’ll be 
meeting with you later on, on behalf of Jack Goohsen, to 
answer any questions you may have. Welcome here. 
 



1850  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
today to welcome a group from the Turtleford School, a group 
from my constituency. It’s so good to see someone from home. 
You’re the first group that’s travelled this far, and I’m sure 
pleased to have you there. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
members, the group from Turtleford. There are 31 grade 8 
students. I’m looking forward to answering questions and 
meeting with them later. 
 
And I also would like to welcome their teacher, Sheila 
Johnsrude, and the chaperons, Ellie-Mae Bishop, George Barr, 
Larry Macnab, Lillian Currie, and Albert Angus. 
 
And please welcome them, and I hope you enjoy question 
period. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Mining Week 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 
mining industry is vital to Saskatchewan’s economy, and so I’m 
pleased to recognize this week’s designation as Saskatchewan 
Mining Week. By celebrating Mining Week, I hope that more 
people become aware of the significant contributions that 
mining makes to Saskatchewan. 
 
Directly and indirectly, the mining industry employs about 
17,000 people in the province. Mining has the potential to be 
dangerous work, but Saskatchewan mining companies pride 
themselves on their safety records and the strict safety rules. 
Saskatchewan’s mine safety record is one of the best in the 
world. In fact stats show it is safer to work in a mine than in 
your own home  but I guess that would depend on your 
home, wouldn’t it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
What’s also important is that more mining companies are also 
developing environmentally conscious methods of doing 
business. I would like to commend all the people working hard 
to put Saskatchewan on the leading edge of the mining industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As my colleagues will be aware, my constituency lies in Prince 
Albert, known as the “Gateway to the North”, so I’m very 
familiar with the contribution that mining provides for northern 
communities. This contribution is not limited although to the 
North, as mining benefits the entire province. Therefore I think 
that it’s fitting that I speak about it today at the beginning of 
Mining Week in Saskatchewan. 
 
My colleague has indicated some 17,000 direct and indirect 
jobs are created by the mining industry. Last year as well this 

industry shared a $136 million in royalties and production taxes 
with the province. 
 
But the province isn’t the only beneficiary, Mr. Speaker. The 
uranium and potash companies alone paid $15 million in 
municipal and school property taxes, all of which contribute to 
keeping viable cities, rural towns, and RMs (rural municipality) 
throughout the province. 
 
Mining Week, as my colleague has indicated, is part of an 
education process to show that this is a major role that the 
industry plays. I want to publicly commend the Saskatchewan 
Mining Association and the hard-working people that they 
employ for the positive benefits that they accrue to the province 
of Saskatchewan. I want to commend them for a job well done. 
And I look forward to working with them in the upcoming 
months. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

20th Anniversary of Saskatchewan  
Indian Federated College 

 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the past 
weekend, present and former students of the Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College celebrated 20 years of university 
education. 
 
Since SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) opened 
its doors in 1976 more than 1,500 students have graduated from 
its programs. Make no mistake, SIFC’s educational programs 
are special and unique. 
 
As Dr. David Ahenakew remarked during the anniversary 
banquet, quote: “The creation of the college meant there would 
finally be Indian education for Indians about Indians”. 
 
The college offers 12 different degree programs. Although 
SIFC is based out of Regina, the college offers certificate 
programs in more than 20 different communities around the 
province. As SIFC’s profile grows, it continues to attract more 
and more native high school students to post-secondary 
education. 
 
SIFC will celebrate another remarkable event next year when 
construction begins on its spectacular new building that was 
designed by the well-known Douglas Cardinal. 
 
The success of Saskatchewan’s Indian Federated College is due 
to the tireless efforts of people in Saskatchewan who had a 
vision of providing a unique educational experience for the first 
nations people. 
 
I would like to congratulate all the people involved in SIFC’s 
development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women’s March Against Poverty 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the last  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

time there was a national march to Ottawa, the reception in 
Regina was not very hospitable. In fact we have the dubious 
distinction of being the place where the 1935 On to Ottawa 
Trek was stopped, with some cost to life and limb  on order 
from the federal government, I hasten to add. 
 
As was mentioned last week in the legislature, we now have 
another march taking place, and the marchers have been with us 
in Saskatchewan for the past four days. I am happy to note that 
this time, rather than being assaulted and arrested, the 
participants of the Women’s March Against Poverty are our 
guests in the legislature today and we were happy to welcome 
them a few moments ago. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in some ways, the times have changed for the 
better. And sadly, in some ways they haven’t. My mention of 
the 1935 trek was not casual. The marchers then were on the 
way to Ottawa to press the federal government for decent jobs 
and an end to poverty. 
 
The marchers today are gathering strength across the country to 
press the federal government to take action to end women’s 
poverty; to recognize that women  especially single mothers 
 make up the majority of Canada’s poor; and to urge the 
federal government to live up to its promise of a national child 
care program. These are not outrageous demands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on the one hand, we welcome these dedicated visitors to our 
legislature and invite them to return. On the other, we deeply 
regret the need for a march. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Access Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize these week’s designation as National Access 
Awareness Week. 
 
People who are physically or mentally challenged come up 
against barriers every day. These barriers might be a flight of 
stairs, lack of parking spaces, or inadequately equipped 
telephones. Not only should all people have access to services, 
Mr. Speaker, but they should have the fair access to everyday 
living and employment. 
 
Fortunately, ongoing advances in technology are making it 
easier for people with disabilities to enter the workforce. Many 
new communication devices are enabling people living with 
disabilities, greater access to education. 
 
I hope that by participating in National Access Awareness 
Week, people will be inspired to think of new ways to improve 
access to services and programs for all people with disabilities. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we all 
need reminding from time to time that what is easy for us is not 
automatically easy for others. Seemingly little things for us, like  

two steps up to a restaurant or a trip downstairs to the rest 
room, is a major undertaking for those with restricted capability 
for movement. 
 
Consequently, for the ninth year, this week has been declared 
National Access Awareness Week, a week set aside to raise 
awareness about physical and attitudinal barriers faced by 
people with disabilities. More importantly, its purpose is to 
work towards removing those barriers so that people with 
disabilities can achieve full economic and social participation in 
society. 
 
During this week, disability groups, communities, schools, 
corporations, and governments across the country, will sponsor 
a number of activities to fulfil the mandate of the week. 
 
Our kick-off was held on Friday in North Battleford, where the 
annual government Breaking the Barriers Award was presented. 
This award recognizes the government department or Crown 
corporation which exceeds its mandate in serving the disability 
community. This year the award went to SaskEnergy, which 
received a plaque and painting by Adeline Nostadt, a resident of 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, and an accomplished 
mouth-painter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the painting is an example of how disabilities can 
be overcome. National Access Awareness Week is a reminder 
that we all have a part to play in helping those with disabilities 
overcome them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farming Practices 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I wish to 
address an issue of concern to all Saskatchewan residents, 
particularly those involved in agriculture. 
 
In today’s edition of the Regina Leader-Post, there is a 
Frontline article from Reuter’s entitled “Factory farming causes 
problems.” The article, Mr. Speaker, discusses how livestock 
intensity, pesticide use, and other farming practices in Europe, 
are causing environmental degradation and reducing food 
quality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned that many people reading this story 
will assume that the same applies to Saskatchewan. While 
modern agriculture practices are constantly being upgraded, 
Saskatchewan people, however, provide the best quality food in 
the world. 
 
Industry inspection and licensing services, universities, 
extension services, and manufacturers of agriculture inputs, end 
products, strive to ensure our agriculture system is both 
sustainable and environmentally sound. Farmers across this 
province play the greatest role in that and are committed to 
ensuring that they are not only good business people but good 
stewards of the land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I’m sure all members join me in 
expressing every confidence in Saskatchewan’s agriculture  



1852  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

industry. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Saskatoon Economic Development Authority Survey Report 

 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A recent 
survey conducted by the Saskatoon Regional Economic 
Development Authority demonstrates the optimism among 
businesses in my constituency and across the province. 
 
Of the 90 businesses that were surveyed, 75 per cent are 
looking at growth opportunities in the industrial sector. 
Nineteen companies are looking to expand their operations, 
which means that over 250 jobs will be created, investing over 
$37 million in the local economy. Almost 70 per cent of the 
companies indicated their current domestic sales are up and 
only 10 per cent have declined over the past two years. 
 
The prospects for growth in domestic sales is another area that 
showed positive results. About 35 per cent of the companies 
said those prospects are excellent and 40 per cent said they are 
good. Over 85 per cent of the businesses that were surveyed had 
invested in productivity, in new equipment, in employee 
training, or in improving the work environment, i.e., investing 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the measures outlined in our Partnership For 
Growth strategy will help maintain this positive atmosphere. 
These businesses that are moving ahead with optimism will be 
creating jobs for the new century, jobs for future generations. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Patronage Appointments 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members of this House recall a 1991 election campaign promise 
made by the Premier that was going to eliminate patronage. In 
fact the NDP (New Democratic Party) platform document 
indicated, and I quote: 
 

Performance and competence must be re-established as the 
sole criteria for employment and advancement. 

 
In spite of this promise, the NDP government has openly 
broken this promise on a scale only exceeded by the previous 
Conservative administration. Mr. Speaker, one of the winners 
under this government’s obsession with patronage has been 
long-time New Democrat Party organizer, Mark Stobbe, who 
moved from the Finance minister’s office to the Crown 
Investments Corporation, then on to SaskTel. Mr. Speaker, it 
has come to the attention that there is a great deal of friction 
between Mr. Mark Stobbe and the new president of SaskTel, 
Don Ching. 
 
Can the Premier confirm if Mark Stobbe has been relieved of 
his duties as a result? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as the minister 
responsible for a Crown or a department, I certainly don’t feel 
that it’s my role to enter . . . personally engage in the hiring or 
firing of personnel. 
 
I was not aware until some days after, as I was told later, Mark 
Stobbe was no longer at SaskTel, that he was no longer there. 
So I think what you do in these circumstances is you engage 
personnel  be it deputy ministers, be it presidents of 
corporations  to run the business of the corporation, and they 
will engage those people that they feel are appropriate in those 
positions. And it is management decision and should never, Mr. 
Speaker, become a political consideration of a political party or 
of the floor of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the minister in charge of SaskTel for answering for the Premier 
for his promise that he made in the 1991 election. Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Stobbe is probably best identified as the campaign manager 
who forgot his NDP candidate at an all-candidates’ forum 
during the Northwest by-election  whoops. 
 
He is also associated for his part with the Co-op upgrader 
fiasco. Aside from this, he has managed to move from 
government departments to Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, 
given the movements of Mark Stobbe, one has to question if his 
qualifications are meeting the demands of these different 
government agencies. 
 
Given the fact that this does not appear to be a consideration 
where NDP patronage appointments are concerned, will the 
Premier  will the Premier — explain what plum political 
appointment he will be finding next for his party friend. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I think that it would be 
appropriate perhaps to make some comments for the benefit of 
the members opposite as to the definition of patronage. They 
should be experts on that subject, Mr. Speaker. When you 
engage people who are competent in their field then it’s in spite 
of, not because of, political considerations. 
 
Mr. Stobbe is a distinguished graduate of the University of 
Saskatchewan, the author of several published books, and I 
think, Mr. Speaker, his credentials should not be in question 
here. 
 
So I think when you hire someone who does not have 
credentials  except political credentials, which the members 
opposite would understand  that’s patronage. When you 
employ people who are qualified in spite of their political 
considerations, that is bona fide employment, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s the difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

Service Districts Act 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Municipal Government just can’t seem to get it right. Last 
month she told local government officials from across the 
province that she would recommend to cabinet that The Service 
Districts Act be withdrawn. She told the media on April 17 that 
she would put it on the back burner, stating, and I quote: 
 

We don’t intend to proceed with it any further at the 
current time until we’re sure that we’ve have a pulse on 
what the majority view is out there. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it has come as a great shock to hear reports 
indicating that this NDP government now intends to push 
through this proposed legislation. Will the minister explain why 
she has broken her word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we have not broken our 
word. The members opposite would take certain phrases out of 
context and try to leave the impression that we have been less 
than truthful. This is not true, Mr. Speaker. This is false. It is a 
misrepresentation. 
 
There has been some controversy surrounding and some 
misunderstanding surrounding the meaning and intent of The 
Service Districts Act. We have responded to that by trying to 
make explanations, by holding meetings, by circulating copies 
of the legislation so that people, Mr. Speaker, could understand 
it more clearly. 
 
We have said that, and  it’s true, whatever definition you 
want to use  it’s on the back burner for the time being 
because it was given first reading so that it could be made 
public, its provisions could be explained and understood. It has 
had second reading, but it has not been voted on at second 
reading, Mr. Speaker. It has not been to Committee of the 
Whole, at which time the members opposite will have adequate 
opportunity to ask and receive the answers to questions. 
 
So as I say, it’s taken due course, Mr. Speaker, and we intend to 
proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) president, Sinclair 
Harrison, says the flip-flop of this government concerns him 
because it suggests that the NDP has a plan where 
amalgamation is concerned. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan continue to get mixed messages from this 
government. The minister has indicated full and proper 
consultation should take place before the Bill proceeds. This 
has not happened. The minister states that there is no top-down 
plan to force municipalities to amalgamate, yet she is now 
preparing to force the Bill through the House. 
 
Madam Minister, if there is nothing to hide, if this Bill has 
nothing to do forced amalgamation, why are you prepared to  

proceed with legislation without first letting full consultation 
take place? 
 
Mr. Speaker, since it appears we’re getting two stories from the 
minister, I’ll address my question to the Premier. Will you make 
the commitment in this House today to meet with SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 
officials to explain your actions before reintroducing this piece 
of legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, there are not two stories 
with respect to this Act; there is one story with respect to this 
Act. There have been ongoing consultations with the municipal 
organizations, with individual municipalities, with anyone who 
cared to raise questions. And the Bill has been in the public 
domain since the day that it was given first reading several 
weeks ago. 
 
There should be no confusion, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
provisions or the intent of this Act. So we will continue to meet, 
to communicate, to explain, and to go through the steps 
necessary to bring this legislation forward and, as we’ve said, to 
pass it in this House and not proclaim it at this particular time 
until the need for it becomes apparent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Office Leases 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, when this government recently 
closed down eight Crop Insurance offices and four rural 
services centres, it resulted in the elimination of yet another 
service to our farm families. However there has been no 
comment from this government regarding the status of the 
buildings that were formerly occupied. Will the Minister of 
Agriculture explain if the lease agreements on each of the 
buildings were terminated when the offices officially closed? If 
not, when do they expire, and at what costs to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister 
responsible for Property Management Corporation, I can say 
that there is a schedule of leases that are on the buildings, and 
there’s a process in place to turn those buildings over to people 
or organizations who might want them, and that is being done 
now. And to date, I haven’t seen any problems in those matters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, it has come to my attention that 
the lease on at least one of these offices, the former Crop 
Insurance office in Canora, does not expire until the year 2001. 
Therefore, even though the office now sits empty, 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are still footing the bill. 
 
One then has to question, if the lease on one building does not 
expire for five years, what is the case with other former  



1854  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

government office space? Will the minister come clean and 
explain the status of these lease agreements and how much 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are on the hook for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the fact of 
the matter is, Mr. Speaker, there are some long-term leases from 
a previous administration, but our new policy is that the longest 
term lease in SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) is five years. 
 
With the leases, I don’t know if the member opposite is asking 
whether or not we should have saved the tremendous amount of 
money we did by restructuring government in order that we 
might pay for the lease in Canora. If he’s saying that, well the 
answer, I guess, is no. In times of change and restructuring, Mr. 
Speaker, the member opposite should know that there are leases 
that have been entered into that will not be totally utilized. 
 
But the fact of the matter is the Property Management 
Corporation, it has a process ongoing to utilize those buildings. 
They’re going to be offered to municipalities or local 
organizations and to individuals. And I know a number of those 
leases have already . . . people have contacted SPMC to use a 
lot of those buildings. So the process is under way. I ask the 
member not to panic. We’re doing this in a very orderly, 
organized fashion, and that I think in the end of the day he will 
see, will prove very fruitful to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Service Districts Act 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Government. Once 
again, the minister feels her statements about service districts 
have been misinterpreted. The minister is now saying that her 
service district Act has nothing to do with governance. 
 
Madam Minister, have you read this legislation or are you just 
hoping that no one else will? Section 4 of the Act lists all the 
services a service district can provide. Section 8 of the Act 
gives the service district the power to pass by-laws. Section 13 
of the Act gives the service district the power to levy charges 
against individual municipalities which may be passed along to 
the ratepayers in the form of additional taxes. 
 
So this new level of bureaucracy can provide services, pass 
by-laws, levy taxes, but the minister says this Bill has nothing to 
do with governance. Madam Minister, who are you trying to 
fool? How can you say this Bill is not about governance when 
that is exactly what it’s all about? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
obviously had a look at the Act, but then he’s been a victim of 
his imagination, Mr. Speaker, in that the authorities  if you 
will read closely, to the member  the authorities that are given 
to The Service Districts Act come only from the member 
municipalities and can be delegated only up to them. 
 

For starters, participation in The Service Districts Act is 
voluntary. If a municipality doesn’t want to be a member, they 
don’t become a party to forming a service district Act. Having 
become a member, the authority of The Service Districts Act is 
taken only from those municipal representatives. So if a 
representative municipality doesn’t want their municipality to 
be levied, doesn’t want to be represented in some way, doesn’t 
take certain actions, then they don’t do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I wish if the member  I’m glad he’s read part of the 
legislation  I wish he would read the rest. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Appreciated the 
reference to my imagination. I’m afraid it’ll take a whole lot 
more imagination to find out why this Bill ever came to 
fruition. 
 
Madam Minister, you’re not fooling anyone. You say this Bill 
has nothing to do with governance and forced amalgamation 
when clearly that’s what it’s all about. Municipal councils don’t 
believe you. SARM doesn’t believe you, and they’re also very 
suspicious about your promise to pass this Bill and not to 
proclaim it. 
 
Madam Minister, if you really have no intention of proclaiming 
this Bill, why pass it in the first place? Will you show 
municipalities that you are listening to what they are telling you, 
and pull this flawed legislation today? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we will . . . and have 
been carrying on consultations with anyone who is seriously 
interested in the intent of this proposed legislation or the 
legislation that’s before the House in the form of second 
reading. We will have ample opportunity in the context of 
adjourned debates and Committee of the Whole to discuss it all. 
 
In the meantime, we have constant communications with 
municipalities and their representatives. We will be happy to 
engage in sincere consultation, and we will not, in the 
meantime, Mr. Speaker, react to paranoia. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Atomic Energy of Canada’s Saskatchewan Office 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, what is the current state of negotiations to save the 
AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) office in Saskatoon? 
When did you or your government officials last meet with the 
federal government officials to discuss the matter? Have you 
any other further scheduled talks, or do you expect to have an 
agreement in place by AECL’s deadline of June 30? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 
Third Party for that question, which is a very important one 
because it does involve the future of AECL in Saskatchewan. 
 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

I must tell the Leader of the Third Party and the members of the 
Legislative Assembly that there have been negotiations off and 
on over the last several weeks. In fact as current as today, there 
have been meetings of officials. I can’t say that the federal 
people were present at the meeting today, but I do know that 
there is a meeting slated for, I think, it’s Wednesday of this 
week in Toronto with officials on our side and AECL federal 
officials as well. I may not be correct on the dates. 
 
The message that I want to communicate to the Leader of the 
Third Party is that we are involved in these kinds of 
discussions. One of our difficulties is that the federal 
government has slashed back, if I can describe it that way, 
AECL funding by approximately $75 million. This puts a real 
tough pinch on AECL. And in the consequence, what running 
room they have we’ll have to determine in the discussions that 
pursue and follow thereafter. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the 
Winnipeg Free Press is reporting that a deal has been struck 
that will save the Whiteshell nuclear lab in Manitoba. While it’s 
good news for Manitoba, it’s probably very bad news for the 
Saskatoon AECL office which will probably wind up being the 
big loser in this deal. According to the article, the deal was 
spearheaded by the Foreign Affairs minister, Lloyd Axworthy, 
and will result in Western Economic Diversification, Natural 
Resources Canada, and AECL providing ongoing financial 
support until the Whiteshell lab is self-sufficient. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Premier, I’m not sure which is worse  your 
inaction on this matter or the fact that Lloyd Axworthy 
managed to steer virtually every dollar on economic 
development in the West into Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you aware of the deal with the federal 
government and Whiteshell and what it will mean to the AECL 
office in Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, we are not aware of the 
details of the reported arrangement with respect to Whiteshell 
because it is merely a newspaper report. Officials will be 
briefing . . . (inaudible) . . . it turns out later this day on not only 
this aspect, but the entire file that we’re discussing. 
 
I must point out that the story does not indicate that there is any 
commitment by the province of Manitoba for financial 
assistance respecting Whiteshell. And as the hon. member will 
know, Saskatchewan is the only provincial government that 
does actually have a financial commitment to the AECL 
research project here in Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan, which 
should be a very strong bargaining position for us, and I think is 
a strong bargaining position. 
 
All that I can say is that we believe that negotiations are being 
conducted on an honourable basis, an open basis. They’re going 
to be difficult negotiations. I don’t think anybody should be 
confused about that. But we want to try to maintain AECL here. 
We’ve got them here, we’ve committed money to them, we 
think they can research; if it’s not the 3, maybe the CANDU 6 

(Canadian deuterium uranium ) or CANDU 9. And we think 
this is a natural mix and match with the uranium industry which 
we have in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
How this will play out will depend partly by what the federal 
government does with respect to its money, or lack thereof, and 
the negotiations. I simply tell you we want to try to keep them 
here and we’re doing all the best that we can to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt-Wakaw Water Pipeline 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to bring to the attention of this House an issue that is of 
great concern to the residents of the RM of Fish Creek near 
Wakaw, in regards to the Humboldt-Wakaw water pipeline. 
 
Sask Water took action to supply treated water to the area by 
constructing a new water treatment plant. The problem is that, 
unbeknown to residents of this RM, Sask Water determined that 
this plant be built in Wakaw instead of at the Saskatchewan 
River source, the location which was originally specified for the 
treatment plant. As a result, a new reverse line must be installed 
to service the residents of this RM of Fish Creek with treated 
water. 
 
These people now find that they will be forced to pay the totally 
outrageous cost of $200,000 for putting in this reverse line. 
And they will have the burden to pay more than double what 
other people along the new line are paying for treated water. 
And there are also the additional costs to hook up the new 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a matter of justice and integrity, I ask: will the 
minister responsible for Sask Water make a commitment to 
honour their prior commitment? Will he intervene and ensure 
that the residents of the RM of Fish Creek are treated fairly and 
equitably? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, as a matter of 
integrity, I would at least ask that member to acknowledge the 
answers that were given to her in a private meeting in my office 
less than two weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member will know, there have been 
meetings with Sask Water, with RMs, with communities, 
ongoing for months with respect to this project. There were 
initial proposals put forth that were amended based on technical 
pressures. There were costs, there were federal funding that we 
were accessing to try and achieve across the piece a reasonable 
cost for the delivery of water to those communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the member opposite that if 
she hasn’t got her facts right, which she clearly hasn’t today, 
allow me to offer yet again another meeting. Or if she’s 
interested, we can deal with this during estimates. But I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that the cooperation that we’ve had with the 
communities in that area has been exemplary. 



1856  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

There are some concerns with Fish Creek in terms of not having 
a supply of treated water; but the technical feasibility and the 
costs — the member knows, in terms of delivering treated water 
to some 26 rural residents spread in a very diverse area, do not 
come without costs. But as I said, if the member hasn’t got it 
right, I’m willing to meet with her again to try and explain it to 
her. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister’s department has supplied me with some answers 
regarding this project. But these answers also invite more 
questions and those questions continue to come from the 
members of Fish Creek. 
 
As I have indicated, Sask Water determined the site for the 
water treatment plant. Their choice and the finances related to 
that choice mean residents of the RM of Fish Creek have to 
carry the burden of these costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total price tag for this reverse line totals 
$200,000. However, it is interesting to note that $135,000 falls 
under the subject heading of, installation. In other words  
labour. Mr. Speaker, given the fact that a trench is already being 
constructed for the reverse line, will the minister explain why 
the cost of installing this line appears so excessive. Could union 
labour costs associated with the CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement) agreement be partly responsible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let me say 
again, the member hears but she doesn’t listen. 
 
With respect to the delivery of water, what we tried to put 
together is a piece that is in the neighbourhood of over $30 
million in terms of construction. We’ve worked with every 
community, we’ve worked with the federal government, to try 
and achieve the lowest costs of delivery of this water that we 
possibly can, and we will continue to do that. 
 
I outlined for the member a number of options. And let me 
describe to her, firstly she’s got it wrong. In terms of where the 
treating plant was, yes, there was some discussion as to whether 
it be at the source. After technical feasibility studies, as I 
suggested to her, it was cost prohibitive to do it there and it was 
moved to the location that it now exists. 
 
Now if the member opposite is not satisfied with the answers 
that were given, I’m sorry. I have a difficult . . . And we can 
discuss that during estimates, and I’m more than willing to do 
that. 
 
What we will attempt to do and as I offered some options to the 
member which she chose not to take up, that we would sit down 
with the RM of Fish Creek to determine whether some of the 
other players would want to input the cost of delivering treated 
water to those 26 farms. And if we could encompass it in that, 
that we could in fact reduce it from over 15 cents a unit to  

perhaps something close to 5. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Highways 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The roads in 
northern Saskatchewan are in very poor shape. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve read letters from people. We have heard from 
people like Erica Billette in Dillon. And today I’d like to read a 
part of a letter from Grayson Janvier of Michel village. Grayson 
says, and I quote: 
 

My biggest concern . . . as I am growing up is about our 
gravel road 77 klms to Junction . . . 155 . . . to Buffalo 
Narrows Sask . . . We lost five of our love ones on that 
road due to the condition of the road. If only our road was 
paved maybe one of our love ones would have made it to 
the Hospital in time to be safe. We have the nearest 
Hospital about 140 klms. It takes us 2½-3 hours to get 
there due to the road . . . It seems to me that we are living 
in the north-pole that nobody seems to know where we are. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a 10-year-old boy’s word about the roads where 
he lives, and he already sees a lack of commitment by this 
government to the people of the North. 
 
Will the minister commit to working for the people of the North 
to ensure proper repairs for the road? Will the roads of the 
North be given the same priority as those in the South, and will 
they be repaired in the same manner, with the same amount of 
gravel that is needed to do a proper job to make these roads 
safe? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, again I might remind the 
member from Athabasca, it’s the Liberals indeed who are at 
fault in regards to $114 million cut. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  And when you look at it, they even cut 
the social housing in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
They don’t . . . (inaudible) . . . to the women and children in 
regards to the education . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. I’m going to ask the members 
of the opposition to come to order. I’m unable to hear the 
minister’s response. And I’ll ask for the cooperation of all 
members to allow the Minister for Northern Affairs to respond 
to the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  What is true is this, Mr. Speaker: the 
federal government and the federal Liberals don’t even know 
that northern Saskatchewan exists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  And also your own members don’t even 
want to see development in northern Saskatchewan. On Friday  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

the member from Arm River said this: the people from 
Cumberland House would foot the total bill on building the 
Cumberland bridge; the whole 6 million should be paid by the 
people of Cumberland House. 
 
We cost-shared that program with the people of Cumberland 
House and with the federal government. And his own member 
said that the people of Cumberland should foot the total bill. So 
I would say that the member should get his facts straight, not 
only from the federal Liberals but his own members, who don’t 
want to see development of a Cumberland bridge in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I think that in regards to the facts, Mr. 
Speaker, we not only have a Cumberland bridge, we have a 
road to the Grandmother’s Bay — road that was never there 
before. We’re having a road to Athabasca that was never there 
before. All the roads in northern Saskatchewan were built by 
NDP governments and not by . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order! I will call members to 
order on both sides of the House. Hollering across the floor is 
not  order  is not appropriate and all members know that. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Same Question Rule respecting Bill No. 56 and Bill No. 93 
 
Mr. Speaker  Before orders of the day, I would like to make 
a Speaker’s statement. 
 
I draw to the attention of members that until recently this 
Assembly had two Bills with substantially the same purpose on 
the order paper  Bill No. 56, An Act to Protect the Public 
from Convicted Pedophiles, under the name of the Leader of 
the Opposition; and Bill No. 93, An Act respecting the Public 
Disclosure of Information related to Individuals who Pose a 
Significant Risk of Serious Harm to Other Persons, under the 
name of the Attorney General. 
 
Both Bills have the object of providing for the public 
identification of individuals convicted of certain offences. 
According to Erskine May, 21st edition, page 468: 
 

There is no rule or custom which restrains the presentation 
of two or more bills related to the same subject, and 
containing similar provisions. But if a decision of the 
House has already been taken on one such bill, for 
example, if the bill has been given or refused a second 
reading, the other is not proceeded with if it contains 
substantially the same provisions . . . 
 

I would also direct members to rulings of the Chair of this 
Assembly of May 17, 1990, May 9, 1994 and June 1, 1994 on 
the “same question” rule in respect to Bills. It was ruled that 

once the Assembly has given or refused second reading on one 
Bill, the Speaker then must prevent any further consideration of 
the other Bill. 
 
Bill No. 93 received second reading on May 16 and third 
reading on May 23. Consequently it is necessary that Bill No. 
56 be removed from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
introduce some late-breaking guests here. They were at a media 
event involved with the Women’s March on Poverty. And in the 
west gallery are Sunera Thobani, the president of the National 
Action Committee on the Status of Women. With Sunera is her 
daughter, Sitara Thobani. 
 
And of course Barb Byers, who is familiar to us, the president 
of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, who’s travelling 
with the caravan through Saskatchewan. Thank you so much for 
all your work, and please join me in welcoming Sunera, Sitara, 
and Barb to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker:  Question 106 is converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table the answer to question 107 as 
requested. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 107 is tabled. 
 
(1430) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting The Management of Forest 
Resources 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my remarks 
I will be moving the second reading of The Forest Resources 
Management Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s forests contribute to our quality 
of life in many ways. Half of Saskatchewan’s landscape is 
dominated by incredibly rich, diversified, forested land, from 
the sparse spruce and lichen forests in the sub-Arctic north-east, 
to the pine and fescue grass forests of the Cypress Hills. 



1858  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, our forests are much more than trees. They are 
complex communities of plants and animals nourished by the 
soil, air, and water. The quality of our physical environment, the 
air we breathe, the water we drink, and all living things around 
us depend on the health of our forests. 
 
Forests are important to Saskatchewan’s economy. 
Approximately 8,000 jobs depend on the forest industry. In 
1995 to ’96 it was estimated the forest industry will contribute 
products worth $1 billion to the provincial economy. People 
doing other forest-based activities such as recreation, fishing, 
trapping, hunting, and ecotourism spend hundreds of millions 
of dollars annually. 
 
Recently our government unveiled it’s Partnership for Growth, 
the second phase of our long-term strategy for economic 
renewal. The forestry sector, Mr. Speaker, featured prominently 
in Saskatchewan’s plan for prosperity. We intend to provide a 
climate that will allow forest resource industries to prosper and 
to continue to contribute to a vibrant Saskatchewan economy. 
This new Act will allow us to implement these strategies for 
economic growth in a sustainable manner with input from 
industry, aboriginal groups, the public, and other stakeholders. 
 
Tourism and related businesses depend on the existence of 
beautiful, healthy forests. Last summer approximately 2 million 
people visited our provincial parks and enjoyed recreational 
activity such as hiking, skiing, camping, boating, and 
bird-watching. In addition, 250,000 people fished our 
Saskatchewan waters. 
 
Treated with care and respect, our forests offer many rewards 
ranging from cultural to spiritual to recreational to economic. I 
believe, Mr. Speaker, that our forests are a legacy to be 
sustained and passed on to future generations as a natural and 
valuable resource. 
 
Passage of this Act will show Canada and the world that the 
Government of Saskatchewan is committed to meeting its 
responsibilities in resource management. We will work with the 
forest industry and the people of Saskatchewan to fulfil our 
obligations as stewards of the forest on behalf of future 
generations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our current legislation is nearly 30 years old and 
did not foresee some of the key challenges forest managers now 
face. The people of Saskatchewan want their forests managed 
differently than in the past. We have come to realize that our 
economy and lifestyle must be in balance with the natural 
forces sustaining life. The challenge, Mr. Speaker, is to apply 
the principle of sustainable development in the management of 
Saskatchewan’s forests. 
 
The new forest management policy and this Bill are based upon 
extensive consultations carried out over the last three years. 
Many public meetings and workshops have been held to ask the 
people of Saskatchewan how our forests could be better 
managed. Consultations were held with forest companies, 
aboriginal people, tourist operators, recreationists, trappers, 
RMs, environmentalists, co-management board, wood lot 
owners, and many others. More than 40 community meetings 

were held during this process. 
 
In February 1994, the government formed the Forest Legislation 
Advisory Committee. This committee had representatives from 
14 stakeholder and aboriginal groups, and developed a report 
recommending the principles on which to base the legislation. 
 
In March 1995, our government announced a forest 
management policy to serve as the framework for meeting these 
new challenges. The policy called for new forest legislation to 
establish a foundation for achieving sustainable forest 
management. In March 1995, we released the new Bill for 
public review as a White Paper. As a result of that review, we 
made over 40 changes to the proposed Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, following first reading of the current Bill in March 
1996, industry met with department officials to discuss various 
aspects of the new Act. Out of those discussions came some 
suggested changes to this Bill. When the Bill goes to the 
Committee of the Whole, the government is prepared to 
introduce amendments that will further clarify the relationship 
of forest management agreements to the Act. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I will highlight the Act’s key features: 
public participation in forestry planning — striking the proper 
balance between conservation and development of forests 
requires the participation of communities, industry, aboriginal 
people, and all others with an interest in the outcome of forest 
management decisions. The people of Saskatchewan have a 
vital interest in the way our forests are being managed and have 
expressed a strong desire to have a more direct say, particularly 
in setting objectives, developing policies, and planning forest 
management activities. 
 
The Act will give the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity 
to participate in all levels of planning, starting with long-term 
provincial policies down to operating plans prepared by forest 
companies. To ensure public views are reflected in forest 
management, the public participation process will be open, fair, 
and well-defined, with generally accepted procedures, and 
deadlines for decisions. 
 
One form of public participation will be through forest 
management committees whose purposes will range from 
providing advice, to participating in the preparation and 
implementation of any plan. The Act will support the continued 
development of co-management and partnership initiatives that 
will respect and work with those which have already been 
established. 
 
Under the new Act, three levels of planning will direct the 
management of Saskatchewan’s provincial forests. The first 
level sets broad policy for the province and is done every 10 
years. The second level is land use planning for individual 
management units. Land use planning will guide and regulate 
the best mix of forest land uses. The third level is done by 
industry within the context of the provincial policy and land use 
guidelines developed in the first two planning levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides the public with the right to  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

participate in all three levels of planning. This will ensure that 
the public has the opportunity to be involved in all levels of 
forest management planning from provincial policies to 
industry operating plans. 
 
Treaty rights to hunt, fish, and trap: during the preparation of 
this new Act, we consulted with first nations people. 
Twenty-five bands have land within or adjacent to provincial 
forests. First nations people across all of Saskatchewan are very 
concerned that this Act not interfere with their treaty rights. We 
recognize their concerns and have made amendments to the Act 
to ensure that it will not restrict the right of first nations people 
to hunt, fish, and trap. In addition, Mr. Speaker, my hon. 
colleague, Minister of Justice, in this legislative session will 
introduce amendments to The Interpretation Act which 
specifically guarantee that no provincial legislation is designed, 
intended, or able to affect aboriginal, constitutional, or first 
nations treaty rights. 
 
The gathering of food and medicinal plants: no permit will be 
required of anyone gathering food and medicinal plants for their 
own use. Commercial gatherers of special forest products will 
be regulated to ensure that developments occur sustainably and 
that traditional gathering areas are protected. 
 
Royalties and industry fees: in consulting with the major forest 
companies, Mr. Speaker, they expressed that it is important that 
their costs for forest management remain stable for a 
predictable period of time in order to plan for new investments 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
We listened to their concerns and amended the Act to ensure 
that an agreement between the province and the company on the 
fees that they pay towards renewal, inventory protection, and 
other forest management costs, will be in effect for 10 years 
before they will be reviewed again. New royalties and fees paid 
by industry will be agreed upon and set for a 10-year time frame 
to give companies time to plan new investments and to ensure 
that the set fees reflect the true value of the timber resource. 
 
Renewal fees: those harvesting any kind of forest product must 
now pay for the cost of renewing the forest. 
 
Forest product harvesting licences: in return for a secure supply 
of forest products, the licensee must accept responsibility for 
operating within prescribed environmental standards and for 
preparing long-term plans which must meet the department’s 
approval. 
 
Environmental assessments: forest industry long-term 
management plans will be subject to environmental assessments 
to ensure standards for protecting all components of the forest 
are established. 
 
The spread of forest pests: to reduce losses and protect our 
forests, the new Act includes provisions for directing 
landowners to create forest conditions that control the spread of 
damaging insects and diseases. Mr. Speaker, this provision may 
be required to help prevent the spread of Dutch elm disease in 
our cities, towns, and villages. 

State of the forest report: the new Act commits the government 
to regular, comprehensive reports on the state of 
Saskatchewan’s forests, prepared every 10 years. Such reports 
will be followed by a review with extensive public involvement 
of provincial forest policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides protecting the forest, the new Act provides 
a framework for obtaining the best possible mix of economic 
and social benefits from forest resources. The Act authorizes 
the making of regulations which will deal specifically with 
conserving and managing our forest resources. 
 
These regulations will be developed in consultation with 
stakeholders and aboriginal peoples and will cover issues such 
as harvesting methods, forest protection, licensing procedures, 
reforestation, operation of processing facilities, planning 
procedures, fees and dues not set out by agreement, and 
consultation procedures. 
 
Implementation of the regulations and Act is targeted for 1997. 
 
This is just a brief overview of some of the many new features 
from The Forest Resources Management Act. 
 
To conclude, Mr. Speaker, this Act will change Saskatchewan’s 
forest management policy from one primarily concerned with 
timber to one that recognizes forests as complex ecological and 
biological systems. If our forests are maintained in a healthy 
state, they will continue to provide a wide variety of benefits for 
a long time to come. 
 
The new Act acknowledges that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has the responsibility of protecting, conserving, 
and enhancing the forest resource for public benefit. It also 
recognizes the importance of a strong partnership between 
provincial and local governments, first nations, and 
stakeholders, in working together to manage our forest 
resource. 
 
The Forest Resources Management Act will ensure the future of 
Saskatchewan’s forests for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Forest 
Resources Management Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to be 
able to take a few moments today to discuss some of the 
proposed amendments that have been initiated through The 
Forest Resources Management Act. Once implemented, this Act 
will have a significant impact not only on the forestry 
companies that are currently operating in Saskatchewan, but 
also on the people of the North who depend on the forests’ 
renewable resources for their livelihoods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a firm believer in consultation before action 
and I do not believe that this government has adequately 
demonstrated a similar commitment to consultation. There are 
just too many corporations and communities that have been left 
out of the picture. I wonder which communities were involved  



1860  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

in the meetings that have taken place over the past three years. 
In my view, having a government official come and say this is 
what we’re doing, this is what we’re planning, does not pass for 
consultation. 
 
The Metis communities have been segregated by this 
government for many years and this is just another example of 
the government’s lack of commitment to the Metis communities 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
When this Bill was initially tabled in this House, forestry 
companies were outraged. They had no idea where these 
changes were coming from and were appalled by the 
government’s total disregard for their input and views. This 
legislation has disappointed forestry companies because of 
increased stumpage fees, pest control costs, and the shifting of 
the financial burden on the corporations for fire-fighting and 
disease control. 
 
Aboriginal and Metis communities of the north part of this 
province were also astonished by the lack of consultation by 
this government. Many of their concerns were not addressed by 
the government. 
 
Government officials in the Department of Environment and 
Resource Management claim to have consulted with 
stakeholders on this issue, but for some reason many Metis 
communities have been left entirely in the dark with regard to 
the entire process. I fully understand that this Bill has been 
designed to affect all aspects of forest product management. If 
all aspects of forest product and resource management are 
going to be affected, then why were not all stakeholders 
consulted? 
 
(1445) 
 
I understand and accept that this Bill has been in the making for 
a number of years. What I can’t understand is that if this 
government has been consulting and investigating for the past 
few years, why is everyone involved and affected upset by the 
changes that have finally been proposed by this government? 
 
There are three areas of particular concern with regards to the 
Bill. The first area deals with the licensing procedure. Under 
this, no one can sell forest products except under licence or for 
subsistence gathering. The effect of this, as I understand it, 
would make a requirement for people who gather berries, 
mushrooms, wild rice, and other products, to obtain a licence if 
they have any intention of all of selling any of these products. It 
is this area that causes a great deal of concern for the aboriginal 
people of the North. How will an individual who gathers berries 
and medicinal herbs for personal use prove that they will not be 
selling any of these things? Will these people be required to 
carry permits that need renewal, or will they be allowed to go 
about their business as usual? 
 
The next area of concern are with private and public review 
considerations and the enforcement of powers by the minister 
and his delegates. Costs for implementation of advisory 
committees and forest reports will be to licence holders. 
 

With regard to the enforcement of powers, they are extremely 
broad, including the ability to give an enforcement officer the 
power to arrest without warrant. 
 
This Act contains vastly enhanced powers of the minister to be 
able to enter into agreements concerning harvesting activities 
and broad powers of enforcement. To add to this, fines imposed 
are very large considering what is normal in legislation. 
 
This extension of ministerial powers resembles the extension of 
powers to the Minister of Health with respect to the health care 
facilities legislation as well. I’m left to wonder why this 
government feels that ministers should have the utmost power 
and no accountability to the people who elected them. 
 
Don’t get me wrong. There are a number of positive changes 
also being initiated in this Act. A 20-year mandatory forest 
management plan is a positive move, even if it has been is use 
by forest companies for years; as is the establishment of three 
levels of forestry management planning. 
 
The problem is this: there are so many complicated and 
wide-ranging changes that have been pushed in without proper 
consultation; higher royalties and fees paid by industry; the 
requirements of permits and licences for all people who gather 
renewable forest resources for sale  even by aboriginal elders 
 costs to combat forest pests; and forest fires being 
downloaded onto the industry. 
 
These are only a few of the controversial issues contained in 
this Bill before us today. There are many other issues related to 
this Bill that need ongoing research and consultation before this 
Bill passes into law. 
 
And we also understand from the minister’s statement that there 
are further amendments that are being considered and we would 
ask to have those amendments before us for our consideration. 
 
Due to the complexity of the issues at hand and a continuing 
need to get a feel for the real needs and wants of the industry 
and the people of the North, and time to study these proposed 
amendments, I move that debate of this Bill be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 21  An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 
1995 and to enact a related amendment/ 

Loi modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 1995 et édictant 
une modification corrélative 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 
1996. 
 
The proposed changes to The Interpretation Act clarify that 
provincial legislation in no way intends to infringe upon the 
constitutional rights of aboriginal peoples. The first amendment 
states that no legislation will abrogate or derogate from the 
aboriginal and treaty rights that are protected by the Canadian 
Constitution. 
 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

This provision is an explicit recognition of the government’s 
existing policy with respect to the constitutional rights of 
aboriginal peoples. A consequential amendment will remove a 
provision included in The Fisheries Act (Saskatchewan), 1994. 
The contents of that provision will now be included in The 
Interpretation Act, 1995 — this Act — which applies to the 
interpretation of all provincial legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Interpretation Act, 1995 and to enact a related amendment. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to take 
a couple of moments today to discuss briefly the Bill before us 
 The Interpretation Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
It is my understanding that this Act was originally created to 
provide a uniform basis for the interpretation of words and 
phrases used in the legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
It establishes the rules to be used in the interpretation of all 
provincial legislation. This Act applies to every Act that has 
been and will be introduced in this House. 
 
There are only two changes being made by this Bill to the 
existing legislation. These amendments are required in order to 
make it clear the provincial legislation is not intended to 
infringe upon the constitutional rights of any aboriginal people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The first amendment before us today will add a subsection that 
will guarantee that no provincial statute is to invalidate or 
detract from the existing aboriginal treaty rights given to the 
aboriginal people of Canada. This amendment recognizes that 
this government is moving towards a policy that respects the 
constitutional rights of aboriginal people of Saskatchewan. This 
is a very important change for all people of aboriginal ancestry 
in Saskatchewan and will become even more important as time 
goes on, due to the fact the aboriginal population in 
Saskatchewan is increasing at a fairly substantial pace. 
 
This amendment also states that no provincial legislation will 
be able to override the current rights of aboriginal peoples as set 
out in the Constitution Act, 1982, of Canada. Section 35 of the 
Constitution Act, 1982, states that treaty rights of aboriginal 
people are protected and are not to be abolished or detracted 
from in any way. If any provincial legislation does this, it is 
constitutionally invalid. 
 
I am very pleased to see the steps being taken to protect the 
rights of the aboriginal population in this province. Aboriginal 
groups have been suggesting that provincial legislation include 
a non-derogation clause to clarify that provincial legislation is 
not intended to infringe upon their constitutional rights. 
 
It is now time to take similar measures to protect the inherent 
rights of the Metis population of Saskatchewan. 
 
The only other change made to Bill 21 is to repeal subsection 
2(5) of The Fisheries Act (Saskatchewan), 1994. This 
subsection also states that nothing in the Act can abrogate, 
derogate, or add to, existing Indian treaty rights. I understand 
that this subsection has been repealed because its meaning is  

included in the proposed amendments to The Interpretation Act 
because this Act applies to the interpretation of all provincial 
legislation. 
 
The continuity that is being established through the 
amendments to The Interpretation Act is necessary for this 
Assembly. This Bill, by giving all words and phrases a definite 
meaning, will ensure that interpretations of different Acts by 
different people will mean the same thing. In this day and age, 
as the world becomes smaller and communication between 
peoples must be improved, it is good to see steps taken to 
establish some common basis for this interaction. 
 
This Act is to be a source of reference for the interpretation of 
every other Act  past, present, and future  that receives 
assent in this House. Through this, maybe we can establish a 
beginning to a better understanding of one another in this 
House. 
 
Since the aboriginal and treaty rights are protected under the 
new subsection of this Act and it clarifies meanings for the 
interpretation of other Acts, I see no reason to hold up debate 
any further. I look forward to discussing the changes in more 
depth with the minister in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 86  An Act to amend  
The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will, at the 
conclusion of my comments, move second reading of Bill 86, 
The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act. 
 
As many members will know, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act establishes the level of provincial assistance to be allocated 
to both urban and rural municipalities. Accordingly, the 
amendment gives legal effect to decisions reflected in the 
1996-97 budget. The Bill provides for no reduction to either the 
urban revenue-sharing pool or the rural revenue-sharing pool 
this year, and implements the funding levels which were 
announced last year as part of the government’s overall debt 
management plan. 
 
For urban municipalities, it has been decided to maintain grants 
at their 1995 levels. In other words, each city, town, and village 
will receive the same grant amount as last year. Funding for the 
rural revenue-sharing programs will remain at the same level as 
last year. Grant allocations to individual rural municipalities 
may change through the normal operation of the formula and 
the changes in their own circumstances. 
 
The province’s budget address has announced two-year funding 
levels for third parties in order to allow local governments to 
plan for fiscal adjustments. For 1997-98, a total of 20 million 
will be reduced from the urban and rural revenue-sharing pools 
due to continued fiscal pressures. Municipalities cannot be 
shielded from these pressures. 
 
The decreases in urban and rural revenue-sharing plan for the  



1862  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

1997-98 year is unavoidable since third-party grants make up a 
significant portion of government expenditure. Reductions have 
been necessary in all components of the province’s 
expenditures as a result of federal offloading. The government 
will be working with municipalities and their associations on 
how best to accommodate next year’s funding reductions. 
 
I am also interested in opening discussions on the future of the 
municipal sector. Together, we will develop initiatives that 
would lead to sustainable services within an affordable 
governance structure. 
 
In closing, the total revenue-sharing funding of 79.8 million 
represents a significant level of financial support to 
Saskatchewan municipalities, and I urge members to support 
this Bill. 
 
Accordingly, I move second reading of Bill No. 86, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This session, the 
government has spent a great deal of time and effort on 
legislation related to municipal governments. Of course most of 
this legislation is nothing more than a thinly disguised attempt 
by this government to grasp even more power over local 
governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have continued to object to the changes which 
transfers control from local governments to provincial 
governments, and on behalf of all the Saskatchewan people we 
will continue to object. But, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 86, The 
Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, is not only talk 
about taking power from municipal governments. It’s about 
taking money from municipal governments as well, and that’s 
something this government has done to an art. No matter how 
much the members opposite complain about dealing with 
federal cuts, they have no conscience when it comes to 
offloading onto local governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act gives the 
Minister of Municipal Government the authority to pay out 
sums each year to urban, rural, and northern municipalities. The 
formula outlined in  the original Act takes the amount of grants 
in the last year and multiplies it by the escalator index. The 
escalator index includes things like the corporate income tax 
base, the E&H (education and health) tax base, the fuel 
petroleum products use tax base, and other bases set out in 
regulations. In other words, the Act gives municipalities a 
complicated, predetermined formula to figure out what their 
grants would be each year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 86 will allow the government to deviate from 
that formula. Now this is not unusual. It will actually be the 
third fiscal year in a row that the government has passed this 
type of legislation. If you take into account inflation and the 
increased costs of living, that means that municipal 
governments have now been handed a cut for the third year in a 
row. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I commend local governments for handling 
a desperate situation so well. Even with severe funding cuts, 
these municipalities have been able to keep providing services 
to their communities. But, Mr. Speaker, how much more are the 
municipalities expected to take? How many more cuts can they 
handle before they collapse under the pressure? If the members 
opposite would look at the municipal governments throughout 
the province, they would see how this government’s cuts are 
starting to take a toll  jobs are disappearing, hospitals are 
closing, schools are being forced to amalgamate. Working 
people, sick people, the elderly, and our children, are the ones 
who suffer. In other words, Mr. Speaker, cuts to municipal 
governments affect every person in rural Saskatchewan in one 
way or another. 
 
Provincial government cuts mean cuts to essential services in all 
communities. Less money for policing means that our streets 
may not be as safe for our children. Less money for 
transportation means our seniors will have less access to 
necessary services. And less money for roads means more 
accidents and an increase in SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) claims. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill means that as long as this government 
is in power, the people of Saskatchewan will be getting less and 
less and paying more and more with each passing year. After 
all, it’s within the government’s power to introduce Bills like 
these. 
 
(1500) 
 
There’s that word again, Mr. Speaker  power. It is the very 
word that motivates this government. Every piece of legislation 
they draft, every new regulation they create, and every policy 
that they change, is motivated by a desperate grasp for power. 
 
Well the people don’t need a powerful, almighty government. 
They need a government who can find a balance between fiscal 
responsibility and compassion. Sadly this government has 
placed so much emphasis on balancing the books on the backs 
of the Saskatchewan people that they have tipped the scales 
completely away from compassion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that managing the debt and the 
deficit is so very, very important. But it’s not more important 
than providing the people of Saskatchewan with a decent 
quality of life, and that is all that municipal governments are 
asking for. They are not asking for millions of extra dollars for 
roads or for policing or general upkeep of their own towns. 
 
Even if these things were severely needed, our local 
governments know that they have the financial limits and they 
will have to be creative and innovate in dealing with these 
limits. But even they cannot accept unlimited cuts. They do 
have a breaking point and the government is getting 
dangerously close to that point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for three years now the government has 
introduced legislation that lets them back out of stipulations 
outlined in The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. I’m curious. 
Why don’t they just repeal the Act, or at least the section of the  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

Act, if they’re going to make these expectations to the rule. 
How long does it take before the exception becomes the rule? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have some serious concerns about this Bill 
and we would like to see them addressed in Committee of the 
Whole. Only then will the government be forced to answer for 
its choices  choices that are destroying the fabric of rural 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 97  An Act to amend  
The Department of Agriculture Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I will, at the 
conclusion of my comments, move second reading of The 
Department of Agriculture Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food works closely 
with producer groups, industry, and other stakeholders, to 
ensure the needs of the industry are being met. Our 
consultations with producers and industry resulted in the 
development of a strategic direction for government to assist 
the agriculture industry to move in the direction it has chosen. 
This strategic direction was put forward in Agriculture 2000. 
Agriculture 2000 directs the provincial government to work 
with the industry to undertake changes which contribute to the 
development of family farms, diversification, and value added 
production. 
 
We have a growing livestock sector and opportunities to further 
diversify the agricultural community. There is, however, a need 
to ensure that provincial services to the livestock industry have 
the flexibility to respond to changes in the industry. 
 
The proposed amendment to The Department of Agriculture 
Act, 1996 will establish a revolving fund to be used to provide 
livestock inspection services, dealer licensing, and brand 
registration functions for livestock collection of cattle 
marketing and horned cattle revenues, and the administrative 
support to these activities. A revolving fund will allow 
flexibility for Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food to respond to 
changes wanted by the industry. 
 
The fund will also facilitate greater participation of the 
livestock industry in determining standards for inspection and 
enforcement. Services to be funded provide stability and 
security to producers through protection of ownership and 
enhancement of recovery . . . and the enhanced recovery of 
stolen or lost animals. This legislation is consistent with the 
desire of producers to take a more direct role in industry 
development. 
 
I ask the members of the Assembly to support this Act, and I 
therefore move second reading of The Department of 
Agriculture Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the  

government is proposing some interesting changes within Bill 
97  An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act  
but I am not convinced that all these changes are designed with 
the best interests of Saskatchewan farmers in mind. 
 
This Bill will attempt to centralize the Department of 
Agriculture’s processing fees for inspection registration and 
licensing of animal products. The government is proposing to 
do this with the establishment of the livestock services 
revolving fund as outlined in section 17. 
 
The majority of the services provided by the Department of 
Agriculture would fall under this new livestock services 
revolving fund. The operational money for the new fund would 
come from the General Revenue Fund. It would be spent on the 
acquisition of machinery, hiring of staff, equipment repairs, and 
general administrative fees. 
 
A complaint I often hear from farmers is that they have to deal 
with too much government red tape. If the government intends 
to reduce this red tape by centralizing accounting of services 
provided by the Department of Agriculture, I wonder if that will 
actually be achieved by setting up another layer of bureaucracy. 
 
I am pleased to see that the Agriculture department would be 
required to file an annual report on the livestock services fund. 
All government bodies funded by Saskatchewan taxpayers 
should open their books to the public. 
 
Another part of this Act that causes me concern also lies within 
section 17. It states that in cases where there is no specified fee 
for a service provided by the agricultural department, that the 
minister will have the authority to set and charge that fee. This 
could be a very contentious issue with many farmers because it 
seems to give the minister the power to set a whole array of fees 
for a wide variety of services. It could actually cost 
Saskatchewan producers more money because the minister 
could decide to charge fees for services that have in fact been 
free in the past. 
 
I do believe the minister and officials of the agricultural 
department should be allowed to charge reasonable fees to 
recover the costs of providing some of those services, but I am 
worried that this Act will give the minister too much unchecked 
power when establishing these fees. 
 
Another amendment proposed within Bill 97 states that the 
minister would also have the authority to charge additional fees 
if he is directed to do so by the Treasury Board. I am gravely 
concerned that this might be the back door method of taxation 
on Saskatchewan farmers. For example, if the Treasury Board 
decided it wanted to charge an extra fee for livestock inspection 
as a means of generating extra revenue, this legislation would 
make that possible. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers are already struggling under the burden 
of high input costs. If the government decides it is absolutely 
necessary to target Saskatchewan producers to get extra 
revenue, then those extra fees should be open to the scrutiny of 
this Assembly. But there is no mechanism provided within this 
Bill to regulate how much agricultural service fees can be  



1864  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in general I do support streamlining some 
administrative services in the agricultural department if it means 
reducing the red tape facing Saskatchewan farmers. But I 
question the amount of unchecked power this legislation would 
give the Minister of Agriculture in respect to setting fees for 
some services. 
 
Bill 97 could have a profound impact on Saskatchewan 
producers and I would like some more time to consult with 
them about these implications. Therefore I move adjournment 
of this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 113  An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of Bill 113, The Wascana 
Energy Inc. Act. The Bill, Mr. Speaker, addresses a need on 
behalf of a Saskatchewan corporation, Wascana Energy Inc., to 
grow and the commitment by this government to help it grow. 
 
This Bill, firstly, repeals The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas 
Corporation Act, 1985; secondly, continues the corporation as 
Wascana Energy Inc.; thirdly, defines head office function and 
requires them to be located in Saskatchewan; fourthly, requires 
50 per cent of the board of directors to be residents of 
Saskatchewan; and fifthly, establishes the formula for 
Saskatchewan appointing representatives to the board of 
directors. 
 
This Bill repeals The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation 
Act, 1985. The significance here is the end of the provisions 
restricting shareholders. These restrictions meant that 
non-residents other than Canadian citizens could hold no more 
than 35 per cent of the issued and outstanding shares, and no 
one person or group of associated persons could hold more than 
10 per cent of the total issued and outstanding voting shares. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wascana Energy asked for this change because 
these restrictions on shareholders limit the company’s ability to 
access equity markets on terms comparable to those of their 
competitors. Access to these equity markets is essential if 
Wascana Energy is to grow, providing more jobs and 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people. The company argues 
that the restrictions may be philosophical deterrents to some 
investors, which is particularly important in the increasing 
globalized financial markets. 
 
There is also a perception that Wascana Energy Inc., unlike 
most other oil and gas companies, continues to be subject to 
control and influence of the government. The repeal of the 
restrictions on shares allows Wascana Energy to offer as 
currency its shares in the acquisition of foreign companies or 
shares of Canadian companies owned by non-residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also recognizes and responds to the 
reality that Saskoil changed its name to Wascana Energy Inc. 
 

Another important factor in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that the head office provisions in the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas 
Corporation, 1985, Act are enhanced to ensure that the head 
office remains in Saskatchewan and that the head office 
functions are clearly defined. This definition extends to 
outlining what senior executive officers and functions must be 
located at the Regina head office. 
 
Under the authority of this Bill, 50 per cent of the board of 
directors must be residents of Saskatchewan. This provision 
was contained in The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation 
Act, 1985 and is maintained in the new Act. 
 
Another thing this Act does is clarify the formula for the 
province to appoint members to the board of directors of 
Wascana Energy. The province has an automatic right to 
appoint one member to the board of directors and may appoint 
additional directors according to the formula, set out in the 
legislation, which is based on the province’s shareholdings in 
Wascana Energy Inc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I stated previously, removal of the restrictions 
on shareholdings will enhance the capacity of Wascana Energy 
Inc. to compete with its competitors. A more competitive 
Wascana Energy Inc. will mean a greater benefit to the province 
of Saskatchewan. This also puts Wascana Energy on an equal 
footing with other provincial holdings — the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan and Cameco —  which had 
similar share restrictions removed. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also ensures that there will be no 
confusion between names. It will be clear that the corporation is 
Wascana Energy Inc. This Bill will protect some 350 jobs in 
Saskatchewan, partially due to the definition of head office 
functions. These functions will include all senior executives, 
which will ensure quality jobs remain in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The last two provisions mean that Saskatchewan will have an 
influence on the direction of the corporation, as the board will 
consist of 50 per cent Saskatchewan residents and the province 
will have the authority to automatically appoint one member of 
the board of directors. 
 
For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I urge all members of this 
Assembly to support this Bill, and I move second reading of 
Bill 113, The Wascana Energy Inc. Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to begin 
our discussions on this new Wascana Energy Act and the 
possible ramifications of this new Bill, I think we should review 
the role of this natural resource and what it has played in 
Saskatchewan’s past and present. 
 
Before Saskatchewan was a province, the entrepreneurial spirit 
brought geologists into this area to map the oil pools and 
speculators to buy up the mineral rights from unsuspecting 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

pioneers. They knew Saskatchewan was resting on pools of rich 
gas and oil reserves, but it wasn’t until the ‘50s and ‘60s that 
the oil companies began the rush to extract the black gold that 
lay miles below the equally rich fields of golden wheat. By the 
late ‘70s, escalating problems in the Middle East sent the 
petroleum prices sky-rocketing, creating a crisis around the 
world. 
 
To combat the alarming flow of money out of Canada, the 
federal government created Petro-Canada and Saskatchewan 
established the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation, which 
later became known as Saskoil. It was their desire to protect the 
country and the province; to never allow the country to again be 
so vulnerable to the quirks of some foreign state. 
 
The mandate of this company was to develop and market our 
own resources. By this means, they hoped to make this country 
more self-sufficient in petroleum and to establish a position for 
themselves to play a leading role in the development and use of 
gas reserves. Under the initiative of Saskoil’s past president, 
Ted Renner, and vice president, Glenn Carley, The 
Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation Act, 1985 was decreed. 
 
This transformed Saskoil from a publicly operated company to 
a privately traded corporation. It took Saskoil from a small, 
well-respected company with good resources but little 
influence, to become one of the top 10 oil and gas companies in 
Canada. They diversified the company, bringing into play 
expertise in gas and asphalt. 
 
It is truly a Saskatchewan-based company. The past two CEOs 
(chief executive officer) were born and raised in the province 
and feel a strong attachment to the aims and objectives of 
Saskoil. 
 
When Saskoil changed its name to Wascana Energy, they 
demonstrated their commitment to Saskatchewan by choosing a 
name that maintained the company’s strong Saskatchewan 
roots. Then they selected the name of Pasqua for the company 
that controlled their non-core assets. They began reflecting the 
company’s strong Saskatchewan foundation. With the sale of 
Pasqua, Wascana Energy turned the corner and laid a strong 
financial base for the formation of this new company. 
 
It is because of people like this that Wascana Energy is able to 
contribute a major role in the economy of this province and the 
continuation of the commitment to show to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. Today the government proposes to repeal The 
Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation Act, 1985, and in its 
place they are introducing the new Wascana Energy Act. 
 
The present executive now has an opportunity to build on this 
remarkable record, and they hopefully will take the company 
into the future where it will again become one of Canada’s 
major oil and gas players. The government has stated that their 
objective is to stimulate economic activity within the province 
and to protect 350 company jobs located here. To this end, the 
government has repealed restrictions that held foreign 
investment to 35 per cent of the shares. 
 
The body of this Bill deals with Wascana Energy’s properties  

and what they may or may not do with the assets. 
 
As well, the Bill guarantees that 50 per cent of the directors are 
residents of Saskatchewan. Also within this Bill, we find a 
formula for determining the make-up of the board of directors. 
It determines the elected and appointed board members by the 
number of Crown voting shares compared to the total number 
of voting shares. To date, a set number of government board 
members have been appointed. I would think that this gave the 
company a certainty, a degree of assurance from year to year, 
when they knew exactly how many government board members 
they would have to deal with. Executives, past and present, are 
to be commended for having been able to accomplish so much 
in spite of the confining environment of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have questions that I want to ask of the 
government, but at this time I believe it is in the best interest of 
this enterprising company and the people of Saskatchewan to 
pass this Bill on to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time, and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 114An Act respecting the Establishment of a 
Crown Foundation for District Health Boards  

and their Affiliates 
 
Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise and 
move second reading of a Bill to establish a Crown Foundation 
for District Health Boards and their Affiliates. 
 
This Act, Mr. Speaker, will enhance their ability to attract large 
donations. Currently under the federal Income Tax Act, 
individuals can only receive a tax deduction on donations of up 
to 20 per cent of their net income. The tax credits for donations 
to a Crown foundation are not limited by the net income of the 
donor. 
 
The current income tax treatment of charitable donations tends 
to discourage larger donations by residents to help districts and 
their affiliates. The residents of our province have a tradition of 
generously supporting our public institutions. This legislation 
respects that tradition. 
 
By creating a Crown foundation, Mr. Speaker, we ensure that 
both donors and health districts receive maximum benefits from 
the spirit of charitable giving. Across the province, there are 
many non-profit foundations for hospitals, nursing homes, and 
other organizations administered by or affiliated with district 
health boards. The money they raise often goes toward 
equipment purchases or other capital projects. 
 
I should add, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation comes at the 
request of the Crown foundations . . . of the hospital 
foundations, I should say. The Crown foundation is being set up 
at their request, Mr. Speaker, and they’re very happy that we’re 
responding to that request. 
 
The Crown foundation will complement the fund-raising of 
these existing non-profit organizations and support their 
partnership with health districts. By making a donation to the  



1866  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

Crown foundation, donors can support district health boards 
and their affiliates, but the donor will receive a Crown donation 
receipt rather than a charitable donation receipt. This will help 
districts and their affiliates attract larger donations to their 
fund-raising campaigns. In effect, the Crown foundation will 
act as a conduit between donor and institution. 
 
I should add in this regard, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the 
opposition, that federal rules require that the money go to the 
Crown foundation in the first instance, rather than be earmarked 
in a binding way for the local foundation, in order for the 
complete tax deduction to take effect. 
 
The reason the legislation is worded the way it is is because that 
is what is required under federal tax laws. The wording is 
equivalent to other Crown foundation legislation such as we 
have for the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 
Regina. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because there’s some 
confusion on the part of some of the opposition members about 
the reason that the legislation is worded the way it is. 
 
Crown foundations were recently established in Regina and 
Saskatoon for both the University of Regina and the University 
of Saskatchewan. This Bill is very similar to the enabling 
legislation used for these Crown foundations, as indeed it has to 
be to comply with federal law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation will give our health districts and 
their affiliates the tools to compete equally with the universities 
as well as with other jurisdictions. I would be pleased to answer 
questions concerning Crown foundations when discussing this 
Bill at Committee of the Whole. 
 
It therefore gives me great pleasure to move second reading of 
An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for 
District Health Boards and their Affiliates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
government keeps digging itself deeper and deeper into a hole 
every time it comes up with a new way to make changes to our 
health care system, and unfortunately for the people of this 
province who want to believe in a decent health care system for 
Saskatchewan, Bill No. 114, The Crown Foundation for District 
Health Boards Act, falls into this government pit. It is because 
so many concerns have been expressed by people throughout 
this province that I feel that I must address the shortcomings of 
this Bill today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a nutshell, this Bill treats district boards as 
charities. Now this isn’t really surprising because our health 
care system is a victim of government cuts, and as we all know, 
it really is suffering and it does need help. 
 
But the government has shown it will not help no matter how 
dire the situation becomes. So in their ultimate wisdom they 
come up with a Bill like Bill 114. This Bill introduces one more 
stone to Saskatchewan’s cornerstones of medicare  public 
funding, public administration, universal accessibility, 
portability, and comprehensiveness. I guess those five stones  

weren’t enough to withstand the pressure put on our medicare 
system by this short-sighted and insensitive government. 
 
It’s odd that the cornerstones only started to crumble after the 
NDP government came into power in 1991, especially since 
they like to pull Tommy Douglas’s name out, holding him up as 
the father of medicare. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the Health minister has 
said to us in the House before, we are not being disrespectful to 
the late Tommy Douglas. We believe he did possess a 
compassion and a respect for health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  And we aren’t showing disrespect to 
anyone. It is to the present NDP government who has 
completely forgotten or ignored the principles bestowed by the 
former premier. The Health minister can ask us not to speak of 
him in this House but, Mr. Minister, he fought for health care 
and now we are fighting for health care, and that’s more than 
this NDP government is doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, until this Bill was introduced, the five 
cornerstones were in place. Until now they seemed to be a solid 
foundation for Saskatchewan. I guess that’s what happens when 
a government continues to chip away at the very foundation of a 
system. Every new cut they make, every hospital or senior care 
home they close down, it’s just another attack on our medicare 
system. 
 
(1530) 
 
What I find particularly ironic is that this new cornerstone 
seems to be at odds with at least one of the existing 
cornerstones. Sure charity sounds good. It’s a benevolent word 
and it conjures up positive feelings of helping and sharing with 
less fortunate, but in this case the less fortunate are the district 
health boards that are funded by this government. Public 
funding — one of the original cornerstones, I believe. But now 
the government is looking for charity. Doesn’t it seem odd, Mr. 
Speaker, that these two concepts exist together in a government 
way of thinking? It must be a government way of thinking 
because it doesn’t make much sense to any other people. 
 
I find it astonishing that this government can slash health care 
funding, cut rural hospitals, chase qualified medical staff out of 
our province, and destroy the quality of health care, and then 
turn around and ask for help from the very people they are 
hurting  the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s an arrogant action and an action I find hard to support. 
People suffer from heavy provincial sales taxes, and the 
government tells us they are lucky because they don’t pay 
health care premiums in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think I’m wrong when I say that people in Saskatchewan 
really don’t feel very lucky. 
 
Seniors who have been shipped off to communities miles from 
their friends and families, all because the government closed 
their care home, most certainly don’t feel lucky. And nurses,  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

doctors, and other medical staff who are forced to move away 
from their homes to earn a living because this government 
continues to shut facilities, certainly don’t feel lucky either. 
Patients who have been shipped by ambulance to facilities over 
two hours away just to receive care don’t feel lucky at all. So 
when the government tells us we are lucky to have such an 
excellent health care system, who exactly are they kidding? 
 
I shake my head every time the Health minister rises in this 
House and pretends that all is well with our health care system. 
He manages to do this, despite daily stories of communities that 
are hurting, communities that are literally reeling under the 
blow of this government’s deep cuts to health. We keep asking, 
where is this government’s compassion, and I ask that again 
today. Where is this government’s compassion? It’s certainly 
not in Bill 114. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite know, will 
allow people to receive 100 per cent tax credit if they donate 
more than 20 per cent of their annual income to a district health 
board or an affiliate  100 per cent. That’s quite an increase 
over the current 20 per cent allowed. It looks like the 
government knows it is incapable of handling the financial 
situation our health system is in. Now they want help from the 
public  the public, Mr. Speaker. That means that these people 
in communities who are watching the complete destruction of 
health care and the people who are receiving no breaks on their 
taxes, are supposed to help. So much for public funding. 
 
I guess the first cornerstone of our medicare system should 
come with a point of clarification. Public funding, unless the 
government is completely irresponsible and make cuts too 
quickly, too deep, and then it can be publicly and private 
funded. I know it doesn’t have the same ring, Mr. Speaker, but 
at least it does have a ring of credibility. 
 
But that’s not even the worst part about this Bill. The worst part 
is that the government wants to create even more bureaucracy. 
I’m not sure where this fits into the Finance minister’s budget 
speech. I guess it would have to come somewhere after she says 
that her government will, quote, “eliminate red tape.” 
 
Already this government has come under fire for its farcical 
district health boards. Yes, the idea of an elected board that 
truly represents the people in health districts is wonderful. And 
district health boards would be good if the government didn’t 
insist on pulling all the financial strings. But sadly this is not 
the case in Saskatchewan. Since the health board elections, we 
have heard several elected members say they have no real 
choice in decision making. 
 
The Plains Health Centre is a perfect example. People who were 
elected because they wanted to save the badly needed facility 
were forced to agree to close it down. Their hands were tied, 
they said. If they didn’t go along with the government plan their 
funding would be cut even further. So these open and 
accountable health boards apparently have ended up to be open 
and accountable only to the NDP government. Public input?  
not with this government’s system. 
 
Now if the government lets this Bill go through, the health  

boards will get another slap in the face, because this Bill sets up 
a whole new level of bureaucracy to deal with the sixth 
cornerstone of health care, called charity. 
 
The Crown foundation would consist of not more than 12 
appointed trustees who will hold office for not more than three 
years. Appointed trustees. I assume these trustees would be 
appointed by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the board of trustees will have the power to make 
by-laws which will be subject to regulation. They may invest 
any money in any security or class of securities. It can sue or be 
sued. In return, all they have to do is submit a report of business 
to the minister every fiscal year. 
 
So in one Bill, Mr. Speaker, charity seems to translate into more 
power for government. The foundation would be government 
controlled and government accountable, and we all know what 
kinds of problems this can cause. Look at SaskPower under the 
control of Jack Messer. Rates go up, service goes down, and 
Jack gets to take home a huge salary year after year. No one 
says patronage doesn’t pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that what this foundation is going to be  a 
new place to bestow patronage appointments? I suppose they’re 
running out of them. By the time they find Don Ching, Fred 
Van Parys, and Jack Messer, among others, installed in their 
appointments, there may not be many open spots left. 
 
Think about it. Organizations already exist to deal with the 
changes to the health credit. They’re called district health 
boards and they were established by the same government who 
wants to create a new level of bureaucracy. How many levels of 
control does this government need? 
 
I really want to know when the public will finally get to control 
the agenda of their health care system, the health care system 
that is publicly funded and supposed to exist for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also find it ironic that in government press 
releases the Health minister doesn’t seem to worry about the 
loss of some tax revenue as a result of this change. The Health 
minister says it’s okay because it’ll be shared by the federal 
government. I guess the NDP government only shares with the 
federal government that which benefits them, because they 
refuse to share any of the responsibility for cuts to our health 
care system. Almost daily they’ll point their fingers at the 
federal government for causing all the pain and suffering that 
health care cuts are causing for Saskatchewan people. They 
certainly don’t want to share then; but when it comes to this 
Bill they are more than willing to share a loss of revenue. I may 
be wrong, Mr. Speaker, but it seems like a double standard to 
me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made it clear today that I do not 
support this Bill as is. I’m only frustrated that I can’t do more to 
defend health care in this province. As official opposition we 
can ask the government to show some compassion. We can ask 
the government to think about the people they are hurting. We 
can ask the government to come up with better solutions. But  



1868  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

it’s like hitting our head against a brick wall. This government 
has its path set for health care and it’s a path of destruction and 
devastation. Still they stubbornly push ahead and let the 
casualties fall around them as they carry out a cold and uncaring 
plan. 
 
So I could continue to speak out on this Bill and I could point 
out all the things that are wrong with health care in the 
province, but I don’t know if it matters. I don’t know if any of 
the members opposite really listen to the message that people 
throughout the province are sending them. I will bring forward 
my concerns to this Bill when it reaches Committee of the 
Whole and I can assure you that my colleagues will bring 
forward their concerns also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quality health care is worth fighting for and when 
the government brings forward legislation that is unnecessary or 
just plain bad for the people of this province, we must speak 
out. For the sake of every person in this province who wants to 
rely on a high quality medical system, I hope the government 
will finally start to listen. 
 
I move that debate on this Bill be now adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To my 
right is Craig Dotson, deputy minister of Education. And to my 
left is Michael Littlewood, director of third-party funding and 
legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, and 
to your assistants, last day when we left the issue around 
replacement contracts and the discussions that I’ve had from 
phone calls from people that were privy to some of the 
discussions between yourself and myself, Madam Minister, I 
was wondering if you might clarify, I think, probably two or 
three different situations so that I might better understand the 
Act and that others would as well. 
 
Let’s deal maybe with I think probably the simplest situation. 
And could you explain how this Act will affect the person who 
is a replacement teacher for the first year of a one-year leave 
and then the leave has been extended for a second year? How 
will this Act . . . how will it affect the replacement teacher? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Under your situation, if at the end of 
the first year the board did not consider that replacement 
teacher to be competent, then the board could terminate that 
teacher and choose another teacher. If at the end of the first year 
the board of education determined that the teacher was 
competent, then they would be obliged to offer the second year  

to that replacement teacher. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  You’re saying that they’re obliged to offer. 
As I read (9)(a), it says that the replacement teacher, if they 
haven’t been let go prior to May 31, and that indeed leave has 
been granted for the teacher who was on leave, then it’s not a 
matter of offering. It would in fact be that replacement teacher 
then that would have the automatic . . . and indeed would have 
the first right of refusal. Is that how I read (9)(a)? 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Obviously the board of education 
would have to approach that replacement teacher and indicate 
that the person you’re replacing has asked for a second-year 
leave. In that situation, the board would be obligated to offer 
that teaching position  that one-year teaching position  to 
the teacher that had been the replacement teacher in the first 
year. 
 
Now obviously the board would have to determine that by May 
31, whether or not that teacher was competent. If, in the opinion 
of the board, the teacher was not competent or they didn’t want 
that teacher to continue teaching in that particular school or 
school division, then obviously they could terminate that 
replacement teacher. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, then the teacher has been contacted, 
the replacement teacher, and they have accepted. Therefore now 
they are on what you have indicated or what the Act has 
indicated is now a continuous permanent contract? Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  That’s correct. The board would have 
to determine by May 31, in the first year of that teacher’s 
position in that school division, whether or not that teacher was 
competent. I presume that boards of education regularly 
determine whether or not beginning teachers have what it takes 
to continue teaching. The expectation would be that the board 
of education would determine whether or not that teacher was 
competent. If the teacher was competent, then they would be 
obliged to offer that second year of the extended leave to that 
teacher. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Let’s look at a 
second scenario to better understand, which might be another 
instance. Two teachers have been granted leave. Prior to May 
31, one of the teachers  teacher A, for instance  has 
decided that they are coming back. Okay. Teacher B is the one 
now that has been granted a second year of leave. 
 
I’ll use the scenario that in this case the replacement teacher for 
B was, as you’ve said, either not competent and has been 
evaluated by the director of education and they’ve decided that 
that person is not going to . . . or for that matter the right of first 
refusal, the teacher has a better job in another school division, 
and they’ve left. 
 
If the board hires the replacement teacher that was in for teacher 
A  okay, so the scenario that I’m using is now that there’s 
been a second year leave but it’s now for a different teacher  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1869 

than the replacement teacher taught for in the first instance  
will the Act now, the changes to the Act, will it mean that the 
replacement teacher is also now on a continuous contract 
because they’ve been hired for the second consecutive full 
academic term? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes, they would be on a permanent 
contract at the start of their second year. But obviously the 
board of education would have determined at the end of their 
first year that they had the necessary skills required to be a 
competent teacher. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Right. Okay. So the question that I have been 
asked and I’m sure that you have been asked by some of the 
stakeholders is as to whether or not this clause no. 9 is specific 
to the same teacher  it does not necessarily mean it’s the 
same teacher; it could be different teachers  and if they’re 
competent they will be hired on for the second year and indeed 
that now will make them a permanent contract. Right? Thank 
you. 
 
Now the third situation  which is the question that we left at 
last day, and I wanted to get the clarification here  is the 
scenario where we have a teacher who has been a replacement 
teacher for a full academic year and they weren’t let go; it’s just 
that the permanent teacher has returned and the contract is over. 
Then for the following year they did not teach on a replacement 
contract for that school division; they may have substituted or 
they may have been a temporary teacher but they were not on a 
full replacement contract. 
 
My question to you last day was, when somewhere down the 
road  maybe it is the third year  there is another full 
academic position that comes up for a leave, for an academic, 
yes, an academic contract, if that position is awarded to that 
replacement teacher, is that now a continuous contract because 
it is the second year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  If a school division made the decision 
to offer a second year but it was a second year some time later, 
then that school division has made a decision that that teacher is 
competent, that teacher has the skills necessary to be a 
competent teacher, and that teacher would then be in a position 
where they had a permanent contract with that school division. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  So to summarize, you’re saying then that the 
Act will allow now for any replacement teacher  whether they 
be hired for the second year consecutively or whether they be 
hired two years down the road or five years down the road  if 
they have been hired by the same school division for a complete 
academic year, then they will automatically be on what is 
referred to as the continuous contract? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes. If they are hired for a second year, 
then they would be on a permanent contract because that school 
division would have determined that that teacher had the 
necessary skills and expertise to be a second-year teacher, and 
they would be in a permanent contract position. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  As I indicated to you last day, I think, you 
know, there are some concern from teachers, as well as 

directors and boards as well, around this whole notion that 
immediately after one year, a teacher has the in on a position 
because someone has been granted a leave. And I would 
suggest that maybe we can look at an amendment there, if that’s 
in order, for the next day. 
 
What I’d like to ask, Madam Minister, is clause no. (11), when 
it refers to “The period of time during which a teacher is 
employed as a replacement teacher is to be credited in any 
computation pursuant to subclauses . . .” as numbered. Isn’t this 
an automatic if you were on a permanent contract? My question 
is, I guess, is what does this clause do, and is it necessary under 
the amendment, or is it already there when your contract 
becomes a permanent contract? This should already be in place. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as the member may know, 
replacement teacher is a new concept that’s being introduced to 
the legislation. And we wanted to ensure that when you’re 
adding up the time for a board of reference, that all periods of 
time are taken into consideration. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  If I understand you correctly, Madam 
Minister, when you say then that they’re employed as a 
replacement teacher, this would be in the instance then where 
the replacement contract does not become a permanent 
contract? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As you know, in year one the teacher is 
a replacement teacher. They do not have a permanent contract. 
Say down to the road, they receive a second year of teaching, 
they’re then in a position where they have a permanent contract 
because the board of education has determined that that teacher 
is competent. But in year three, if there’s some difficulty, or 
year five or six there’s some difficulty, what we’re saying here 
is that for the purposes of a board of reference, the year where 
the teacher was a replacement teacher serves as time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, thank you. I think I better understand 
that now. I think it will be protective to both teachers and 
boards in this case. 
 
Next issue is around forms. You make reference to the offer 
and the acceptance and the notice of confirmation shall be on 
prescribed forms. Could you indicate . . . or how your officials 
are coming along with that, as to what will be prescribed forms? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  First of all this section is not being 
proclaimed upon assent. So we want to sit down with our 
stakeholder groups in the weeks and months ahead and 
determine what an appropriate form would be. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Having had some experience at a board table, 
I wonder is this a level of . . . is this another level of 
bureaucracy in terms of having to follow through with forms 
where boards of education hire, you know, hundreds of teachers 
every year by methods that are already in place? Now are we 
devising another set of forms that must be followed — in other 
words you know, the exact form each and every time. Is it a 
change from what exists currently? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I can assure the member that we will be  



1870  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

mindful of the need to avoid undue paperwork and bureaucracy. 
I guess I’d just make the point, in reference to his comments, I 
sure do hope that boards of education are hiring hundreds of 
teachers because we have a lot of young people this year that 
are looking for those first teaching positions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I understand that the age of 
the teachers in the province is increasing with each and every 
year, and that over the next six or seven or eight years, I 
understand that there will be a number of retirements and 
superannuating teachers in the province. So I would hope that if 
our population stays . . . or in fact maybe starts to grow, in 
terms of young people coming into the province, that you and I 
would both rejoice at the thought of having to hire 3 or 400 
teachers. 
 
But in rural Saskatchewan though, that may not occur unless 
there are a number of retirements because we know enrolments 
are declining. That’s reality, and we’re still very concerned  
people in rural Saskatchewan are still very concerned — that a 
quality education exists there, and that there be no additional 
burdens on trying to spend money with, you know, extra time 
spent by directors putting in place forms. 
 
If the forms are going to be involved for these replacement 
contracts, will this be a form that you will also, through 
discussion with your stakeholders, will it be then expanded to 
include all job offers whether they’re replacement or temporary 
or whether they’ll be continuous offers? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As you may know, all teachers have 
some form of contract of employment with the employer, and 
whether you’re a temporary teacher or a replacement teacher or 
a permanent teacher, and we expect that we will be able to 
develop some common threads, common elements, throughout 
these forms. But as I said, this particular section is not going to 
be proclaimed until we’ve had an opportunity to work with the 
various stakeholder groups to get the appropriate forms drafted 
and in place. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Madam Minister, that leads me to 
the next question. When you have indicated that sections 8 and 
10 are not coming into force, and 10 as I see it is regarding the 
prescribed forms, just one more question on section 10. When 
you have met with the stakeholders  and I guess the boards of 
education represented by the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association would be the stakeholder that I’m talking about  
is this something that is supported by them and LEADS 
(League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents)? Is this something that you are at some 
disagreement with those groups? Or are we looking at an 
amicable solution, and indeed the forms will have unanimous 
support of all the officials and the department that are at the 
table? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As I understand it, LEADS, or the 
directors of education, are supportive of the notion of a form. 
They want to make sure, however, that we do not have a form 
that leads to all kind of paperwork that’s unnecessary. 

The teachers, as I understand it, are in favour of a form. And the 
trustees aren’t sure we need a form. 
 
So we’re in a position where not all of the stakeholders are in 
agreement. But I expect that as good Saskatchewan people, we 
will be able to sit down and compromise our various positions 
and come up with a form that’s not overly bureaucratic, doesn’t 
lead to unnecessary paperwork, but provides some consistency 
to boards of education across the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I asked you this question 
last time, and I recall some of your comment, and I was 
wondering if you still might expand on that a little bit. As far as 
beginning teachers, and I still have some concerns because I 
have had a couple of people talk to me about this. When they 
are hired as a replacement teacher . . . and as I indicated last 
day, in their first year, many beginning teachers make mistakes; 
they’re learning. They’re growing. And at the end, by May 31, a 
board of education is going to have to make a decision about 
that teacher — whether or not they’re fair or whether they’re 
adequate — in order to decide whether they’re going to keep 
them for the second year of a replacement contract. 
 
And I’m wondering if you think that the process then will be 
fair to those teachers that have stumbled along and maybe 
haven’t been . . . I mean there’s no question; boards of 
education and the director will recommend the hiring of those 
excellent teachers for their second year without blinking an 
eyelash. But what about those teachers who, in their first year, 
stumble a little bit? They are probably still going to be great 
teachers. Now there is some fear that an evaluation process will 
say, we’re just not going to take a chance on you after year one 
because we know automatically that we have you on a 
permanent contract. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I guess what I would say to your 
question is this. If a board of education hired a teacher in a 
permanent contract, at the end of year one they may not be sure 
about the teacher. The teacher has some difficulties . . . had 
difficulties with discipline, maybe had difficulties appropriately 
teaching the resource materials. But they decide to give that 
teacher a second year opportunity, and at the end of the second 
year they determined that that teacher just was not cut out to be 
in that particular school division. That teacher would be let go. 
That teacher would not be entitled to a board of reference, not 
unlike your replacement teacher who had been in a one-year 
replacement contract. 
 
The one-year replacement contract was extended. At the end of 
year 2, if that teacher was simply not cut out to be a teacher in 
that particular school division, the board of education could let 
that teacher go, sever the relationship with that teacher, and that 
teacher would not be entitled to a board of reference. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I understand you, Madam Minister, in terms 
of the relationship between someone who is on a continuous 
contract . . . because the board knows full well that that person 
is in your employ, hopefully for a long period of time, and 
you’re trying to see whether or not this teacher will make it. So 
there is a benefit of the doubt to go into the second year, and 
then of course it’s the difference between tenure and non-tenure  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1871 

and tough decisions are made at the end of that second year. 
 
The situation that I’m looking at and wondering how young 
people will be affected though is in the case of a replacement 
contract. It is a one-year contract. If it’s over because the 
teacher has returned from a leave, there’s no . . . it’s a fixed 
term. The situation will be of course if they’re willing to . . . if 
the person has been granted leave, then it is an automatic that 
they automatically have the second year of a leave. That’s point 
one. Point two, they are automatically on a continuous contract. 
 
And then of course if the teacher returns at the end of the 
second year, there is the whole issue of severance. And I know 
you’ve . . . I shouldn’t use the word severance; I guess I should 
use a redundancy pay. And you have indicated of course it’s 
only five days per teaching year which in this case works out to 
10 days. But when a board is looking at every available dollar, 
that indeed becomes a bit of an issue. 
 
So the situation  maybe is my fear  is that at the end of one 
year only that some good, promising, young teacher may be 
given a little bit of a rough go here because a board does not 
want to take a chance that this teacher may become something 
better, and they may let him go after one year. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I certainly appreciate your 
concern, but I would hope that you would appreciate the 
concern of some of those temporary teachers that have been 
temporary for six, seven, eight, nine years where they were 
bought back year after year after year after year, and really, it 
was difficult for the teacher to make plans about their future  
maybe buy a house, begin a family, get married, those kinds of 
things. And I think it’s fair to say that I certainly heard from a 
lot of younger teachers, you know . . . is there ever going to be a 
time when I can get out of this temporary position? 
 
And what we’re trying to do is ensure that we’re applying 
consistent practices across the province. And I think it’s fair to 
say that the example that I’ve just referred to was certainly not a 
widespread practice. But it was a practice that was causing 
some concern amongst directors of education, amongst 
teachers, and amongst trustees. 
 
So I think what we’ve tried to do here is deal with the court 
case, obviously, but also apply some consistent practices so that 
regardless of which school division operates in the province, 
that they have to treat teachers in a fair and consistent way. 
 
You’ll argue that it’s not fair to beginning teachers. What I 
would argue is that we’re treating replacement teachers that 
have been given a second-year contract the same as if they had 
been given a permanent contract. At the end of the two years, 
regardless if replacement teacher or permanent teacher, the 
board of education can sever their relationship with that 
teacher. They’re not entitled to a board of reference. 
 
I might also note that at the end of the first year, they can 
decide, look, this teacher just is not cut out to be a teacher or 
doesn’t fit into our school division, and we’re going to sever 
our relationship. They can do that without a board of reference 
and without giving redundancy pay. 

Mr. Krawetz:  While I concur with your remarks of last day 
and again today  and I think I made the comment to you, 
Madam Minister, last time  I totally agree that temporary 
contracts, full-year temporary contracts running four and fifth 
and six years are not in anybody’s best interests. And I’m glad 
to see that your comment of last day is exactly the same today, 
and I support that. I support that. 
 
I am looking at the situation though where it seems that a 
one-year term, only to begin after one year to go into the 
permanent status . . . just seems that we’ve gone from the abuse 
by a very few on keeping someone on a temporary contract for 
year after year after year, and we’ve gone now to saying that 
somebody after only one year is an automatic for a particular 
position just because they were lucky to be hired for that 
replacement. And I’m wondering if we couldn’t look at 
something next day. 
 
My last question before we move on, Madam Minister, would 
be when you indicated that section 8 is also not coming into 
force until proclamation what would that entail, as far as the 
ramifications for not bringing that one around? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Member, before I answer your 
question, I’d just like to make this point, that in the vast 
majority of cases the replacement teacher is only in that 
replacement position for one year. Most, most teachers do not 
go on a leave of absence beyond a year or a year and a few 
months or a year and a half. 
 
So you say secondments; that’s true, secondments. But the vast 
majority of replacement teachers out in the workplace are not 
replacement teachers for any extended periods of time beyond 
the year or the year and a half. 
 
Now in terms of answering your question 8, this particular 
section does not require any regulations, but it does require that 
the department have some time to properly consult local school 
divisions to make sure that we have a consistent application of 
The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right, Ray Clayton, deputy minister; to my 
left, Bruce Wilson, executive director of petroleum and natural 
gas. Behind me I have Donald Koop who is the assistant deputy 
minister of finance and administration; and as well George 
Patterson who is the executive director of exploration and 
geological services; and as well Trevor Dark who is the director  



1872  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

of energy economics. 
 
The Chair:  I would instruct the committee that the 
committee last considered these estimates on May 10. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I guess, Mr. 
Minister, I would like to welcome you and your officials. 
 
Just a couple quick questions on northern Saskatchewan. In the 
last several years  I think we asked a similar question, but I 
never got much of a response  in the last couple of years and 
with the next couple of years, how do you see the resource 
sector associated with mining in northern Saskatchewan? Is it 
going to be increasing or is it going to be decreasing? Do you 
expect that flurry of activity? What’s the general consensus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think, Mr. Chairman, not 
unlike my answer of the other day, we’re very optimistic in 
terms of development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
As you will know, there is some activity right now happening 
with respect to environmental assessment of uranium mining. 
There is some gold play that looks very optimistic. We’re still 
optimistic that in fact there may be, through the exploration 
that’s happening . . . In terms of diamonds in the 
Fort-à-la-Corne area, there might in fact be an opportunity there 
for expansion. It would appear that the investment by the 
mining sector is fairly substantial which should result in 
increased job opportunities for northern Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much. And we noticed we 
had a number of visitors in the Assembly today in reference to 
the Saskatchewan Mining Association, and we had a whole pile 
of questions that we certainly wanted to ask, but time again is 
not on our side in this matter. 
 
In that point, when you say that you do have an optimistic 
outlook, I certainly believe that as government we have to make 
every effort to attract investment, attract business. And certainly 
mining is one huge operation, and it certainly contributes a 
great amount of value to Saskatchewan. 
 
Lenora Resources  it’s a small company out of Ontario  
they had proposed a mine up in Uranium City, and I’m looking 
at a couple of headlines here basically saying that the project is 
having some troubles. And I know that people of Uranium City 
were very anxious to see this happen because you’re looking at 
anywhere between 175 to 250 jobs for that small community. 
Uranium City, throughout the years, has contributed a great 
amount to the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s one of the questions I’ve asked many times is . . . 
what is your government doing to attract companies like the one 
I mentioned here so that they’re able to come into Uranium 
City, and they are able to provide hope; employment 
opportunity for the people of that area? And really I’d like to 
see what concessions were offered, what concessions were 
taken, and how you, as our minister, is making the atmosphere 
for business to thrive. 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To the 
member, I’m assuming that he’s talking about the Greater 
Lenora initiative. They have been in discussions with the 
department on a regular basis. As I understand it, the company 
was reassessing their reserves and what the potential was . . . or 
what the potential is, but that process has not been completed. 
And until they’ve completed an assessment of what reserves are 
there and what opportunities there may be, based on what’s 
there to mine . . . they have not returned to the department after 
having completed that analysis. So I guess the bottom line is 
they haven’t completed their analysis as to whether or not it will 
make economic sense for them. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess the second part of the question is . . . 
we all know that electrical power and certainly the need to 
generate power, in terms of generation, and that also needs fuel. 
And you look at some of the costs of fuel in northern 
Saskatchewan. Uranium City, $1.12 a litre of gas, I think that’s 
the amount that they pay out there. You look at the costs of 
power. 
 
And really, I guess, in essence, Lenora opportunity with the 
Box Mine and the Athena Mine, you would assume that they 
may have approached your department, trying to attract some 
support to establish this mine. This mine offers incredible 
potential and opportunity for the Uranium City, Camsell 
Portage, and Fond-du-Lac people, and they’re very anxious to 
get going. 
 
What are you going to do as our Energy and Mines minister to 
attract this company, to make Saskatchewan a more 
industry-conducive province? Because again I state, Mr. 
Minister, there’s a lot of optimism, a lot of hope that this mine 
will come into being and that Uranium City can once again 
have a bright future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair 
to assume that until due diligence has been done with respect to 
their reserves, with their cost of operations, that they’re not in a 
position to determine whether or not they’d be able to go to the 
markets to raise capital for the investment. And I think that’s 
sort of the crux of what you’re talking about. Certainly they’re 
going to want to assess what the reserves are, so they know 
what they can generate in terms of revenue, because without 
that it’s going to be very difficult, you know, to raise capital in 
order to get the project going. 
 
I’m told by the officials that they haven’t been back to us now 
for a period of months, which would suggest either they are not 
comfortable with the amount of reserves in the area or maybe 
other initiatives. 
 
With respect to other costs that might be associated with 
developing the resource, certainly power will be one of the 
considerations. I can’t say today whether or not they have been 
in discussion with the Power Corporation in terms of what the 
rate may be. 
 
Now we are all well aware that in northern Saskatchewan there 
are some fairly high costs associated with doing business in that 
area of the province. You have isolated ore bodies, isolated  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1873 

resources. They’re a long ways away from, in some cases, a 
road infrastructure, which may not be the case in this one you 
cite, but certainly the costs of operations in northern 
Saskatchewan have historically been very high. 
 
And I think that mining companies take this all into account 
when in fact they put together a prospectus in terms of what 
they feel they can generate and what they’re able to take to 
investors. But as I can say with Greater Lenora, they have not 
been back to the department in months, as I’m told by my 
officials. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So I guess the point that you’re saying, if 
they haven’t been back in months, it has not been the result of 
this government not making a conscious effort to attract this 
company to Saskatchewan. So to make it simple, they are not 
here not because the government did not try and help. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I want to say 
to the member that it’s not anything that’s been done or not 
been done by this department, by this government. 
 
I am told that after they did their initial investigation and went 
to the market, the market was not responsive. And potential 
investors indicated to the corporation, to the company, that they 
would have to go and firm up the numbers before it would be 
conducive to generating investment by investors. 
 
We as a department, we as a government, were receptive to 
industry. When they have a proposal, when they have an 
initiative that they feel is a go and can be a go, then we sit down 
and work with them to try and facilitate the development in 
those areas. That hasn’t happened with Greater Lenora. 
Apparently there wasn’t enough information to satisfy 
investors, so they haven’t returned to us since their initial 
contact with the department. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So if I were to get up and I were to phone up 
the president of the Lenora company and ask him, did the 
Saskatchewan government do all that they could to assist you 
establishing this mine, you would say yes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think the response would be 
that the discussions aren’t completed. That would be what I’m 
assuming the reaction would be. We’ve had initial discussions. 
There’s been some reaction by the market, which was that there 
wasn’t a willingness to invest based on the information that was 
available. So I’m assuming that their option is to put together 
more information with respect to the resource and then go back 
to the market to determine whether or not investment would be 
available. 
 
I can say that the Department of Energy and Mines is certainly 
more than willing to entertain proposals, and it would be up to, 
I guess, to Greater Lenora to determine whether or not they had 
a good enough package to go to the market. We will do as we 
do in other circumstances with other companies where other 
developments happen  work closely with them to help to 
facilitate their development, their initiatives. 
 

Mr. Belanger:  So again the situation is that he would . . . 
What you’re saying to this House as of this day, May 28  or 
27, whatever the day is  is that the mine that we’re looking at 
near Uranium City is not having troubles, not because of this 
government’s willingness . . . (inaudible) . . . trying, negotiate 
and to assist but it’s really because of the markets in reference 
to this mine? Is that correct? 

(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think it would be fair to say, 
as I have indicated, the history of the discussions and those 
discussions I have put on the record — we are of the 
understanding that they are reassessing the reserves at this 
point. We haven’t heard from them subsequent to that. And I 
think that we have done all that has been asked of us as a 
department, the Department of Energy and Mines. 
 
If there are some other issues outside of the department that I’m 
not aware of, you might be able to bring them to my attention. 
But I’m not aware of any. 
 
As is the case with all developments, there’s always discussions 
in terms of the cost of energy that’s required. Those discussions 
don’t happen within Energy and Mines; they would happen in 
direct consultation and negotiation with the Power Corporation. 
 
I can only tell you what I have told you in terms of the history 
of the interaction with this company, and we haven’t been 
approached, as I’m told by the officials, for months. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I would assume that you would have, you 
know, a . . . I shouldn’t say better effort, but a finer method in 
terms of you, being the minister responsible for Energy and 
Mines, in terms of cooperating with SaskPower, with SaskTel 
and SaskEnergy and so on and so forth, to discuss on how we 
can attract business to the North and how we can get a mine 
that’s much like the one we’re speaking about. You know, 
again the atmosphere or the environment for business to exist. 
 
Have you ever subsidized or granted or donated any other goods 
or services, or even given any company a concession when you 
talk about attracting them to operate in northern Saskatchewan? 
And this is in reference to all the costs that the mines go 
through. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, the approach that 
we take as a government and as a department is that we will 
institute policies of a general nature, of general application, that 
would pertain to all of the industry players, those who are 
proponents of a project, and we put a policy in place so that it 
would be fair for one, as fair as it would be for another. But do 
we single out a specific company for a specific concession? The 
answer is no. 
 
I can say that we attempt to coordinate quite clearly in the fact 
that under the energy portfolio  SaskPower, SaskEnergy, the 
Department of Energy and Mines, and other entities  there are 
discussions that happen within the corporations, as an example 
within the Crown corporations, that I don’t necessarily deal 
with on a hands-on basis. My job as the Energy minister is 



1874  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

to work to develop policy, to develop policy with government 
whereby we can create an environment that industry will be 
attracted to. 
 
I can’t stand in this House and tell you that I’m aware of the 
day-to-day negotiations and discussions that happen with 
specific companies because that’s not my role. But when we 
appear before Crown Corporations estimates, as an example, 
the officials who do that and whose job it is to do that will be 
there to answer detailed questions. 
 
If you have a specific question with respect to Uranium City 
and development there, I’m more than willing to sit down with 
you, bring together the information in an up-to-date fashion 
from all of the different players, and share that with you. 
 
But I guess to go back to your question, in terms of special 
concessions for separate companies, the answer is no; we tend 
to prefer a general policy across the industry. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  No, I just noticed that from this particular 
mine that we’re speaking about we notice that  of course I’m 
not familiar with how the stocks operate  but you went from a 
. . . you know, and I quote from the paper: 
 

“It’s a shock. We had a $4 dollar stock, then a $2 dollar 
stock, and an 80 cent stock. It knocked the heck out of 
investors and myself as well” said company chairman, 
CEO Robert Kasner. 

 
I guess in reference to the jitters that we talk about when you 
invest into the stock and the whole bit — again, not 
understanding how the stock works — I’m assuming that if the 
Saskatchewan Minister of Energy and Mines were to get up and 
he would say yes, the Saskatchewan government truly believes 
in creating an environment for business to thrive and to exist, 
and that we see that there’s a lot of potential; we’re going to do 
all that we can to support the efforts of this particular company, 
so it could provide employment for the people of Uranium City, 
an opportunity for the people of Camsell, and the people of 
Fond-du-Lac, and Stony Rapids, I am sure that that would have 
nothing but a positive spin on the fact that this company that’s 
dealing with the mine that’s so close in terms of being there, or 
being shut down, that that would be only positive for this 
particular company, only positive for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Are you prepared to do something of that nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I think, if I could 
describe what I see to be the role of the minister and of the 
department, as I’ve indicated, it’s my job to work with the 
department and work with the rest of caucus, the government 
caucus, to develop policy. Within that policy framework there’s 
hopefully, and in some occasions there will be, some degree of 
flexibility; other times there won’t be. 
 
In terms of, I think, the viability of a project, it’s got to be based 
on known and proven reserves, which is certainly something 
that our department works closely with industry on, not only in 
Uranium City but in other projects in terms of  

sharing information that we have. They will do the more 
detailed work in terms of exploration to develop the richness of 
an ore body. In terms of my role as the minister, I can say to you 
that I don’t take the position that I should do anything other 
than offer encouragement in a general nature based within what 
the reserves are, what the policy is, and based upon the cost of 
doing business. 
 
And as I’ve said, there may be policy changes that are required 
from time to time. And we do that; we monitor policy on an 
ongoing basis. And there may be some flexibility within a 
policy framework. But that, I guess, is sort of the role that I see 
the department playing, the role of the minister, and the role of 
the companies. Because certainly the companies have a 
responsibility to prove their resources; it’s them that are going 
to the shareholders. It’s the corporation that will go to the 
markets for investment. And I guess what they have to do is 
prove a case, to show that investors should be comfortable in 
believing that there can be some profits to be made by a 
proposal that they as proponents are putting to them. 
 
We do, in our way, as a department, deal with the regulatory 
and the licensing issues, and certainly we help to facilitate that 
inasmuch as we can. But there is some onus on industry — 
industry that has to do due diligence in terms of showing folks 
that it’s a good project to invest in. 
 
The market-place isn’t cut or dried. It’s not black and white. 
And certainly I can’t suggest to you that I’m terribly 
experienced in playing the stock market. I guess I’ve made a 
few dollars and I’ve lost a few dollars, like many of us have, 
over the course of my lifetime, but I think the real responsibility 
though is for a proponent of a project to attract investment 
based on what they’ve got to offer and what potential for profit 
they have. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Just one last point in terms of . . . and I got 
some other . . . some of my colleagues have some other 
questions. 
 
The people of Uranium City have for the last year or so, since 
this whole mine was spoken about and talked about, had been 
looking at this with a great amount of optimism. And I request 
the minister to . . . and I strongly advise you to take a very 
serious look at what role that you could play to make this mine 
become a reality. What type of concession, what kind of 
environment, can you develop to allow this mine to proceed? 
And that’s the whole key what we speak about when we speak 
about developing an environment for business to thrive and to 
exist. 
 
And if you give concessions . . . we’re not talking about 
investing in this company. We’re not talking about giving out 
grants and the whole bit and giving away the environmental 
right to do anything they want. We’re speaking about giving 
them concessions. And if they spend 15, $20 million on 
developing this mine and they create 100,150 jobs, and you’ve 
giving them maybe 200 or $300,000 worth of concessions, then 
that works good for the provincial economy. That works good 
for the people of the whole province and of Uranium City, 
especially that community. 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1875 

So in reference to this point, I strongly urge the minister to look 
into this particular project, look into this particular mine, and 
see what you can do to create the environment for business to 
thrive and to exist. 
 
And to that end, I sincerely look forward to some of the 
information that you promised me, and I’m sure you will have 
other discussions as well. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, just to briefly 
respond, I guess the concession that we would see as being 
appropriate is a return on investment, and that would be based 
on royalties, taxation levels  how much that would or how 
much that would not be. It would be based on the cost of doing 
business, the cost of developing the resource, what the market 
value of the resource is; and all of those things will determine 
what the shareholders’ rate of return on investment will be from 
the corporation. 
 
With respect to direct injection from the Department of Energy 
and Mines or from the provincial government, that has not been 
our policy. Our policy has been to set in place a taxation and a 
royalty regime that can allow a favourable rate of return which 
will then attract investment, and that’s the approach that we 
have taken. 
 
And I would say to the member that I don’t believe that the 
government has any determination to become involved in 
investing in what may or may not be risky operations in mining. 
We think that’s best left to speculators, to people who play the 
stock market and invest in different initiatives. We don’t see 
that as being government’s role. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
minister’s officials here this afternoon. Would the minister 
please let me know why or where, I’m sorry, do I see within the 
Estimates before us here today, an expense for the payments 
made to the NewGrade upgrader? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  You won’t see them in the 
department estimates because we don’t make payments to 
NewGrade from the department. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you provide 
us with an explanation of why that in fact is the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, the investment 
is made through Crown Investments Corporation and not 
through Energy and Mines, so that would be the appropriate 
place to question payments that may be, through an agreement, 
made to NewGrade. That would be done under Crown 
Investments Corporation estimates but not Energy and Mines. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister; but  and correct 
me if I’m wrong  but is it not your department, through order 
in council, that has made payments to the NewGrade upgrader 
in years gone by? 
 
Could you just please qualify that? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I think the member 
might be referring to an order in council dated 1989 which 
provides for the authority of payment and remission of royalties 
to a couple of companies who then in turn remit that to 
NewGrade. That was, as I’ve said, done in 1989. It’s an 
ongoing process. And that’s how that was put together. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then am I to 
understand there have been these types of payments that have 
been made since 1989 up until . . . through this most recent 
fiscal year ending March 31, ’96? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, to share with the 
member as I understand it, this was one of the components of 
the original agreement that put the NewGrade deal together, so 
you would understand the date 1989. Maybe what I should do is 
take you through, as I understand it, the background of this 
arrangement. 
 
In 1989, an order as part of the agreement was passed that 
would indicate that NewGrade should receive a rebate of 
Crown royalties paid on natural gas used in the upgrading 
process. The order calls for remission of Crown royalties paid 
by producers of natural gas. An assignment is made to 
NewGrade of their right to that remission in payment to 
NewGrade by the department. 
 
The Provincial Auditor as you will know  and I’m sure that’s 
where you’re headed  has indicated that the order is not a 
remission but a grant and therefore lacking in proper legislative 
authority. The government takes an opposite position. We have 
legal opinions supporting our position, as does the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
I would want to say to the member that this is part of an 
agreement that was put in place by the former government. It 
was part of what put the NewGrade package together. I believe 
that the remissions are required for another 13 years, and quite 
clearly there are some that would suggest that it’s an 
inappropriate deal. It was not of our making, but it’s one that 
we live with as part of many things that we live with that were 
done by the former Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And we certainly 
can appreciate that this is in fact one of those very deals that 
does trace its original inception and development to the 
previous administration, so we are appreciative of that. 
 
However, could you just perhaps relate to us, was this remission 
previously made under a different name? Was it always referred 
to as a royalty rebate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, we have 
always dealt with it as a remission, and it’s been in Public 
Accounts, in the Public Accounts documents for as long as we 
have been in charge of this initiative. So it’s all there; it’s part 
of Public Accounts, and it’s always been dealt with as a 
remission. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But was it always 
referred to as the NewGrade royalty rebate? 



1876  Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Okay. We, as you will know, are 
not responsible for putting together the Public Accounts 
document. And my officials are not aware of whether or not it 
has been referred to by using different terminology over the 
years. As I’ve said, we don’t put together Public Accounts 
documents. That is done by other arms. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You referred to the 
department having a legal opinion with respect to whether your 
department should be listing this remission as an expense of 
your department. Could you outline for us this afternoon what 
have been the costs incurred to date to develop such a legal 
opinion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that is just 
part of the routine advice that was received by the department 
when this arrangement was designed. And it would be a piece 
that would be looked at by the Department of Justice, as they do 
with other initiatives when requested by different departments. 
So I guess, just to condense, it’s part of the ’89 agreement. 
Justice would have looked at it and, based on their analysis, 
made a recommendation to the department. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Given now that the 
Provincial Auditor has expressed concerns, as you’ve alluded to 
earlier, as recently as the spring 1996 report in this regard and 
you also have made reference to the auditor having developed a 
legal opinion contrary to yours, it would seem to me that this is 
going to be an ongoing battle. And perhaps is there any 
provision by your department here in terms of . . . like, where 
will this get to? Will there be further legal opinions required? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I would say to the 
member opposite that I think what is important here is that the 
amount identified is accurate and that the amount is disclosed in 
Public Accounts. 
 
This is a disagreement with the department and the Provincial 
Auditor, and I would want to say that we certainly don’t like to 
see disagreements with the Provincial Auditor or different 
interpretations, but I think that’s, I guess, the nature of the 
beast. It’s a matter of disagreement. We have legal opinion that 
represents our position as being appropriate. We are interested 
that the amount is documented and made public. And so I think, 
in terms of legality, we’re comfortable with our legal opinion. 
The amount is disclosed, and the amount is accurate, and I think 
that’s what’s important. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. With respect to 
royalty rebate for the year ending March 31, ’96, would you 
have that figure available here this afternoon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that 
historically it’s been averaging about a million, a million and a 
half dollars a year. It’s not a number that has been disclosed yet 
for the ’96 fiscal year by Public Accounts, but I’m sure when 
that document is available, you’ll be able to check for the exact 
amount. But to say to the member that it doesn’t change 
dramatically from year to year . . . it’s been historically fairly 
close, one year to the other, similar amount. 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I do note here that 
for the year ended March 31, ’95, I believe the rebate was 
something in the order of $1.3 million. And the Minister of 
Health might be interested in knowing that that’s about the 
amount of money that would be required to fund the operation 
of the geriatric unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
So I do appreciate the position that you have been placed in 
here in this respect. As you’ve said earlier, and we 
acknowledge, this was the creation of the previous Tory 
administration. 
 
However we all are aware of a number of deals in this province 
that have been rejigged, so to speak, since your government 
came into power in 1991. And I would maintain that perhaps 
that there could have been a little bit more rejigging done in this 
regard given the very difficult choices that are having to be 
made in this province at this point in time, particularly those 
with respect to our health care and education. And this in fact 
could have been another one of these that perhaps should have 
deserved a little further scrutiny than the department may have 
given it. And perhaps it would have been one where it would 
have been appropriate to have reworked it. So could I just get a 
further comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’d be more than pleased to 
comment. Firstly, as I’ve indicated earlier, this wasn’t a 
decision that would have been made by the Department of 
Energy and Mines; it’s a Crown Investments Corporation 
initiative. I want to say that the government has had to make 
some very, very difficult choices. And I would say with respect 
to health care funding, that’s one of the areas where we’ve had 
some major choices to make. 
 
I would also want to say . . . let me, I guess, put this in a couple 
of different ways. The interest on the provincial debt this year is 
in the neighbourhood . . . and the interest we’ll be paying is in 
the neighbourhood of $850 million. And I think we all 
acknowledge and recognize that that is a major, a major amount 
of funding. 
 
With respect to one of the departments that I was administering 
a few years back, the expenditure of the Department of Natural 
Resources was somewhere in the neighbourhood of $80 
million. Well if we didn’t have that interest to pay on an annual 
basis, we could fund that department ten times with no 
pressure, no changes. It would have been very easy. 
 
But those weren’t the choices that we had to make. Just as I 
would say this year, the amount that you’re suggesting for the 
geriatric unit in Moose Jaw is $1.3 million. We could have 
funded that particular unit. That could have been funded by the 
health district a hundred times if we hadn’t had the $114 
million offload from the federal Liberal government. 
 
But those were choices that we made. Those were the situations 
that we inherited. We try to do the best that we can with the 
limited resources that we have. And I recognize that you won’t 
always agree that we have made the right choices, and it’s the 
nature of opposition and it’s your responsibility to raise these 
issues. 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1877 

And as I’ve indicated, we won’t always agree, but we’ve had 
some choices to make. We think that we’ve made some rational 
choices and some reasonable choices based on what we’ve had 
to work with, some very difficult situations: a debt-load left by 
the former administration, federal offloading But they’re 
realities. It’s just something that we have to deal with, and we 
make the best choices that we can given what we have to work 
with. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. However, if I might 
just make one further comment in this regard, because it is I 
believe somewhat facetious to continue to refer to this as a 
royalty rebate given that the producers of the natural gas in 
question here are in fact paying the royalties  if I’m correct in 
understanding that  and in turn they’re giving this right over 
to NewGrade and then a rebate is being made to NewGrade by 
the government. So hence I would suggest that it should be 
renamed properly, in that it’s nothing more than just a grant, 
plain and simple. And that would be just my last comment, and 
if you’d . . . you’re welcome to comment if you have anything 
to say on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well certainly that’s your 
viewpoint, and as I indicated we won’t always agree on every 
particular issue. And I think that’s fine, but I would also say if 
we could turn the clock back 10 years, 15 years ago, that we 
wouldn’t be dealing with some of the financial situations that 
we have to deal with. That’s not the case. 
 
The case is these situations are a reality. We attempt to deal 
with them in the best way that we possibly can, trying to 
maintain the job opportunities for Saskatchewan people here in 
Saskatchewan. And I would want to say that the jobs and the 
people who work at NewGrade are every bit as protective of 
their jobs as those who work in health care facilities or in other 
facilities around Saskatchewan. It’s a matter of trying to balance 
and trying to weigh what is in the best interests of all the people 
of Saskatchewan, and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know we’ve 
talked at great length about this, this afternoon, and I feel a little 
bit selfish in this regard. Perhaps I should have let the third 
party climb in on the discussion here this afternoon because 
after all, it was their project to defend. So I just will leave it up 
to them if they want the last comment. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1847 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1847 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1847 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1848 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1848 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1848 
Crofford ..........................................................................................................................................................................1848, 1857 
Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................1848 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1849 
Stanger ......................................................................................................................................................................................1850 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Saskatchewan Mining Week  

McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1850 
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1850 

20th Anniversary of Saskatchewan Indian Federated College  
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1850 

Women’s March Against Poverty  
Murray ......................................................................................................................................................................................1850 

National Access Awareness Week 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1851 
Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1851 

Farming Practices  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1851 

Saskatoon Economic Development Authority Survey Report  
Pringle .......................................................................................................................................................................................1852 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Patronage Appointments 

McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1852 
Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................1852 

Service Districts Act  
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1853 
Teichrob ..........................................................................................................................................................................1853, 1854 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1854 

Government Office Leases  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1853 
Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................1853 

Atomic Energy of Canada’s Saskatchewan Office  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1854 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................1854 

Humboldt-Wakaw Water Pipeline  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1855 
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1855 

 



 

Northern Highways  
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1856 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................1856 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
Same Question Rule respecting Bill No. 56 and Bill No. 93  

Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1857 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting The Management of Forest Resources  
Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1857 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1859 

Bill No. 21  An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 and to enact a related amendment/Loi modifiant la Loi 
d’interprétation de 1995 et édictant une modification corrélative  

Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1860 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1861 

Bill No. 86  An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act  
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1861 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1862 

Bill No. 97  An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act  
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1863 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1863 

Bill No. 113  An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc. 
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1864 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1864 

Bill No. 114An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for District Health Boards and their Affiliates 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1865 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1866 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act  

Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1868 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1868 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  
General Revenue Fund  
Energy and Mines  Vote 23  

Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1871 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1872 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1875 

 


