
























































May 28, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1937 
 May 28, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 14  Support for the Canadian Wheat Board 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Johnson:  Good evening, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
things about the Canadian Wheat Board is that in the size of 
market and in the marketing of grain, the Canadian Wheat 
Board, for the amount of grain that we market in export sales, 
we really are not in a position to maintain a system such as they 
have in the United States. 
 
The United States market  which is basically controlled by 
five or six fairly large private companies that dominate not only 
the U.S. (United States) trade but the world trade as well  
these companies seem to be able to control and regulate the 
export sales. One of the things that can be said about them is 
that the large nature of these firms seem to be able to cover the 
. . . to be able to coordinate information and to contain risk that 
this market, this highly volatile and market of large traders, and 
volatile and competitive market, has. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we in Canada, if we wish to have any of the 
grain industry here at all, we are basically going to have to 
maintain the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s been said . . . and I’m going to quote 
from the Leader-Post of about, oh, four, five days ago now. 
One of the things reported in there is that Canadian critics of 
the Wheat Board are inadvertently nudging us towards the 
worst-case scenario in which wheat boards with the market 
clout that comes from Pool selling is abolished, while exports to 
the U.S. by individuals, by private Canadian companies, or 
whoever, would be banned. 
 
So we would be in the situation of lose, lose, lose. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t believe that’s where we should be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Now before moving the motion, I’d like to 
point out that what the Alberta government is doing, if you can 
rely upon reports, it says in a report out of Edmonton, under the 
plan, Alberta would be buying grain from its wheat and barley 
farmers for a dollar, then transporting it across the border. Once 
in the U.S. the province would sell the grain back to the Alberta 
farmer for a loonie, who then would sell the grain to the 
American buyer. Klein hinted that the Alberta government 
could get around the federal law. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the federal Minister of Agriculture, Goodale, 
said that Alberta would be doing what is basically an illegal act 
and it would not be tolerated. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is no particular gain to be made for those 
people who are attempting to circumvent an orderly system 
where everyone gains and no one really loses. 
 

So, Mr. Minister, with that I’d like to move, seconded by the 
member for Redberry Lake: 
 

That this Assembly register its opposition to the recent 
Alberta proposal to circumvent the Canadian Wheat Board, 
thereby undermining the single-desk marketing of 
Canadian grains to the world. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to take 
this opportunity to speak for a few minutes on what I consider 
is one of the most important assets that prairie farmers have. I 
of course am referring to the Canadian Wheat Board. The board 
has served our farmers well for over 60 years. All those years 
farmers have had the protection of an agency that established an 
arrangement where a buyer had one Canadian supplier to buy 
from. Thus the situation was created that prevents a buyer 
playing one farmer off against another  which is exactly what 
the open market not only permits but encourages. 
 
With the open market system, farmers, especially those with 
Bills to pay and a shortage of cash, are forced to sell when the 
bills are due, regardless of the price. By the same token, those 
in a better financial position can hold off sales in hopes of 
hitting a higher price. Such an arrangement is very detrimental 
to farmers, particularly those that are cash strapped. Often the 
young farmers trying to become established are the most 
vulnerable. 
 
I often think that the late John F. Kennedy said it best, when 
describing the American farmers’ position with their situation, 
having no protections from risks, such risks as the board 
protects us from, when he stated, “The farmer is the only 
individual who takes what is offered, pays what he’s asked, and 
pays the freight on it both ways.” 
 
Well the federal Liberals followed through on the Tory agenda. 
So now we as farmers have no protection on the freight rates 
that the private rails can charge us, which makes a stable price 
on grain that much more important. Often we hear about the 
border jumpers in their attempt to get the best of both worlds, 
while they attempt, not always successfully, to capitalize on 
higher prices across the line. Those same people would be the 
first to run back to the Canadian Wheat Board when their 
bubble burst. 
 
Back in 1923 when the first pooling was done in Saskatchewan, 
my grandfather, like thousands of others, was an original signer. 
We have been strong farmer supporters of orderly marketing 
ever since; a period of time in my family spanning four 
generations. 
 
During the 1930s a system of voluntary boards was attempted 
which resulted in failure, as people sold to the board when the 
prices were low and attempted to deal with the open market 
should the price suddenly rise for a period of time. A voluntary 
board didn’t work then, can’t work now, and will never work in 
the future. 
 



1938  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

So don’t be fooled by the suggestions of a choice of which 
method to market your grain. The end result will be financial 
disaster for prairie farmers. In addition, such a system makes it 
virtually impossible to guarantee a steady supply, which 
impacts negatively on the overall market. 
 
The Wheat Board may need some minor changes from time to 
time, as it has in the past. Attend the board meetings every year 
and express your views on the changes that you feel are 
necessary, but for your own sake, and for the sake of all prairie 
farmers, don’t throw the baby out with the bath water. Or as the 
Premier so aptly put it in his response to an oral question in this 
Chamber on May 21: 
 

. . . this debate about the Canadian Wheat Board is an 
important one because, as far as this provincial government 
is concerned, and I believe the vast, vast majority of 
farmers in Canada are concerned, the single-desk 
marketing system of the Canadian Wheat Board has served 
this country and the farmers very, very well. 

 
That’s not to say that there can’t be improvements made to the 
Canadian Wheat Board, as there can to any institution, but what 
we do not support is what the Conservatives in this province are 
advocating, namely some form of two-tiering, a breaking-up of 
the single-desk marketing approach, which doesn’t make any 
sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost all the buyers in the world buy from a 
single desk. The only ones who benefit when you have a 
multiplicity of sellers are the buyers. It makes no sense to the 
farmers of Sturgis, Saskatchewan, to be competing against the 
farmers in Meadow Lake; or the farmers in Saskatchewan to be 
competing against the farmers in Alberta. We stand for the 
Canadian Wheat Board 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the best efforts, or if 
may say so, the worst efforts of the Conservative Party in this 
province to destroy the Canadian Wheat Board, you will not get 
us onside on that mission. 
 
I say that, historically and in actual reality, the single-desk 
marketing system in the Canadian Wheat Board has been one of 
the greatest advantages for the farmers and the people of 
Saskatchewan and this country. It makes economic sense. It’s 
the right thing to do when we meet the other competitors in the 
international market-place. And we’re not going to privatize the 
grain industry. 
 
I just want to close my remarks by saying that it may be . . . not 
may be, it is the policy of the Conservative caucus to be in the 
hip pocket of ConAgra and the large marketing grain companies 
internationally. It is not our policy. We support the Canadian 
Wheat Board because it’s the right thing to do and it makes 
sense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Jess:  I too would like to see changes to the Canadian 
Wheat Board. The changes I would like to see is a higher initial 
price guaranteed by the federal government and the inclusion of 
all grains and oilseeds that we as farmers produce, so that we 
would not always be in the position of paying what we are 
asked and accepting what we are offered. 
 
I believe I speak for the vast majority of farmers, and certainly 
for this NDP (New Democratic Party) government, when I say 
we stand for the Canadian Wheat Board 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  We should be aware that while our support for the 
board is deeply entrenched, we must always be prepared to fight 
for what is rightfully ours, keeping in mind that the reactionary 
forces led by the Conservative thinkers in society are always at 
work, which means once again we must fight the good fight to 
keep our Canadian Wheat Board  the fight that was won over 
60 years ago and must be fought again to ensure that we retain 
one of our greatest assets. 
 
I move the debate be now adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I ask for leave to go to government 
business. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
(1915) 
 

Motion No. 15  Implementing a Regional 
Telephone Exchange System 

 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to have the opportunity to 
discuss an issue that is of significant interest to people of rural 
Saskatchewan in particular. It’s born out of an experience that I 
had through the campaign, where in my constituency it came to 
my realization that there were a great number of telephone 
districts that were very much an impediment to the people that 
lived within those districts. 
 
For example, I campaigned and visited folks in the Star City 
area. And what became increasingly apparent as I talked to 
those people is that these people were conducting their business 
in Tisdale or Melfort, and everywhere they went, they were 
forced to pay long-distance. Their children went to school in 
these other communities. They did business in these 
communities. And in all of these instances, everything they did, 
they were forced to call long-distance. And so when I went door 
to door, people would say to me, is there anything that is 
possible for you to do about minimizing these long-distance 
charges that we have? 
 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

When I went up further north in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 
I ran into a great many people in the Ridgedale exchange, 
Ridgedale and Gronlid, who really didn’t even have any 
community of any significant size within that telephone 
exchange. And so they were caught really between Nipawin, 
Tisdale, and Melfort, and every call they made to do any 
amount of business, any amount of social interchange, was 
long-distance. 
 
And as I looked into it further, it became even more absurd in 
the way the system had evolved, in that there were people that 
literally lived across the road from each other, and these people 
had children that went on the same school bus. They went to the 
same school. They went and enjoyed the same kinds of social 
activities. In many instances they went to the same churches. 
They did business in the same stores, in the same communities. 
And any time they wanted to talk to their neighbour across the 
road, they were forced to dial a long-distance number. And so it 
seemed to me that something certainly was necessary to be 
done. 
 
What the people originally asked for . . . it said that would be at 
least as a minimum sort of an effort on their part, would be 
could they at least choose a more major community to attach 
their telephone number to, so they wouldn’t have all these 
long-distance charges. And that seemed to be at least some 
move forward. 
 
But as I thought about it more and more and I realized that one 
of the fundamental economic development initiatives of the 
government that I support in principle  of the regional 
economic development authorities  was there, and I looked 
on the fact that quite often what always happened in rural 
Saskatchewan is one community was pitted against the other in 
bidding for the services and favours that were available. I 
realized that it was important that what we did not do is end up 
with a situation where the people in Star City were forced to 
choose between the status quo or moving between Melfort or 
Tisdale and that old competition and rivalry would continue to 
take the order of the day. 
 
And so in consultation with people from the economic 
development authorities in Tisdale and Melfort in my 
constituency and looking in the bigger picture, it seemed to me 
to be a very reasonable proposal to say, let’s look at regional 
economic development authorities as a natural, evolving district 
that the communities in rural Saskatchewan are trying to 
embrace in terms of working together. 
 
And when you think of what should happen within a regional 
economic development authority, a number of things came to 
mind. Firstly it made sense that these groups would work 
together as one community, a broader community if you like, 
that would do things that they were not able to do individually; 
that they would build a broader community sense beyond what 
their individual, little, parochial communities were that were 
always competing with one another, and that we could move 
beyond that situation to look at the broader issues. And so it 
seemed to me that there was some real benefit in that sort of 
activity to happen, and I support the government’s efforts in 
terms of these regional authorities. 

But more importantly, within that regional authority, over and 
above attracting the big things that happen in terms of tourism 
or culture or things of that nature on a broader sense, it also is 
important that we build a sense of regional community. Far too 
often one of the problems of rural Saskatchewan has been our 
parochial nature, where we sit and look at our own little 
community and we would rather cut off our arm than let the 
neighbouring community have any recognition for achievement 
at all. 
 
And I think what’s happening into the ‘90s is that we are 
starting to look beyond these parochial kind of interests and 
moving it beyond to a regional interest. And so it seemed 
important that what we are able to do is build this community 
that was beyond our local, individual towns. And so it seemed 
to me that one of the foremost things that you have to do if 
you’re going to build a broader community is to be able to 
communicate with each other. 
 
And so it seemed to me to be very important that people in 
Melfort should be able to communicate with people in Tisdale, 
should be able to communicate with people in Nipawin, and all 
the rural and smaller communities in that whole area, and that 
this was a real vehicle to really allow regional economic 
development to happen in a practical, community sense. 
 
And so in proposing a private member’s Bill last week, that was 
the thrust of what we’re trying to do, is to say we need to be 
able communicate within the region in order to really build a 
sense of regional community. And I understand that this creates 
some difficulties, but it also creates a whole new way of 
looking at rural Saskatchewan in a very proactive way. I think 
that when we talked about some of the small-business things 
this afternoon, we talked about the small communities, the 
individual people who were the heart and soul of our 
communities. 
 
And that community base has changed over the years. I recall 
when I was growing up that there used to be the rural school 
communities and many people that are even a tad older than I 
am remember going to rural schools. I remember starting school 
in a two-room school. And that was a bit of a sense of 
community. 
 
And it was with interest that I think that I had a conversation 
last evening where an individual said to me that when you look 
back in our fathers’ days, we could look around a rural area and 
say, here was a family on this quarter section that had five 
children; here two miles away was another homestead with five 
or eight children. And bus routes in a very small, local, 
agricultural area had 15 or 20 or 30 families, and they all had 
reasonably large children bases. 
 
And so what happened, you had these rural communities that 
were very much tied around a rural school setting. And that has 
diminished over the years, and so then we ended up with a 
situation where we ended up that the community expanded once 
again, and the small towns and villages became the base of that 
community. And we saw that flourishing. 
 
And we also now see in the ’90s where farms are getting larger,  



1940  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

the number of children people have are getting smaller. It’s 
becoming increasingly important that the community base has 
to expand once again in order to establish community. 
 
And the telephone and communications media has to follow 
that. It used to be, and I can remember as a young child, where 
the phone was on the wall with a crank. And you had the one or 
two cranks or whatever . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, we 
are; yes, we are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, we are . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . no. And it was on the wall. 
 
And there used to be the community information would come 
over the phone. There used to be the general ring and all of a 
sudden there were specials from the grocery store, there were 
specials from the hardware store. The telephone media was very 
much a part of what brought us together as a community 
because communications were very much part of it. 
 
And then we moved forward, where we had the dialling system 
and SaskTel moved in and was able to take over, and not an 
unfriendly sense, but to absorb the local telephone networks, 
the local telephone exchanges. And that all sort of changed the 
way things happened, and yet we’ve been left with a lot of the 
local sort of things. 
 
We’ve ended up, because Melfort was an exchange, it stayed an 
exchange. The rural community exchanges, because they were 
exchanges, stayed as exchanges, and the community atmosphere 
has now moved forward and changed as well. 
 
But what’s not happened is we haven’t kept up with the reality 
of how we bill people and how we allow the interchange of 
ideas and communications to happen to keep up with the 
changing realities of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that it is a fundamental 
thing that we need to do, is to allow our ability to communicate 
with one other to catch up to the changing face of 
Saskatchewan; to accept the realities of a changing population, 
changing demographics, and changing trade patterns, and to 
embrace the idea of a regional economic development authority 
and move the communications into that reality. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we propose that what should happen is 
that communications within a regional development area be toll 
free. And that allows us to engage in this communication 
process of being able to talk to one another as an expanded 
community within that district without financial impediment. 
 
And I know that that has some relevance in terms of SaskTel 
revenues; I understand that. I understand that what has 
happened and evolved is that we have now . . . have an income 
source that comes out of these long-distance calls on a local 
level and we will have to find ways of addressing those revenue 
issues. 
 
We can either address them by changing the rates at which we 
charge for long-distance calls that go beyond the region; we can 
address those issues by saying that there should perhaps be 
adjustments to the base rates that people pay so that this is 
allowed to happen, and perhaps we have to take the courage to  

say, as a matter of government policy, that we can’t continue to 
just take money from rural Saskatchewan by way of VLT (video 
lottery terminal) revenues or whatever, that maybe something 
has to be put back in order to allow these communities to be 
able to communicate and establish that regional base that is 
really needed. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what was intended to happen in this is to 
allow the realities of communication to catch up to our 
demographic realities right now. 
 
In my constituency, for example, there are now nine exchanges 
for long-distance. And that’s just unacceptable, that people 
should have to all phone long-distance within those nine 
exchanges. There’s something like 35,000 people in a rural 
constituency right now, and for us to have nine long-distance 
exchanges is unacceptable. 
 
In Saskatoon or Regina, there’s approaching 200,000 people, 
and none of these people have to call each other long-distance 
in order to build a community of an urban centre. And so I think 
that it’s time for us, as a community of Saskatchewan, to 
address this reality. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I strongly support the idea that what we 
have to do is to allow these things to happen, to move forward 
with the issue of building a communications network that will 
address the reality of our community on a broader issue. And I 
strongly urge all members to support this motion that is 
proposed this evening. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — We don’t have a motion before us, unless the 
hon. member would move his motion. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly encourage the government to fully 
implement a regional telephone exchange system 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Seconded by the member from Saltcoats. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order, order. Order! Now all 
hon. members will come to order and allow the motion to be 
read and the debate to proceed. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member from 
Melfort, and it’s a concern of the rest of the caucus too over 
here, and I’m sure it is for the members opposite in the third 
party. 
 
The RM (rural municipality) that I was reeve of, just for one 
example, had five exchanges within our councillors and reeve, 
and our administrator was also on long-distance. So you make 
that six exchanges just to deal with an RM meeting or whatever 
came up. 
 
These kinds of things are happening all over the province, Mr.  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

Speaker. Now you go to SaskTel and they provide us with a 
40/40 plan or the real savings plan which is 15 per cent off 
long-distance phone bills over $1,500; 20 per cent discount on 
the three most often called numbers; or you can be re-homed 
and localized to the neighbouring telephone exchange if you 
happen to live on the border. But the problem with that, as 
SaskTel has told us, that probably would cost you 
approximately $1,500. 
 
All of these plans, Mr. Speaker, cost SaskTel many, many 
dollars. So I think what we’re saying is do away with the 40/40. 
Do away with the real savings. Do away with all the gimmicks 
that they’ve came out with. Put it toward bigger regional 
exchanges and we’d all be much happier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to touch on business in small town 
Saskatchewan, out in rural Saskatchewan. Businesses above all 
would come out ahead on this deal. It would put businesses 
back on a level playing-field with their city counterparts. People 
in Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, probably have the 
benefit of 100,000 phone numbers in their phone book. You 
come out to rural Saskatchewan and many of us are lucky if we 
have a 150 numbers. Anything above that and we’re paying 
long-distance. 
 
The problem, we have been told, is that there’s a technical 
problem for SaskTel to switch over and it’s costly. Well I don’t 
agree with that, Mr. Speaker. For one example, I believe that we 
could keep our same numbers as we have now, and through the 
billing we could all be charged as it was a local call and there is 
no technical side. We’re all billed every month. If the 
long-distance charges are to these communities that we’re 
amalgamated with  and that seems to be a famous word for 
the government opposite, so in this case I seem to go along with 
it  I think this problem could also be solved. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we are told that municipal government 
must accept change. Health, education, and many other areas 
should accept change to prepare for the year 2001. But out in 
rural Saskatchewan our phone exchanges are exactly the same 
as they were when the telephone came in. So what we’re saying 
is yes, we have to prepare for change. Here’s a great example to 
start with. Let’s not stay back in the horse and buggy age. Let’s 
climb out of it and let’s make bigger regional telephone 
exchanges. 
 
SaskTel management has also agreed with us that SaskTel’s 
costs for rural phones are very high, and they’re actually in the 
process of working on more savings programs. So let’s solve 
the problem, Mr. Speaker, by just taking away all these ad hoc 
programs and once again make our regional telephone 
exchanges bigger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our schools are farther apart and they’re becoming 
farther apart every day. Next year we’ll see it much farther 
apart, from what we fear. There are fewer hospitals. 
Everywhere we turn to do business is long-distance so, Mr. 
Speaker, for SaskTel to say they are subsidizing rural 
telephones is also a myth. At one time they were. They 
subsidized us heavy to give rural Saskatchewan an even chance 
with the cities, but that day has come and gone. 

We’ve noticed with the Internet there’s a two-tier system; our 
telephones are a two-tier system. And I think really, Mr. 
Speaker, is all we’re asking is to be treated equal, and to be 
treated equal we need a lot more numbers in our repertoire of 
our phone book, the same as everyone else. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting thing for me to 
listen to the speaker who moved the motion, and I will get to 
the Leader of the Third Party’s remarks later. But one of the 
things that . . . I took a few notes while I was listening to the 
member talk, and what struck me the most was that he said that 
we should get on with the reality of communications and meet 
the demographics of the community, etc., as far as 
communications is concerned. 
 
But this same member, I can remember, in this particular 
House, using the same logic, wouldn’t say that should take 
place for health care, where we should get on with the 
demographics of the community. 
 
And let me just take a look here; I think I’ve got some of them 
down  change some of the community patterns with the 
community and live with some of the changes that have 
occurred in the community, as people used to be able to ride a 
horse basically, to all their neighbours. Then they went with a 
car, etc., etc. 
 
It’s very strange, Mr. Speaker, that in the case of telephones, 
that this seems to strike the individual as a possibility, but not in 
health care. It’s very strange. 
 
What the member basically is putting forward is that as long as 
it’s technology and as long as it is moving in favour of the 
individual with the benefits coming from some place else and 
more cross-subsidization, then it’s okay. But when it is 
implementing new technology, new medical services, and you 
are expanding to where the services can be provided at a very 
economic manner, it’s not okay. Very strange dichotomy that 
the member opposite has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member has also indicated that there may be a 
need to generate revenue in order to do this. And he went 
through a number of different things. Number one, he said that 
the rates could be increased for long-distance calls elsewhere 
throughout the province. 
 
That’s a very interesting thing to do if you were not in the 
situation where deregulation is occurring across the North 
American continent and that particular method of 
cross-subsidization, which served SaskTel very well and the 
community of . . . and the whole province of Saskatchewan very 
effectively over a period of years, is no longer available. 
 
And maybe he should speak to his cousins in Ottawa and ask 
them why they’ve destroyed what he really wants to use in 
order to provide telephone services to his rural community. In 
other words, he is saying that his cousins in Ottawa did the 
wrong thing and have created him a problem, and now he’s  



1942  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

looking for somewhere else. 
 
He said that you could increase the monthly rates, Mr. Speaker. 
Increasing the monthly rates is an interesting experience. But if 
you look at things, what that generally does, Mr. Speaker, in 
increasing the monthly rates, is what you end up doing is you 
make it more and more difficult for those people on the lower 
economic end of the scale to have telephones. 
 
And in the province of Saskatchewan, I can say quite proudly, 
that we are a province that 98 per cent of the households in the 
province of Saskatchewan do have telephone service. They may 
not be in a position where they can use the telephone service on 
a basis without care, because there is cost for long-distance, but 
they do have the availability of telephone service, Mr. Speaker, 
and as indicated, reasonably priced and for them to be able to 
have it there. So we go through two of the suggestions. 
 
Third one, I believe, if I got my notes correctly here, Mr. 
Speaker, was that he said that he could pay for some of the cost 
by taxation from somewhere else; raise the taxes locally. Mr. 
Speaker, if I understand correctly the municipalities  all of 
the municipalities in this province  have said that you 
shouldn’t add any new taxes to the local tax base. They didn’t 
want the health district boards to have that. And here we have a 
member standing in the Assembly here suggesting that that’s 
what should be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that a very strange situation to occur where 
the member is saying one thing at one time and agreeing with 
one group of people at one time; when he finds it to his 
advantage he skips the fence and stands on the other side and 
says that he wants to do . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the telephone in the province of 
Saskatchewan have covered . . . have been very, very great; 
have done a large number of things over a period of years that I 
think I should put on the record as they’ve improved their 
service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1979 SaskTel installed the first digital 
switching network. In 1984 they had the longest fibre optic 
system in the world  3,268 kilometres. In 1986 SaskTel 
International incorporated as a wholly owned subsidiary of 
SaskTel to market telecommunications expertise internationally, 
and from one of the things that they did is that they worked in 
the Chunnel under that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1987 digital switching modernization program 
was announced that resulted in Saskatchewan having an 
all-digital network in place by January 1996. 
 
But it’s even more interesting, Mr. Speaker, to look back and 
understand that SaskTel in 1919 had the first . . . the telephone 
exchange in the community of Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan, 
became the first exchange in North America to operate as an 
unattended office. The exchange is the first in Canada to 
provide dial service to rural customers  in 1919. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1947 Saskatchewan Government Telephones 
was incorporated, taking over the operation of the provincial  

telephone network. Mr. Speaker, the name was changed in 1969 
to Saskatchewan Telecommunications, and again in 1984 when 
the official name became SaskTel. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite in . . . the 
seconder, I should say, of the motion opposite should have 
taken the time to read a little bit in the annual report of SaskTel 
1995 before he stood up and spoke. He wouldn’t then have 
made so many mistakes. Because if you check on page 10, it 
indicates just what SaskTel has been doing in the area of 
cross-subsidization. It says in the second paragraph on that 
page: 
 

On average, the basic monthly service rate each subscriber 
pays falls $18 short of paying the cost of providing access 
to the network. 

 
On an average basis. That’s including rural and urban 
telephones. 
 

As a Crown corporation, we have a mandate to provide 
universal and affordable service. Therefore, to subsidize 
the high cost of providing local service, we have always 
used our revenues from long distance. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is the . . . the member who seconded it 
indicated that he didn’t believe that there was any 
cross-subsidization, and especially that there wasn’t 
cross-subsidization to the rural side of the telephone network. If 
he’d have taken some time to even have read the report, he 
would at least been able to say, I disagree with the report. He 
wasn’t able to do that. He just came out of the thin air and said 
that it wasn’t so. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the member 
opposite should do a little bit of homework before he does any 
remarks. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite finds that the rural 
community . . . the member opposite seems to be indicating that 
the rural people who are using the telephone network are 
wanting to make a massive change. I would not recommend that 
you accept that. Because if you look at telephone companies 
throughout the rest of the world, one of the things that possibly 
would be occurring is that you start paying for your telephone 
use on a minute basis as you use it. And that’s one way of 
covering the cost. And I take the effort and the time to tell the 
member that sometimes a change is not always for the better. 
And in this particular case, it wouldn’t be for the better. 
 
I know that the member suggests that that’s the case for health 
care, but I’d like to point out something to him. One of the 
problems in health care has been the political expenditures that 
have been made in it by all three political parties. And you are 
indicating in this House that a number of times that you’d like 
to make a large number of those expenditures. 
 
Well if you take a look in the long . . . 
 
(1945) 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. I want to again remind the hon. 
member that when engaging in debate, to direct his remarks  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

through the Chair, and not directly to members of the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, I believe that through you I 
would like to point out to the seconder that if he were to take a 
look at some of the expenditures that have been in a political 
sense, he would probably find out that you’d find some 
long-term care facilities are operating at twice the cost of some 
other long-term care facilities because of political decisions that 
were made in the past. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, some of the 345 local telephone exchanges 
in Saskatchewan have a fair size and some of them have a very 
small size, and some of these exchanges have just recently 
become part of the telephone network. 
 
The subsidy portion, which I’d indicated previously of about 
$18 per month, varies in total amounts to about a hundred 
million dollars a year. So there is a fairly large transfer of funds 
from the long-distance charges to the actual monthly rates that 
receive . . . in the subsidy for the average monthly rate of a 
telephone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the telephone company itself indicates that there is 
changes coming. And it says in the same page: 
 

Inevitably, there will be changes in the way we deliver and 
pay for some services. Universality remains a goal for 
SaskTel; however, everything we do is increasingly subject 
to economic realities and technical limitations. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I indicate again to the members opposite that 
one of the things that they should be prepared to do is at least 
have read some of the material provided to them on the 
different Crown corporations before they bring a motion into 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be agreeing . . . I will not be supporting 
the motion that the members opposite have put forward, but 
will be voting against it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few points on 
the motion put forward by my hon. colleague in reference to the 
regional telephone exchange system throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The fact of the matter is, ladies and gentlemen, we have a news 
flash for the government  in fact long distance telephone 
competition is coming. It’s at our borders. In 1997 it’s going to 
be a reality in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I think if anything, Mr. Speaker, the 
intelligence of the member from Melfort -Tisdale is something 
that we need to really build on when we talk about such a 
motion. And the equal intelligence of my gentleman friend from 
Saltcoats, in supporting the effort, has to simply say that it’s 
time for us to examine the whole issue of what we’re dealing  

with here. 
 
We are talking about the Saskatchewan government shoring up 
the current customer base that they now enjoy in light of the 
fact that long-distance telephone competition is coming. It’s a 
fact of life. We know it’s going to be coming so we have to 
make every effort to ensure that the current customer base that 
we have that makes SaskTel viable has to be retained. And how 
best, Mr. Speaker, to do that  when you have an effort of this 
nature  to encourage a regional telephone exchange to make 
sure that the customers benefit. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the effort we’re trying to 
do here, we’re trying to entrench the viability of SaskTel for the 
sake of its employees. If we have a telephone company coming 
in and offering regional telephone service to a certain specific 
area, offering cut rates on long-distance and offering better 
service, then SaskTel becomes a big white elephant and then the 
values go down, the employees go down, and the province can 
consistently go on to lose their effort in support of SaskTel. So 
we have to look at the viability of the employees as well in 
terms of their continuing employment in Saskatchewan within 
this Crown corporation. 
 
We also have to show, Mr. Speaker, the value of the 
Saskatchewan people owning some of these utilities. We have 
to show the overburdened people that there are some breaks, 
somehow and somewhere, that this government will offer to 
people in terms of giving them service. Let us show the people 
of Saskatchewan that they do own SaskTel and that they can 
and will reap the benefits of owning the SaskTels, the 
SaskPower, the SaskEnergys, of this Saskatchewan government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this 911 system  I’m sorry, the regional 
telephone exchange system  we’re talking about is exactly 
doing that. They’re giving a regional effort to ensuring that we 
have the best delivery system for the people of the province, 
thereby the users of the SaskTel system. 
 
I think the most important issue that we want to raise, Mr. 
Speaker, is not necessarily talking about the sale or the 
privatization of these Crowns, but really having people see the 
benefits of owning these Crowns. And this motion and this 
thought that the hon. members that I spoke about earlier put 
forth is exactly doing that. If the people of Saskatchewan do not 
see the benefits of owning these Crown corporations through 
motions and efforts of this nature, then they can’t see the value 
of their existence. 
 
If these Crowns are not used to serve their owners, then where 
are the values of owning these Crowns? If these Crowns are not 
contributing to the debt reduction, or tax reduction, or even cost 
reduction, then where are the values of the SaskTels and the 
SaskPowers? If all these Crowns do is create profits to satisfy 
huge corporations and the huge salaries of some of these 
corporations and no support for the small guy or the regional 
small communities or the small-business person, then where is 
their value, Mr. Speaker? These Crowns were intended to serve 
all people in the best manner possible. We see that SaskPower 
earns huge profits; we see that SaskTel earns huge profits,  



1944  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

SaskEnergy earns huge profits  and the list goes on and on 
and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about the 911 system. We talk about how 
we need to instil that system to serve and protect the people as 
best we can in light of the health care cuts. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that 911 system is not being covered by 
SaskTel. It’s being covered by income from the VLTs, another 
area that we need to examine in terms of where the money is 
going. 
 
At the very least, Mr. Speaker, this motion speaks about the 
value of owning these Crown corporations. They’re serving the 
small people; they’re serving the urban and rural people in a 
very similar fashion; they’re supporting small business, and it 
also helps larger business and larger opportunities come to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in reference to the motion  the private 
member’s motion put forth by the hon. member from 
Melfort-Tisdale  I certainly speak in support of it, that a 
regional telephone exchange system be developed throughout 
the province of Saskatchewan so the people of Saskatchewan 
can finally see the value and benefit of owning these Crown 
corporations instead of having the government use them to 
derive huge profits on the backs of the very people they’re 
supposed to serve. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the 
motion from my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale and so 
eloquently addressed by my colleague from Athabasca and 
Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My comments will be brief because I find myself virtually 
speechless in listening to the member from 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, who is a rural MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), who no doubt has constituents who live 
in a variety of telephone exchanges who are required to pay 
long-distance charges virtually within anywhere from 8 to 28 
miles and perhaps even closer. 
 
I had one person tell me that the long-distance rates in short 
distance were so bad in some areas of rural Saskatchewan that 
when he went out to feed the cattle in his barn and wanted to 
phone home it was long-distance. I think he was stretching it, 
Mr. Speaker, but that’s what’s happening. 
 
In my own constituency of Melville, within anywhere from 8 to 
30 miles . . . we have in a radius of approximately 50 to 60 
miles, 17 telephone exchanges. People that live within 9 miles, 
communities within 9 miles, of one another have to phone one 
another long-distance. 
 
In this day and age, with the closing down of health care 
facilities, with the closing down of schools, with the shutting 
down of businesses, people not being able to remain viable  

because of cut-backs by the NDP government, it’s necessary 
now for people in these small communities to communicate 
with the larger centres  with Melville, with Ituna, with 
communities that are still holding on to the things that they 
need, the services that they can hold on to without having them 
disrupted, and have that service available to them. 
 
But when they have to continuously phone and pay those 
additional long-distance charges, a regionalized system such as 
suggested in the motion by my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale 
would only make sense. It’s a savings to those very taxpayers 
who are being so badly treated. The reference that I believe I 
made in the House once before, it’s getting to the point where 
even our health care system, where you go into the lobby of a 
wellness centre after 5 o’clock and hope you have a quarter so 
you can make a phone call and let somebody know that you’re 
out there and you need some medical assistance. And hopefully 
an operator won’t cut in and say, please add more coins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are the points I briefly wanted to make 
because, again, I could not believe that any rural member would 
. . . MLA would speak against something that would benefit all 
the people living in rural Saskatchewan that still rely on those 
services that are not immediately available, but they have to 
phone for. They have to phone their schools, they have to phone 
whenever there are emergency repairs needed, whenever there 
are emergency services needed for veterinarians, health care 
workers. And it goes . . . the list goes on and on, and the phone 
bills continue to pile up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again as I mentioned at the outset, I’m just 
amazed that rural members of both sides would not support the 
concept of regionalized telephone systems. And as my 
colleague from Athabasca indicated, there is competition 
coming to SaskTel in this province, and by golly, I will be 
willing to bet that people moving into this province to offer 
competition will offer and afford the kind of services that our 
people in small communities very desperately need and deserve 
because they’ve been paying for all these services virtually all 
their lives. They’re the people that built this province. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that members will be 
cognizant, even those who do not speak against the closure of 
rural hospitals and health care centres, I hope they will be 
cognizant of this very vital motion to ensure that the burden is 
reduced on the people in rural Saskatchewan that are taking all 
the hits. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a 
couple of comments on this particular issue because in my 
constituency this is an issue that’s very uppermost in many of 
the minds of the people, especially in some of the areas where 
the districts were created decades ago. Those districts now, 
because of what’s happened in rural society where they have 
schools in one community, their church is in another one, their 
sports activities in a third one, their place where they fix their 
vehicles in a fourth one, sure, and for those kinds of reasons,  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

these people have to make long-distance phone calls for almost 
everything except a holler to who’s in the bathroom. And I 
think there need to be some changes made. 
 
Then when they look at what happens in other parts of 
Saskatchewan . . . and I’m thinking of the Saskatoon district 
where they have close to a quarter of a million people. That’s 
one of every four people in the province can call the rest of 
those quarter-million people in the province for absolutely not a 
single cent. They can call 70 to 80 kilometres away without 
paying anything. When you look at those kinds of 
discrepancies, that’s not fair. There’s absolutely no fairness in 
that sort of a situation whatsoever. 
 
I understand the rationale for cross-subsidization and some of 
those terms. But possibly these people that can go ahead and 
now call a quarter of million people and not have to pay a dime 
. . . And others again can’t call their kids in school. They can’t 
call the person from home that’s working some place. They 
can’t call to find if their car’s fixed without paying 
long-distance phone calls. There is an inequity there, and that 
needs to be addressed. And I think this particular motion that 
was made there does start to address those kinds of problems, 
and I think we need to look at that very seriously. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to speak briefly also on regional telephone systems. I want 
to just inform the members of the Assembly of some scenarios 
within my constituency, particularly. I’m on the Bruno phone 
exchange, and we have a town half a mile from where I live that 
I have to phone long-distance to. It’s probably about a 
three-minute walk, but none the less it’s half a mile. And for 
years and years now we have had to pay long-distance on that. 
 
Now those farmers in that area are all connected, most of them 
connected, to the Bruno exchange. But there’s also the town 
half a mile from me is connected to another exchange. And so 
the fact is that most of those farmers need to access services 
from Humboldt, from St. Brieux, from Bruno, from Cudworth, 
and so on. 
 
Now if I lived right in the town of Bruno, it would be 
long-distance for me to call to all of those places. Now those 
places are within, some of them, 10 miles away, 12 miles away. 
It seems, as the member just mentioned before, that it seems 
terribly unfair to us that we should have to deal with these 
long-distance charges over and over and over again when I can 
talk to my mother in Saskatoon, and she can phone for miles 
around and not have to pay long-distance. 
 
I think most of the people within the rural areas would be happy 
to maybe have a little bit more of a rental charge  not too 
much more, but a bit more  and be able to drop these 
long-distance charges that inevitably . . . especially nowadays 
when everything is so business oriented. You are on the phone 
very often trying to access services. So I thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I want 
to just make a couple of comments on this because of what I see 
is the opposition once again asking for a free lunch. Every place 
they go they’re asking for a free lunch. 
 
What they are trying to do here, Mr. Speaker, is trying to say 
that somehow as you can change the boundaries and everybody 
can have free time on the telephone for an extended period of 
time. Well it just doesn’t work that way, Mr. Speaker. If you 
change the boundaries right now, it would be like moving some 
people from there over to there. And then you know what? The 
people sitting next to him would have to phone long-distance 
just to a different position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not as simple as changing boundaries because 
the boundary line has to fall somewhere. And so there would be 
new people that would have long-distance calls. That’s point 
number one. That’s point number one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The alternative to that, to changing boundaries, is to remove the 
boundaries, in which case you go to a time system. So then 
what you do is you end up paying on the basis of time and 
distance. Are you prepared to go home and say to your people: 
we want a system that’ll pay for time and distance. You have to 
do that, because I tell you folks, there is no free . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Now the Speaker 
is having a great deal of difficulty being able to hear the hon. 
member from Prince Albert Carlton. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. I will ask all members to come to order. 
 
I will also want to remind the hon. member from Prince Albert 
Carlton to direct his comments through the Speaker and not 
directly to members in the Assembly. And I’ll ask all members 
to come to order and allow the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton to make his remarks. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
final point that I would like to make is the point with respect to 
opening up SaskTel and telephones to competition. One thing 
we have to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, is right now there’s a 
cross-subsidy from the urban areas to the rural areas to the tune 
of approximately up to . . . could be up to as much 100 million 
a year. 
 
And the minute it goes to full competition, what is going to 
happen is rural Saskatchewan would suffer, and I don’t know if 
that’s what the members there want. If they want to see 
competition coming in and they want to see people from outside 
coming in and picking off the profit areas, the result of that is 
going to be that rural Saskatchewan telephone users will have to 
pay more  2, 3, or 4 times more. And they ought to be very 
cautious about what kind of motions they make. 
 
On the surface it sounds very good, Mr. Speaker, when you go 
to your neighbour and tell him, yes it would be nice to move the 
boundary over 3 or 4 miles. But then go down to the next 
neighbour that’s 3 or 4 miles down and tell him that story. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Or her. 
 



1946  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you. Thank you very much . . . or tell 
her, Mr. Speaker, that story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do believe we have some other business to 
conduct. I now move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To ask for leave to go to government 
orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

The Chair:  Order. Before we start consideration of the Bill, 
I invite the minister to reintroduce her officials who were 
introduced yesterday. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my right is 
Craig Dotson, deputy minister for the Department of Education. 
And to my left is Michael Littlewood, director of third-party 
funding and legislative services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And thank you 
to the two gentlemen in showing such patience in waiting to get 
to Bill No. 5. I would like one more question answered, Madam 
Minister, that I inadvertently overlooked last time. 
 
Your definition of temporary teacher has a slight change to it. 
And I would wonder why under the old Act the definition for 
temporary teacher, clause (qq)(ii), stated: to replace a teacher 
who for any reason in unavoidably absent. I note that in your 
new definition you’ve removed the word unavoidably. And I’m 
wondering what was the reason behind this. What is the 
intention? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  One of the difficulties, Mr. Chair, with 
the old article was that we had a difficult time understanding or 
interpreting what was avoidable and what was unavoidable. So 
we just wanted to get rid of that language in this particular 
section of the Act. And I guess the other thing is, is that if you 
look at the difference between the old section and the new 
section, we’ve gotten rid of the gender reference in the article. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Yes, I noted 
that that was part of the change. 
 
Were there interpretations made by directors of education, 
principles that caused some concern to the department and to 
you as minister? Or is it just a decision that you’re not looking 
at now, having to interpret to what is avoidable and what is 
unavoidable? Like, is a snowstorm an absence? 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It was just in general trying to clean up 
this particular clause in the legislation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, as I indicated to you the last day, and the previous 
time that we were in discussion on Bill No. 5, I’ve raised a 
number of issues with you around the decision that you would 
recognize a continuous contract after one year instead of some 
other length of time. And I’d like to share with you a couple of 
the things, or maybe probably summarize some of the things . . . 
that I am going to propose an amendment to clause 9 when we 
get there. 
 
I think what you have stated, and what I concur with, is that the 
judicial decision in the Wiebe decision has shown that indeed 
there are a number of contracts that are out there for an entire 
school year. And they have gone on for years and years and 
years, and that has to be corrected. And I think what I’m going 
to suggest is that yes, I agree with that and that it should be 
changed from continuous contracts from four or five or seven 
years, and we should look at that. 
 
I’d also encourage you to look at the amendment from the point 
of view that I think a two-year situation will better protect the 
new teachers that enter the field for the very first time, that 
indeed they’ll be given a bigger chance of evaluation by not 
having that pressure of having to actually cut it in the first year 
or not making the grade in the first year. 
 
(2015) 
 
The third point I’d like to look at is, I think if we extend beyond 
the one-year period of time we are not placing as much of a 
burden on boards of education regarding over-staffing. And I 
know you have indicated that a two-year commitment for 
redundancy pay  which will occur in many of the rural school 
divisions because there are, you know, with declining 
enrolments there’s always an abundance of teachers  that 
that’s not a lot of money. But when a board is hard-pressed for 
money, even that small amount does play a role. 
 
The fourth point that I’d like to raise is that we’re not only 
talking about consecutive years. We’re not only talking here 
about a situation where someone is replacing a teacher that has 
been granted a second and a third year of leave. 
 
I recognize that your Bill is trying to address the situation where 
someone continues to be a replacement teacher for a particular 
teacher in year one and then another teacher in year two. If they 
have missed a year, then they should also get recognition when 
they get re-hired for a subsequent time. 
 
And my suggestion here is that we take a compromise, that we 
don’t look at it after only one year. If you’re hired for the 
second year, that indeed we look at it at the end of two years. 
And that way I think we’ve got a better situation in school 
divisions, I think we have a better situation for teachers, and I 
believe the whole system will work better. 
 
The final point, I think, is that I know that you have had 
discussions with the stakeholders. I know that the LEADS  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

(League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents) group has been involved in some discussions. 
I know that the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association has 
been involved in some discussion. And I know that the largest 
group of people that are involved here and are very concerned 
are the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. And I know that 
there’s been discussions there about what might be a 
compromise, and you’ve indicated that you had to take a 
leadership role because things didn’t quite work out as you had 
hoped at the stakeholders’ level where there would have been a 
complete process put in place. 
 
And I would ask that you seriously look at the amendment that I 
will propose, that will, I think, address not only trustees’ 
concerns, not only superintendents’ and directors’ concerns, but 
also I think will address the real concern that I have for 
beginning teachers. And as I’ve indicated, when we get to the 
appropriate clause, I will propose the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Just in response to the member. I think 
it’s fair to say that I recognize that school divisions, particularly 
in rural Saskatchewan, are facing declining enrolments and I 
recognize that 10 days redundancy pay at a time of tight 
resources, at a time of tax fatigue, at a time of just tremendous 
pressures, may not seem like a lot in the big scheme of things 
but for individual school divisions, it is a lot. I understand that. 
 
The point that I would make is that I do not believe that there 
are many cases throughout the year where a school division is 
in a position where they have a teacher that’s away for a second 
year, a second leave of absence, or a second year leave of 
absence; that this would occur in very few cases. I guess I 
would be of the view that at the end of a first year, if a teacher 
is not working out, the board can release that teacher. They 
don’t have to offer them a second-year replacement contract. 
They can make that decision at that time. 
 
And the other point I would make in terms of your argument, 
and it’s a point that I’ve made earlier in our debate surrounding 
these amendments, is that in a case where a teacher is given a 
second-year contract, the board at the end of the second year 
can let them go if they’re not cutting the mustard. If they have 
nothing else to offer them, and they’re not entitled to a board of 
reference, they are entitled to redundancy pay. 
 
My final point would be this. That if a school division was in a 
position where they had a teaching assistant, that teaching 
assistant had been in place for two or three or four years, under 
the Labour Standards Act, that teaching assistant would be 
entitled to a week’s pay for every year of service if they had to 
be laid off. And so in a sense we are treating teachers 
differently than we are treating other employees of a school 
division. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would like to  

move the amendment to clause no. 9. I would like to: 
 

Amend clause 9 of the Printed Bill by deleting subsection 
198(9) as being enacted therein and substituting the 
following: 

 
“(9) Where a board of education or a conseil scolaire, as 
the case may be, engages the service of a replacement 
teacher for a third complete academic year, that teacher is 
deemed to have been employed under an indefinite 
contract pursuant to subsection 200(1) from the first day of 
the teacher’s engagement as a replacement teacher”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, I had the 
order mixed up and I’d like to read the first clause 9 of the 
Printed Bill. Clause 9 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend clause 9 of the Printed Bill by adding immediately 
after the words “define the specific period of employment 
under the contract” where they occur in subsection 198(8) 
as being enacted therein, the following words: 
 
“, but if the temporary or replacement teacher has been 
employed by the board of education or conseil scolaire, 
other than on a substitute basis, for two complete and 
consecutive academic years immediately preceding the 
new engagement, 

 
The Chair:  Order. We’re going to have a brief pause while 
we get this sorted out. I ask for hon. members’ consideration 
while we get the amendments sorted out. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I’m sorry, Madam Minister. The initial 
amendment that I read is the correct one. That is the one that is 
now being proposed. The second amendment was proposed to 
the Clerk many weeks ago when we were here the very first 
time, I believe, and that was not the amendment that we were 
going to go through with. The one that I read, the one that has 
been distributed to you, dated May 27, is the correct one. And it 
is the first one and the only one that I read to you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would say to 
the member that we understand the point that the member 
raises. It appears as though the member has accepted the 
principle of replacement teacher. And now it’s just a question 
of the appropriate period of time. We hold the view that one 
year-plus is the appropriate period of time. You hold the view 
that two years-plus is the appropriate period of time. I have to 
advise the member that we are going to stick with our original 
position on this. But I certainly do want to say to the member 
that I understand his point. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



1948  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

(2030) 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I move that this Bill be read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair:  The department has appeared before the 
committee on April 15 and then again on May 22. I invite the 
minister to introduce her officials before we begin 
consideration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my right is 
Craig Dotson, deputy minister. Behind Mr. Dotson is Ken 
Horsman, assistant deputy minister. Behind me is Ms. Mae Boa, 
executive director of finance and operations. To my left is 
Michael Littlewood, director of third-party funding and 
legislative services; and at the back is John McLaughlin, 
executive director, Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. And 
we will be joined shortly by Gerry Sing Chin, manager of 
school grants, and Margaret Ball, assistant director of facilities 
planning. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome to 
the officials again this evening. I look forward to a productive 
evening. 
 
Madam Minister, if I could begin by asking you to clarify a 
couple of things that you indicated last day. You stated that you 
were considering, in the area of capital, that the department’s 
facilities branch was considering three major capital projects. 
Could you identify what those three projects are and where they 
are located in the province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The three projects include Winston 
Knoll, phase 2 Winston Knoll here in Regina; Pleasantdale 
School in Estevan, phase 2; and the Tisdale joint-use project in 
Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Last day I had also requested from your 
officials a complete listing of the new mill rates that had been 
set by school divisions across the province, the increases, and 
there was some other information from the previous time 
before. Is that available today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’re preparing everything and we 
will get that to you as soon as we can get it prepared. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Last day we had a discussion about the 

algebraic formula, A minus B equals C, and I wanted to spend a 
little more time on that, Madam Minister, as far as the B 
portion, as I’ve indicated. When we talk about the equalization 
factor and the fact that I think you agreed that the equalization 
factor had changed upwards by 2 mills, and that indeed was $14 
million more that you were expecting boards to contribute to 
the cost of education, I’m wondering if that is still your 
perception of that, and what kinds of ramifications have you 
seen boards indicate to you by telephone call, by letter, or 
whatever method they have used to communicate with you, as 
to how they were able to adjust to that $14 million cost factor 
that you have placed upon boards. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  To the member, Mr. Chair, it wouldn’t 
have mattered whether we increase the mill rate by . . . or the 
equalization factor by zero or 10 mills, we still are spending 
$355 million on public education, K to 12, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Had we done nothing, had we not changed the 
equalization factor, we still would have $355 million in 
operating grants to K to 12 schools in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What I will say is that had we done nothing, we would have had 
some inequities in the system, in that wealthier school divisions 
would have received more of the $355 million than poor school 
divisions. And as you know, there are school divisions in the 
province that have high assessment and a mill raises a lot more 
money than a school division in other parts of Saskatchewan 
that has low assessment where a mill raises very little. 
 
And I’ll just use the example of Weyburn, where a mill raises a 
lot of money, and perhaps the example of Sask Valley School 
Division or Meadow Lake, where a mill does not raise . . . very 
little money in relationship to some of the wealthier areas of the 
province. 
 
So as you know, our formula is based on the whole notion of 
equity, equality, and fairness in education so that we don’t go 
back to the old days where, if you lived in a wealthier part of 
the province, you could sustain a quality K to 12 education 
system, but if you were in a poor part of the province, in terms 
of your ability to pay, you were not on the same footing. And 
what our formula tries to do is put school divisions, regardless 
of where they’re located in the province, on a similar footing so 
that we can ensure the quality of education given to our 
students  K to 12 students  is somewhat similar. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. When I look at 
the formula though, Madam Minister, and the fact that the right 
side of the equation, the amount that the department has 
allocated to school boards, has virtually not changed  it’s 
$355 million  the analogy that I make, Madam Minister, is 
something like this. If my son would like to purchase a pair of 
designer blue jeans that are worth a lot of money, and I say no, 
no, no, you can’t have any, and then finally I agree to the fact 
that he could buy that more expensive pair of blue jeans than 
the pair I was willing to buy, and I tell him yes, go ahead and 
buy it, but I am not providing you any additional money  in 
fact you still have to take it out of the allowance that you’ve 
been receiving  that’s the same thing that has occurred to the  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

boards of education. You’ve indicated to them that the grant on 
the right side of the equation hasn’t changed significantly; it’s 
from 353 million to 355. However, there was a loss of $2 
million of the EDF (education development fund). 
 
At the left side of the equation, now you’ve indicated to boards, 
to try to maintain equality amongst all school divisions, you’ve 
increased the equalization factor. I understand that. But at the 
same time, you’ve increased the recognized costs by the 
equivalent amount. 
 
Now if you play with two sides of the equation without 
adjusting the right side, the school boards are still the losers 
because they haven’t received any additional monies. You’ve 
told them now that they must fund certain things  those 
things being core implementation, rural technological factors  
where you have recognized costs. But you haven’t increased the 
right side. You’ve given $2 million more of salary increases, 
you’ve rolled into the grant formula, you’ve rolled the line item 
that you had there in the previous years. All those things are 
now built into the left side, that A that I’ve been talking about. 
And therefore the boards of education are losing. 
 
I’m receiving letters from boards of education that are telling 
me, we’re short $180,000; our enrolment dropped by four. 
We’re short 220,000; our enrolment just went down by six. The 
loss of enrolment doesn’t match what you’ve said. What 
matches is the fact now that they’ve been asked to contribute 2 
additional mills. 
 
Some school divisions in my part of the province, east-central 
area, where the assessments are not that high, a mill of revenue 
to a board is 38,000, 40,000, 41,000. Two mills is the 
equivalent of about $80,000. So you’ve said to the boards, you 
shall pay an additional $80,000. That’s where they’re short, 
Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I just have to respond to the member. 
First of all, in terms of EDF, I know that the member is saying 
and has said all over the province  because I’ve had it 
repeated back to me  that we simply use this $2 million from 
EDF and put it into the grant. I will say this. Three years ago we 
notified school boards across the province that EDF would be 
wound up by the end of 1995, the 1995-96 fiscal year. They 
knew that. 
 
We did not know three years ago that we would be looking at 
paying for the teacher salary increase come the fiscal year 
1996-97. We did not know that. We didn’t know what teacher 
bargaining was going to lead to, so I would just say this to the 
member. Three years ago we notified school boards EDF was to 
be wound up at the end of the ‘95-96 fiscal year. Three years 
ago we did not know that we would be paying an additional $2 
million in operating grants to school divisions to cover off the 
negotiated wage increase. 
 
(2045) 
 
The other point that I’d like to make to the member is this, that 
if we had not changed the equalization factor, we would have 
had $355 million in operating grants that would have been  

distributed to school boards across the piece. We would have 
had school boards still in the position where they would have to 
be looking to increase their mill rate because of enrolment 
decline, because of changes in bussing, and so on and so forth. 
 
Now what I find interesting about some of the arguments that 
are being made by school divisions is that it’s true their grant 
has decreased. But it’s also true that we increased the amount of 
money per student going to individual school boards in terms of 
the operating grant based on enrolment. And when your 
enrolment drops, it has an impact upon your operating grant. 
 
I know that in the Kamsack School Division, they had an 
enrolment drop of five, but they had more high school students 
leave, and they had . . . and those high school students were 
replaced by kindergarten students. We pay more for high school 
students than we do for kindergarten students. That has an 
impact upon their grant. 
 
In addition, rural transportation  the numbers of kilometres 
travelled by the Kamsack School Division have declined. That 
has an impact upon their grant because we don’t pay for 
transportation for miles that aren’t travelled by individual 
school divisions. In the case of Kamsack, we recognize tuition 
fees; and I understand that Kamsack has tuition fee 
arrangements with first nations bands in the Kamsack area. 
 
Well if you’re getting more students coming to the school 
division than you’d anticipated and you have a larger tuition fee 
revenue generation, that is recognized in the formula by a 
reduction in the grant to the particular school division because 
you’re replacing that operating grant with tuition fee increases. 
 
So I would just say to the member that I think school divisions 
obviously in some parts of the province are dealing with 
operating grant decreases, but it’s not all due to any kind of 
equalization factor. It is due to other issues like decline in 
enrolment, and then of course we have the decline in enrolment 
sort of phased in over a three-year period; that impacts upon 
you. Numbers of kilometres travelled on school bus are 
decreasing as enrolment declines. They may be generating 
revenue with tuition fee arrangements with first nations bands, 
as well as assessment in certain parts of the province has gone 
up so they’re raising more money as a result of increased 
assessment. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, if we could take a look at 
some of the items that you have addressed in the left side of that 
equation, that item A. You have indicated that there are 
recognized costs that you have changed. One of your officials 
shared some of those numbers with me a number of weeks ago. 
 
Could I ask you to describe to us how the small schools factor 
has changed, and indeed how much money have you taken out 
of the rural budget for small schools. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Okay, I’m advised by my officials that 
we did not remove 1 cent from rural Saskatchewan by changing 
the small school factor and the sparsity factor; in fact we added 
$1.2 million. That shows this government’s commitment to 
rural Saskatchewan. 



1950  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

Mr. Krawetz:  I know, Madam Minister, I do know that 
you’ve moved those numbers into the rural technological factor, 
and that’s agreed. And my question to you, Madam Minister, is 
in the area of small schools factor. 
 
You have implemented a new formula this year. You’ve 
changed how the small schools factor is paid out to school 
divisions, and it has taken away money from school divisions 
that do have that small schools factor. It has reassigned it in the 
area of rural technology, but the question that is being 
addressed by many people is that now boards of education will 
not receive additional money for keeping that classroom. 
 
Could you explain also the standards at which your department 
recognizes a small school, the classrooms, and what the formula 
is that you’ve implemented in terms of the minimum amount of 
grant payable and the maximum amount payable. Where do 
those numbers kick in? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Okay, in order to improve 
opportunities for young people, youth in rural Saskatchewan, 
we introduced the rural technology factor. Now what I will tell 
the member is that for kindergarten children in rural 
Saskatchewan where the distances were from 10 to 30 
kilometres away, we increased the rate from $330 to $440. 
 
For elementary students with distances of 10 to 30 kilometres, 
we increased the rate from $525 to $800. For middle years 
students with a difference . . . the old difference was 10 to 30 
kilometres; the new distant kilometre is 15 to 40  we 
increased the rates from $560 to $800. This is per student. And 
in secondary, we went from 10 to 30 kilometres, 20 to 50 
kilometres, and we increased the rates from $600 to $800. As 
well, we removed the boundaries. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  When you talk about that kilometre factor of 
10 to 30, is there a minimum pay-out at 10 and a maximum at 
30? Is that how it works? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  You’re correct. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Another factor 
that I think has brought about the severe decline in grants 
payable to some of those rural school divisions that they’re 
trying to get their heads around is the sparsity factor. I 
understand that you have made some changes in how the 
sparsity factor was looked at by the department. Could you 
identify those changes, please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Okay, what we have done is we 
decreased the sparsity factor, but we redistributed all of the 
money into changes in the amount of money paid in the small 
school factor  and I gave you the rates earlier  and we put 
additional money into the rural technology factor. 
 
I just wanted to make the point that we have more money in 
rural Saskatchewan in the fiscal year 1996-97 than we did in the 
fiscal year ‘95-96. I’ll make the point again; this government 
supports rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, you’ve supported the  

implementation of rural technology in rural Saskatchewan, and 
we commend you for that. But in terms of sparsity and in terms 
of small schools, I have difficulty justifying that to school 
divisions and to parents who phone me to say, we have found 
out from our board of education that in fact the small schools 
factor has been changed, and we’re not getting as much money 
to keep our small school open. We find out now that the 
sparsity factor has changed. 
 
And boards are taking the heat, Madam Minister, if I can use 
that expression, by the fact that the cuts have occurred to those 
school divisions. This is still within your control, and I know 
what you’re saying in terms of trying to bring about rural 
technology, in terms of trying to make those changes, those are 
well and good, but the school divisions that are struggling out 
there with a declining enrolment, that are trying to find out 
ways of keeping those schools open, you’ve now taken some 
money that was normally allotted to that and said, we’ll shift it. 
We’ll shift it into rural technology. Boards are having difficulty 
with that, Madam Minister, and I’d ask your comment on that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I would say to the member is that 
there were way more school divisions that benefited from our 
changes than those that didn’t. And they were school divisions 
that truly have isolated cases, truly have small schools, and truly 
could benefit from the small school factor. 
 
Let me give you an example. Wadena benefited from our 
changes. The Shamrock School Division benefited from our 
changes. The Tisdale and Tiger Lily School Division benefited 
from our changes, as well as Potashville, and Scenic Valley, 
and Deer Park, and Moosomin, and Eastend, and Maple Creek, 
and Gull Lake, and Shaunavon, and Leader, and so on. 
 
I would just say to the member that what we tried to do was 
ensure that school divisions that were . . . that truly had small 
populations and were isolated, would benefit from the changes 
that we made. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I don’t know whether 
you’ve lumped everything together when you say that school 
divisions have benefited. I have summaries of many, many 
school divisions and I look at the Wadena School Division and 
I see a 3 mill increase to ratepayers, government operating grant 
cut by $291,000, 1.3 teachers cut, accumulated grant reductions 
over the last five years totalling $1.341 million. 
 
I see Shamrock School Division, 3 mill increase to ratepayers, 
3.5 teaching positions cut this fall. Administrative assistant and 
assistant secretary-treasurer positions will be reduced by one 
hour per day. These are school divisions, Madam Minister, who 
received hundreds of thousands of dollars less in grant, and yes, 
they have had some rural decline in enrolment, but not that 
significant. 
 
(2100) 
 
So they are school divisions that have a slightly larger 
assessment base, therefore 2 mills for them is a significant 
factor. When we take into account the other things that you 
have talked about, they still are looking at having to make very  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

serious cuts. 
 
I can tell you, Madam Minister, that the summary that I have 
here from many school divisions says that . . . the Kamsack 
School Division and I now have some letters from parents 
saying, what can we do with the band program  the Kamsack 
School Division, which is provincially recognized for its 
excellent band program, is cutting funding to that band program 
effective January 1997. 
 
The Scenic Valley School Division, which you’re very familiar 
with, is eliminating preparation time for teachers, and they’re 
making serious cuts. St. Henry’s Separate School Division are 
proposing a 2 mill increase. They had a student enrolment drop 
of two, Madam Minister  not very significant. The Nipawin 
School Division, a 4 mill increase. Government grants dropped 
from 1991 to 1995 by $811,000. These are cuts that I can go on 
and on with, Madam Minister. 
 
So what I’m asking you to do is to recognize the fact that there 
are many school divisions who are suffering under the kinds of 
things that you’ve asked them to do. Recognizing the fact that 
you have changed the formula, the A part, you have added $16 
million worth of recognized costs. Whether they are the $3 
million that you’re going to tell me is found in the area of rural 
technology, whether they’re the additional amounts that you’ve 
put into core curriculum implementation  I think you’ve 
indicated that there’s almost $2 million that you’ve put into 
core curriculum implementation  you have added about $16 
million worth of recognized costs on the A side of the formula. 
The B side, you have said to boards of education you will 
contribute an additional $14 million. That difference, as we 
talked about that last time, Madam Minister, is the difference of 
$2 million. 
 
You’re indicating that that’s new money. Yes, I agree with you. 
You have informed boards many years ago that the EDF was 
being wound down, and they knew that there was going to be 
zero monies available this year. So yes, you have indeed 
increased the grant from 353 to 355. But the formula is still 
there, Madam Minister. It’s 16 additional million of recognized 
costs. Tell the boards to pay an additional $14 million worth of 
their own taxes and you end up with a net result of $2 million. 
Is that not how it works? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  First of all, I just want to say to the 
member that when I was talking about those particular school 
divisions, I was talking about our changes to the small school 
factor, that our changes to the small school factor and sparsity 
and introducing rural technology benefited the Shamrock 
School Division, the Wadena School Division, and so on. 
 
Now if you want to go through why the Kamsack School 
Division lost money, we can go through that. And let’s do that, 
because I know that you will be giving these Hansard remarks 
to the Kamsack School Division. 
 
The Kamsack School Division lost $61,900 as a result in the 
declining enrolment drop factor. The enrolment decline in 
Kamsack is slowing, and consequently the recognition allows 
for a reduction in the grant. The grant is reduced by $61,908.  

Kamsack had a net reduction of five students. And the 
enrolment decline is due to the fact that the decline in students 
occurred in higher grades, high school, and they were replaced 
by kindergarten students, which in fact does not generate as 
much revenue for the school division as high school students. 
As well, high-cost students in the Kamsack School Division 
declined from five students to two students. That has an impact. 
This reduced the funding by $20,250 and that had an impact 
upon the Kamsack School Division. 
 
There was a reduction in rural transportation because the 
Kamsack School Division has 22 fewer students that are being 
transported and the number of kilometres is down by 102. That 
impacts . . . the assessment in the Kamsack School Division has 
increased by $153,998. Well assessment increases is good news 
for the Kamsack School Division because local revenue is 
increasing, and according to my note, the local revenues 
increased by some $10,533. That impacts upon the grant. 
 
And then I’m advised that the number of students that are being 
home schooled has been reduced so that cuts the grant by a 
further $5,600. So all of these factors contribute to what’s 
happened in the Kamsack School Division. 
 
And I could go through others. Let’s use the Wadena School 
Division because I’m sure that the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena will be sharing these remarks with her 
school division. 
 
The Wadena School Division’s operating grant is reduced by 
$310,137. Well I’ll explain why. The Wadena School Division 
has seen a reduction in enrolment decline factor and the decline 
from last year is less than declines from previous years and 
that’s good news for Wadena but it impacts upon their grant. 
And the factor dropped from 4.32 per cent to 2.65 per cent in 
this year’s grant. 
 
As well, Wadena has increased its tuition fee revenue. That’s 
good news for Wadena but it has resulted  as a result of 
tuition fee revenue going up  it’s resulted in a decrease in the 
grant of some $62,423. The school division also experienced an 
enrolment decline of 14 students which had an impact of 
$54,071. 
 
It all makes sense. There has been no cut. It’s how we have the 
formula, and the formula is based on fairness, and if anyone can 
devise a fairer formula, good luck to them. And if they can get 
all the partners in education to agree to some new formula I’d 
love to see it. But this is the best method that we’ve been able 
to devise in the province and I’m told by fellow colleagues 
across the country that for some reason what we do works. And 
with all of its warts . . . and if you don’t like the formula . . . I 
know you know the formula. Please devise a new formula, and 
please get the directors of education, the SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association), the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation), and the department to agree to it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I just can’t understand, Madam Minister, why 
you would leave me with a small task. 
 
Madam Minister, that foundation grant formula has been  



1952  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

around a long time, and I think it worked well at a time — and I 
think you’ve heard this from stakeholders before — it worked 
well at the time when the provincial government was 
contributing 60 per cent of operating expenses. That formula 
was devised at that time, and I think you’ve heard from 
probably all of your stakeholders that indeed that there is an 
assessment of that formula. And if we ever return to 60 per cent 
funding, I think the formula would better address this. 
 
I think you shared with me last time that in fact there are some 
school divisions who are receiving no grant. And if it be 
known, Weyburn Central might have to give you some money, 
so that’s something that has be addressed in the future. 
 
I would venture to say that if you can pull together the 
stakeholders and try to get additional funding available for 
education, it might work. Right now we’re seeing cracks. I 
think you’ve recognized some of the problems that are 
occurring, and there are cracks occurring in this system. How 
are we going to address that? I hope it’s collectively with all the 
stakeholders, and I’m sure that most people have different 
ideas, and I would like to share some of those with you. But as 
the small task that you gave me, no I don’t have a new formula, 
and I would think that we could work together on that. 
 
Let’s just take a look at one of the other issues that you raised 
in the factor. I know you’ve talked about the enrolment drop 
adjustments that are on the left side of it. One of the factors that 
you didn’t change in terms of recognition of expenses for rural 
school divisions — you’ve adjusted the sparsity factor, and 
you’ve adjusted small enrolment, you know I think, to the 
detriment of small schools and sparse areas — but one of the 
areas is transportation. One of the areas is transportation. The 
amount that you recognize per kilometre has not changed, and 
yet transportation costs have increased, and we just saw the 
price war in the cities and all over rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve heard from boards of education that the contracts that are 
now being tendered and are let are like 5, 6, 7 cents higher per 
litre than what they were a year ago. Boards are going to have 
to pick that entire cost up, 100 per cent, the additional cost of 
transportation, unless of course they’re becoming a little more 
efficient. 
 
And I know you’ve had some discussions around the 
transportation formula and how it works and whether or not 
there is a need to recognize efficiencies. Boards of education 
are now telling me that they’re looking at trying to cut bus 
routes. I see reports here where one school division is 
eliminating two bus routes. Another one is eliminating one bus 
route. 
 
And you’ve told us before that, you know . . . I think you shared 
the information, when I asked a question previously, that many 
school divisions have told you that they make money on 
transportation. Well I think if they look very seriously at the 
cost of purchasing  capital purchasing  they indeed don’t 
make money, and boards are trying to develop better ways of 
doing that. Why wasn’t there any consideration given to 
recognizing increased transportation costs? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I just have to say to the member that 
we increased the rates to elementary school students by some 52 
per cent, in terms of recognizing the small school factor. I went 
through that earlier. We increased the rates up to $800, and 
that’s a significant increase for elementary students  
kindergarten and primary students. 
 
The other point that I would say to the member is that we pay 
more in transportation to school divisions than they expend. No, 
we did not increase the rates this year in rural transportation in 
terms of school buses, but we know that we pay more in a 
global sense than school divisions expend. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, you made a comment that 
you have changed the small . . . you said small schools factor 
values. I note a printout for one of your school divisions — that 
the small schools factor for last year, the amount of money that 
was recognized was $49,000. And this year, according to your 
latest printout to them, the small schools factor is now at 
$17,000. It’s way less than half. Now yes, you tell me you’ve 
recognized additional costs. This school division didn’t lose 
hundreds and hundreds of students. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I said to you earlier is that we, in 
terms of small school factor, we increased the recognition on 
elementary students from $525 to $800. That is a 52 per cent 
increase. This is the small schools factor. I went through this 
earlier and maybe you didn’t hear me. For kindergarten students 
the rate increased from $330 to $440; middle year students, 
$560 to $800; and secondary students, $600 to $800. This is 
where we have small schools that are some distance from each 
other. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Then I’d ask if your officials could provide 
you with this information, Madam Minister. Last year in the 
adjustments for small schools, and this year in the adjustment 
for small schools, what were the millions of dollars that were 
allocated in that particular adjustment line? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  When you take sparsity, small schools 
factor, and rural technology, we have an additional $1.2 million 
that this government is spending on rural Saskatchewan, and 
that shows our commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I complimented you on that, Madam 
Minister, a few minutes ago. I know what you have said in 
terms of the rural technological factor taking the monies that 
was left, that were reallocated. My question though is, last 
year’s small school factor, this year’s small school factor, what 
were the numbers that were allocated in that line? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  In terms of small school factor, there 
was a $500,000 decrease, but all of that money and more was 
directed to rural technology. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Am I correct, Madam Minister, in that about 
$1.3 million was also taken out of the sparsity factor and 
reallocated? 
 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Just so the member is clear, every 
single dime goes to small schools. Just so the member is clear, 
every dime goes to small schools in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  If you repeat it enough times, it will be 
believed, Madam Minister. I understand that. I know what 
you’ve said. My question though — you never answered it — 
was $1.3 million, approximately, taken out of the sparsity 
factor? That was my question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think I told you that earlier. It was 1.2 
million and it was redirected into rural technology. All of this 
money goes to rural Saskatchewan. All of this money goes to 
small schools. It has not been redirected into Saskatoon and 
Regina; it all stays in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I’m sure those rural, small schools will be 
very happy to hear that, Madam Minister. 
 
Could we move to the area of per pupil rates, Madam Minister. 
You’ve indicated that there were some adjustments there and I 
think you’ve also indicated that the goal . . . in one of your 
responses, I think in question period, you indicated that there 
was a goal to move to recognizing rural per pupil rates for all 
school divisions that I think were under the enrolment of 
10,000 students. Was that put in place this year or is that a 
future goal? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It’s coming into effect this year and it’s 
being phased in over a three-year period. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  What was the amount of percentage increase 
or dollar increase in terms of the per pupil allotment for this 
current 1996-97 grant pay-out? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The rural rates increased by 3.3 per 
cent for kindergarten, elementary, middle years, and secondary 
years. In terms of Regina, Saskatoon, 3.3 per cent for 
kindergarten, elementary, middle, and secondary. The 
comprehensive high schools, there was no increase. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, the enrolment figures that you have had for the last 
few years  and I’m sure you have some projections over the 
next few years  can you indicate whether or not you see a 
levelling-off of rural areas first, and what is happening 
provincially? Have we maintained our enrolment count around 
that 194,000 that I think that used to be there, and what does the 
future look like for the next two years? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as you probably know, the change 
in enrolment this past year, I believe we had a decline of 720 
students across the province. And when you look at some of the 
demographics in the province, we see a decline in the numbers 
of little children that are being born in the province. 
 
And I should mention that in terms of the 720 students that we 
saw as a decline, I believe 340 of those students were band 
students that went back to band schools. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I’d like you 

to comment if you have any projections available as well for 
what you see happening next year or the year after. 
 
But before you do that, Madam Minister, I note that in some of 
the information that has been circulated, there was an indication 
that rural Saskatchewan had lost 1,600 students from last . . . 
the previous year to last year. And I think the discussion that I 
pointed out to you one day is that a number of those students, as 
you’ve indicated, have transferred themselves out of the public 
school system that we have in rural school and have actually 
entered band schools. 
 
The other thing that occurred from 1994-95 to ‘95-96 
enrolments, which is what we’re working with, is the fact that 
there was the creation of a number of francophone boards. And 
indeed some of those students moved from some of the rural 
schools into that area. 
 
So the point that I would ask you and any of your officials who 
talk about rural enrolment . . . and I’ve heard some of your 
officials use that number, that the rural enrolment has decreased 
by 1,600 students from the previous year, ‘94-95 to ‘95-96. And 
I don’t agree with that and I’ve had a lot of people who have 
told me that that’s not accurate because some of those students 
that moved, if you look strictly at the enrolment numbers for 
rural school divisions, the difference is 1,600. But the numbers 
. . . those students went to band schools, some of them went to 
francophone schools, and that number’s not accurate. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I will say is that when we talk 
about rural schools, we include francophone schools. So you’re 
incorrect. That is included in our numbers. In fact I believe we 
saw an enrolment decline of some 1,700 students; 340 students 
in terms of that enrolment decline were students that were going 
back to band-controlled schools. So just so you’re clear. 
 
There has been a significant drop in the numbers of students in 
rural Saskatchewan. And I’m advised by my officials that we 
are using the figures associated with conseils scolaires in rural 
Saskatchewan. And those numbers are included when we talk 
about the 1,700 enrolment decline. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I’m using documents 
prepared by your officials and I note that you’ve got the 
numbers, September 30, 1994, number of students in rural 
schools, 80,609; 1995, September 30, 79,056; difference being 
1,600 students. In ’94 there wasn’t a line item for the French 
boards. In 1995 there is a line item for French boards  the 
nine schools, 845 students. These are your documents. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Just for the member’s edification, in 
1994 we did not have francophone schools. There was not a 
line for francophone schools. The member is clearly wrong. 
 
It also depends upon how he defines rural schools. When we 
talk about rural schools we include northern Saskatchewan. We 
do not . . . we considered northern Saskatchewan as being rural 
because they are small. Many of the schools are small schools 
and they are defined as rural when it comes to the way we 
calculate the enrolment decline. And the enrolment decline is  



1954  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

1,700  I don’t have the exact numbers here  students were 
lost from rural Saskatchewan. Overall population loss in this 
province was 700 and some 20 students. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I think you’ve only 
confused me a little bit more. I know that there were no 
francophone boards in 1994. That’s why I said the number of 
80,600 rural schools included those that were probably in some 
francophone schools that were just starting. Okay. 
 
In 1995 the number is 79,000, a drop of 1,600. But now there’s 
800 in the line for francophone boards. So to say that rural 
schools lost 1,600 students, they didn’t lose them. They’re over 
now there in some francophone boards. Those are rural 
francophone boards that now have 845 students that were in the 
column called rural school division enrolments. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We obviously have a different 
definition of rural. We consider rural Saskatchewan to be 
outside of Saskatoon, Regina, P.A. (Prince Albert), Moose Jaw. 
That’s what we consider rural Saskatchewan to be. He 
obviously has a very limited definition of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, Madam Minister, we’ll leave that one 
alone right now, I guess. We know that there are 61 rural school 
divisions. You’ve shared that number with us before. I think 
that’s something that we agree with and we’ll try to arrive at . . . 
Okay. 
 
Madam Minister, a question that I asked you a little while ago: 
do you have any idea whether we’re still going to be holding at 
about 194,000 for next year in terms of enrolment? Are there 
any projections for ‘96-97 or ‘97-98? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We have no projections because it’s 
difficult to know what could happen. We may have more band 
schools coming on line. We may have more children moving to 
certain parts of Saskatchewan. We don’t know. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Many school divisions rely on public health 
for ideas about the numbers of four-year-olds, and 
three-year-olds, and I was just wondering. I note that in your 
charts that you have provided that when I compare grade 3 
enrolments in the province to grade 2 enrolments to grade 1 
enrolments, I see that the grade 1 enrolment is slightly higher 
than the grade 2 and so on. That tells me that it looks like we 
have levelled off in this province and in fact we might be able 
to hold because it seems that the number of four-year-olds are 
indeed going to be about 15,000-some-odd students. 
 
That’s my question. Has there been any check with the public 
health department to recognize the total numbers of 
four-year-old students that are going to be entering our school 
system next year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Obviously we are familiar with the 
SHSP (Saskatchewan hospital services plan) numbers that the 
Department of Health does have. Our information is that it 
appears as though the numbers of one- two- three- and 
four-year-olds is continuing to go down relative to older 
students. But we also know  and that’s why we’ve done so  

much work in the area of Indian and Metis education in this 
fiscal year  that the numbers of aboriginal children, first 
nations children, are going up substantially. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Many school divisions take a look at the 
situation as to whether or not they’re stabilizing or whether 
they’re going to continue to drop. All you have to do is take a 
look at the number of grade 12 students that you have 
graduating this May, this June, leaving the school system, and 
take a look at the number of kindergarten students that you have 
and possibly those that have not entered the kindergarten 
system since it’s voluntary. 
 
But if you have an idea of how many five-year-olds there are 
there in your school division  and again, I’m talking about a 
straight-line projection; nobody move in, nobody move out  
if that is occurring then you know whether you’re still declining 
or whether you’re dropping. 
 
Many rural school divisions who phone me, and in previous 
discussions with them, are saying, well our school division has 
a grade 12 enrolment of 65 and we’re having a kindergarten 
enrolment of 45. We know that we’re declining. 
 
What I’m hearing from school divisions, many school divisions 
are saying we’re levelling off. We’re at the point now where we 
have 50 grade 12 graduates leaving, and we have 51 
kindergartens, and there is great rejoicing in rural Saskatchewan 
in a school division where that’s occurring. 
 
I was just wondering whether you had that projection for the 
province, and you’re indicating that you’re still . . . your 
numbers from Health are showing that the numbers of the 
one-year-olds, two-year-olds, is still lower significantly than the 
. . . just a bit lower, sorry, not significantly, than those in grade 
10, 11, and 12. So our province is still going to decline by 5 or 
600 students over the course of each of the next three or four 
years. 
 
The last time that we were in estimates, Madam Minister, you 
made a quote when we were talking about the plan to achieve 
$7 million worth of savings in 1998-99 — the Finance 
minister’s address in the budget. And you stated that we have to 
discuss the possibility of merging operating grants and capital 
to determine how we might save an additional $7 million. 
 
Could you explain what you meant by operating grants and 
capital and how you’re going to look at a savings of $7 million? 
Is it just reallocation of money out of capital into operating? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as I indicated, we need to speak to 
our stakeholders about how we deal with the $7 million funding 
reduction come fiscal year 1998-99. And as you know, at that 
stage the federal transfer cuts catch up to the province, some 
$250 million. We can back-fill the $114 million this year. We 
cannot back-fill all of the money, the $200 million next year. 
And we’re sure not going to be able to back-fill the $250 
million come ‘97-98 or ‘98-99. So we have to speak to our 
partners in education to determine how we deal with this 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

 overall funding reduction from Ottawa and how we deal with 
that in the context of K to 12 spending which includes 
operating grants and capital. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I’ve indicated to you, Madam Minister, 
before, that in terms of the numbers that you claim that are the 
federal cuts and the numbers that we have differ significantly. 
And whether yours are right or ours are right, only time will 
tell. So whether or not we’re going to have a total of $106 
million difference between last year and two years from now, 
that’s something that your department officials and our caucus 
will continue to disagree with. 
 
When you look at that $7 million though, Madam Minister, and 
you say that you are looking at somehow trying to put in place 
grants and capital together, are you looking at something like 
amalgamation right now, up front, and saying yes, there will be 
amalgamations, and I’m trying to achieve $7 million in the area 
of amalgamations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Just in terms of our caucus numbers 
and your caucus numbers, I just wanted to share this with the 
member and maybe some day you’ll come to know this — that 
we have a whole bureaucracy called the Department of Finance 
that deals with the numbers from Ottawa. We thought it was 
going to be $106 million in this fiscal year 1996-97; it’s 114 
million. 
 
These aren’t numbers that we, you know, somehow made up. 
These are numbers that are coming from our Department of 
Finance officials. These are professional civil servants or public 
servants. These are numbers that they have garnered from 
Ottawa. So this isn’t something that the Minister of Finance, or 
the Minister of Education, or the Premier or, you know, you 
name your minister or government member, has pulled out of 
some magical hat. It is real and it impacts upon this province. 
 
Now what we were able to do in this budget was redirect money 
to back-fill that $114 million in federal transfer cuts. Now you 
shake your head. It is real. It’s just like, you know, we’ve had a 
debate about operating grants. It’s $355 million. That’s what 
we’re spending on K to 12 education. You may not like it, you 
may not believe it, but it will be spent. It will be shown in 
Public Accounts that we’ve spent $355 million on K to 12 
education in the fiscal year 1996-97. 
 
It will be shown, and we have documentation and our officials 
have the documentation  we didn’t create this  that we 
have a funding reduction for health, social services, and 
education, of $114 million coming from Ottawa. Ottawa is 
getting out of funding health, education, and social services in 
this country and it is changing how we view Canada. And our 
Premier gave a speech in Montreal and Ottawa about how we 
keep this country together, and that includes the federal 
government’s relationship with all of the provinces and 
territories. 
 
So I would just like to say to you that your caucus may have 
figures, and I don’t know where you got your figures, but our 
figures come from the Department of Finance. In terms of are 
we thinking of merging capital and operating grants, the answer  

is no. What we are going to do is discuss with our partners in 
education how we deal with the fact that we can’t back-fill the 
whole $250 million — this province does not have the fiscal 
capacity to do that — and how do we deal with the funding 
reduction in the fiscal year ‘98-99 in such a way that we can 
minimize as much as possible the impacts on Saskatchewan 
kids. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I did not pull my numbers 
from the air, as you’re suggesting also, and I guess we’ll have 
to contact the city of Ottawa, because our numbers come out of 
Ottawa as well. So I don’t know whether there are two different 
Finance departments in Ottawa, but there is a difference of 
opinion as to what those numbers are that are coming from 
Ottawa. So we’ll have to look at that. 
 
When you have indicated that you’re back-filling, I want to 
point out to you, Madam Minister, that when you say $355 
million is being spent, I at no time have ever said I didn’t agree 
that you were spending 355 million. I know you are. 
 
But the situation also is that if you take a look at 1991 or 1992 
as far as the amount of money that you’re allocating to boards, 
it was a significantly higher number. And what you asked 
boards to do over the course . . . and you asked the local 
taxpayer if they wanted to maintain the services. You asked 
them to back-fill the cost of providing a good education in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and they’ve done that. 
 
So you know, if the federal government is asking you to 
back-fill $61 million this year, that’s what they asked you to do. 
You’ve asked the school boards over the last number of years to 
back-fill 20 plus million dollars, and they’ve done that. So what 
we’re looking at now though is trying to see whether or not we 
can continue to provide a quality education. 
 
I have some additional questions . . . that I’m just going to turn 
the floor over to one my colleagues. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
and welcome to the minister and her officials. I have some 
direct questions for some of the school boards. You gave me 
the information for Wadena, but I am particularly interested in 
the Humboldt Rural School Division, and I’m wondering if you 
could explain to me and give me a breakdown of where their 
funding cuts will come, which areas they will be in. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Okay. Their grant went down by 
$16,376. I’ll just read it to you. The effect of the increase of 3.4 
per cent on the per capita meant an increase of $155,177, but 
they had an effect on the enrolment change, because their 
enrolment decline levelled out, of $8,325. That was a reduction. 
 
Then they got some money to implement the core curriculum, 
which is a new factor in our formula this year, of $13,630. The 
enrolment decline factor was a decrease of $39,349. Sparsity, 
small school, or rural technology factor saw a decline of 
$32,764. Their high-cost pupils saw a $6,750 increase. The 
SNPF (special needs program fund), which is special ed 
funding, an increase of $11,683. Rural transportation — they 
had fewer kids, I guess, being transported, which meant . . . and  



1956  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

fewer kilometres, which meant a reduction of $10,808. There 
was a reduction for other transportation of $7,471. And then 
other recognized expenditures, a reduction of $85,106. There 
was a change in their assessment. There were adjustments from 
previous years. And the net effect of all of this is a $16,000 
decline. 
 
Now I should point out that because of the equalization factor 
of 2 mills, the change in the equalization factor, they benefited 
by $77,736. So had we not changed the equalization factor, they 
would have been in tougher shape. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m just 
wondering if your government recognizes the impact that 
funding in school divisions has on the decision of people when 
it comes to building their homes and where they’re going to be 
settling. 
 
I think that you probably recognize that I’m speaking about 
communities like Annaheim, where a decision to close a school 
or the high school will have an impact on a business like 
Doepkers. If people decide not to live in a small town because 
of a fear of a school closing and settle in a community further 
away, like Humboldt, there won’t be the young people around 
to work in the industries and it will be more difficult . . . or 
people aren’t as likely to want to stay for a couple of hours or 
half an hour after work to help out in industry, and it is 
definitely having an impact on the businesses. 
 
I’m wondering if, when you’re making your decisions about 
how much money is going to be spent in a school year in a 
school division, if any of these factors are taken into 
consideration. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  One of the things that I’ve come to 
know, having been a bit of a student of educational history in 
the province of Saskatchewan, having studied this when I was a 
student, is that schools in Saskatchewan have closed . . . since 
about 1944 when we went to . . . we just simply needed more 
numbers, and we went to larger schools. And as you probably 
know, if you look at the shift in demographics in the last 50 
years, there’s been a shift from rural to towns or villages and 
then to larger centres. Obviously I am, I suppose in a sense, a 
student that attended a small rural school in rural Saskatchewan 
in the 1960s, and that school closed, and I went to a larger 
school. And that has been going on forever. 
 
What about the village of Springwater now that the school is 
closed? The village of Springwater no longer has a post office. 
It does not have a store. It does not have an elevator. But I’ll tell 
you this, that when we had a reunion two years ago, there were 
over 2,000 people there. And when you ask people where they 
come from, they will say that they come from Springwater, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what’s interesting is that Springwater has had a bit of a 
revival lately because people who have lived in British 
Columbia and made their living in British Columbia are moving 
back to Springwater to retire. And I . . . and they’re coming 
with their money. They’re coming with their money. And why 
are they coming back here to retire? And if you look at some of  

the interesting stuff contained in Foote’s book  read the 
recent Globe and Mail  people are interested in going to rural 
Canada in terms of the retirement. They’ve had the fast pace of 
life in the cities, and in terms of retirement they want the joys 
and benefit of country living. 
 
(2145) 
 
So I guess I would say to the member that just because your 
school closes  and we have examples of this across the 
province where schools have closed  you still have the spirit 
of the people who come from those centres, and they still 
identify with those centres as where they come from. 
 
And I have to tell you that this is not a view that I alone have. 
This is a view held by thousands and thousands of people that 
come from villages in this province, towns in this province, or 
from the farm. They come from a particular community, and 
that spirit lives on regardless of whether the elevator’s there, the 
post office is there, or the school is there. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. But what we 
need in rural Saskatchewan is not just the spirit of people out 
there. We need the people out there. And I think that if we 
should put some emphasis on revitalizing rural Saskatchewan 
so that we can have more than just retired people move back 
into rural Saskatchewan, we could have some working people 
moving back and get some industry there. 
 
And what’s happening right now, with our programs, people 
aren’t encouraged to be there. In fact they’re discouraged to be 
there and they do move to the bigger centres. It is true, Madam 
Minister. Even if small businesses try to keep going out there, 
there isn’t any incentive to stay there. And school closures are 
another icing on the cake. They’re another reason for people to 
leave rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I wanted to ask you, Madam Minister: do you believe that a 
bigger school means a better school? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I was educated in a smaller school. No, 
I do not believe a bigger school is a better school. We have all 
kinds of examples of how small schools in this province have 
led to a quality of education. 
 
And I guess I would just say that your point that we’re 
encouraging people to leave rural Saskatchewan, that is simply 
nonsense  simply nonsense. There are thousands of people 
that do business, live, work in rural Saskatchewan, and they will 
continue to do so. As far as I’m concerned, you’re peddling the 
Liberal line and it’s just not working. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of 
points I wanted to raise with the minister. As far as northern 
Saskatchewan is concerned, you speak of the 27-and-some-odd 
million dollars that you spend on education in northern 
Saskatchewan. And from the North, education is our only 
solution and I strongly urge that you not harm the only 
institution that is saving our northern people, and that of course 
is the system of educating our northern people. 
 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

Some of the problems that we encounter, and some of the 
things we aspire to have when it comes to education, is also 
proper facilities. We need strong educators. We need good 
planning. We need long-term commitment. And local control is 
what the people of the North need to help build a good 
education base. 
 
And recently we hear a lot about amalgamation and school 
boards and what not in northern Saskatchewan. Amalgamation 
of boards cannot be forced, and cannot work, and must be 
resisted to ensure local input and control. And the other factor 
that amalgamation cannot work is because of the vastness of the 
North. People must have local control when it comes to 
education. 
 
As you are probably aware, the North is a unique region. If you 
look at the, not only the demographics, but the geography, it’s 
half the land mass. We see that many of the population in the 
North, that there’s a higher ratio of young people. In the 
southern rural areas we see that most of the population is 
certainly older, but in the North it’s different — it’s a flip-flop. 
A huge majority of the people in northern Saskatchewan is 
certainly school-age children. 
 
So given that particular point of view, some of the fine 
examples of the schools in northern Saskatchewan . . . I’ll use 
the La Loche schools of Dene High and Ducharme School. 
Those are the institutions, and those are the future, of the North. 
These schools really do assist in every aspect of that 
community, and I strongly urge you to put the proper dollars in 
support. 
 
I guess my next . . . the first question I have is in reference to 
the problems of isolated . . . Is there any particular planning that 
you have in mind to address the problems of higher ratio of 
young students along with the fact that many of these school 
boards and divisions in the North do lack proper school space? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I just want to say to the member that 
not to overly alarm the people in northern Saskatchewan by 
your comments about restructuring of education. I did have the 
opportunity to meet with a Creighton School Division, Northern 
Lights School Division, the Ile-a-la-Crosse School Division, 
about the paper that we released a couple of weeks ago that 
looks at restructuring public education in the province in the 
21st century where we outline four options. 
 
People in Ile-a-la-Crosse will have an opportunity, as well as in 
the Northern Lights School Division and Creighton, to engage 
in a public discussion as to which option would be most 
beneficial to them. And it is by no means determined what this 
government is going to do with those options, and in fact we’re 
encouraging the public to think about other options that might 
help us get ourselves ready for the next millennium. 
 
Second point I want to make to the member is that if you look 
at the grant for the three northern school divisions, it has 
increased this year. The third point I want to make to the 
member is that we’ve increased the amount of funding for 
Indian and Metis education development program  IMED 
program  to ensure that we are having culturally appropriate  

programing in rural and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s also to prevent, I suppose in a sense, Indian bands from 
taking their children out of rural Saskatchewan into band 
schools. We want to ensure that some of the concerns that are 
being raised by first nations people can be addressed by rural 
school boards by providing grants or funding to them to ensure 
that we have culturally appropriate subjects, languages, in those 
school divisions. And we think that the Indian and Metis 
education program money will assist rural school boards and 
northern school boards in getting that educational programing 
to first nations and Metis students. 
 
The fourth point I want to make is that there will be funding 
available for northern Saskatchewan for community schools, 
and that is important. In terms of your last point about the 
growing population in northern Saskatchewan, I just would like 
to point out to you that the numbers of students in northern 
Saskatchewan actually declined last year, and some of that may 
have been due to students going to first nation, band-controlled 
schools. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And certainly 
every effort that you undertake to promote the cultural 
awareness and recognize the vastness and the cultural 
differences of northern Saskatchewan people is certainly 
appreciated. There’s no question about that in our mind, that we 
have to look at the demographics and the people of that 
particular region to see what challenges the educational system 
certainly has. 
 
Again I go back to my particular point, in that community 
development cannot work and will not work and there is no 
hope whatsoever for the people of the North if they don’t have 
a good educational system. Education is our only answer out of 
the social and economic problems, and certainly I think you 
must agree with that. And I want to share with you those 
thoughts and comments. 
 
I guess the biggest thing is, in northern Saskatchewan we’re 
seeing a shift, which is not a very positive shift, from the 
amount of students starting in school  kindergarten, grade 1 
 and as they progress to the later grades, you see the 
enrolment dramatically drop. And from what I can understand, 
and I could be corrected on this stat, 24 per cent of the students 
that begin school in the North only achieve grade 12. And we 
do know that the fact that there are economic problems in 
northern Saskatchewan, there’s social problems in northern 
Saskatchewan, there’s distance problems in northern 
Saskatchewan, there’s all these different problems that really 
challenge the educational system — thereby we need to make 
sure that we have a long-term vision and long-term commitment 
with the cultural awareness and these particular stats that 
support the argument of northern people that we need to 
approach health in a more concentrated effort. 
 
So my question is, in the light of these economic, social, and 
distance education, in light of the fact that we are not seeing 
much success because of these problems, is there anything 
innovative or exciting that your department is looking at doing 
in cooperation with these school boards to try and alleviate this  



1958  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

problem? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I’m not quite as glum about the 
prospects for the future as you are. The situation has improved. 
We used to have in this province a situation where very few 
first nations and Metis students would complete a grade 12. 
That has changed in this province. And I think one of the 
reasons that has changed is because, when we were government 
in the early 1980s, we introduced the Gabriel Dumont Institute 
with the SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native teacher 
education program) and NORTEP (northern teacher education 
program) programs, where we began to train Indian and Metis 
people to become teachers. 
 
And in fact the Gabriel Dumont Institute had a SUNTEP 
graduation last weekend and over 340 people have successfully 
completed that program, and have become teachers with the 
same qualifications as any teacher in this province, and they are 
successfully teaching in Saskatchewan classrooms and in fact 
they are moving  students that have graduated from Gabriel 
Dumont some time ago  are moving into administrative 
positions. 
 
One of the things that we have to ensure though is that first 
nations and Metis people have access to employment, have 
access to those jobs. And we know that when we have locally 
controlled school divisions such as the school division in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Northern Lights, and Creighton, and school 
divisions that are sensitive to the needs of local people, 
particularly northern people, that we will have those northern 
educated people in those classrooms. 
 
And I think if you look at what has occurred in the North, we 
have many more Indian and Metis people teaching in 
classrooms across the North. And once you have people who 
are culturally sensitive teaching those classrooms, I think that 
leads to positive role models and a will on the part of the 
students to be there. 
 
Another point I want to make is that we have two very 
successful projects in the province. One in La Loche  and 
that’s in your riding  which was introduced when I was 
minister of Social Services, and the Minister of Municipal 
Government was the minister of Education. And we . . . all of 
the research tells us that if you can engage children when 
they’re three and four years old, and their parents, that you have 
a better chance of ensuring that that young person completes 
their grade 12. 
 
And I don’t know if you’ve been to the preschool in La Loche, 
but that preschool has had amazing results. Parents are engaged 
in their children’s education, parents are starting to think about 
their own education, taking literacy programs, upgrading 
programs, and we know that a mother’s education is a key 
determining factor in terms of what happens to her children. 
 
And we also know from the evaluation that the children that are 
in that preschool and going into kindergarten, grade 1, are 
coming to the school better prepared, and they have a better 
chance of being successful. And we’re hopeful that we can 
expand the numbers of preschools across the province because  

that’s one way to give children a heads up in terms of being 
prepared and not being failures when they hit kindergarten, 
grade 1, grade 2. 
 
I think the other point is that parents  when children are very 
small  parents have not experienced all of the negative things 
that sometimes go along with being a parent. They have not 
experienced their own failure as a parent, or perceived failure as 
a parent, and they have not experienced their own perceived 
children’s failure. 
 
And if we can get parents engaged in their children’s education, 
we have a better chance of making sure that our students 
complete grade 12. And so it’s key that we have parental 
involvement and we have local control. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much for your insight. And I 
certainly commend you on some of the vision that you have as 
the Education minister. I know I’m saying that in Hansard and 
you can certainly use that wherever you wish. 
 
I think the key thing here, Madam Minister, is that there has to 
be an innovative and exciting approach in northern 
Saskatchewan. And we’re talking about preschool, and in 
developing attitudes, and we’re talking about parental support; 
we’re talking about even housing support for some of these 
families putting kids through the educational system. 
 
Hopefully a number of other areas we talk about  
employment, the social development of communities, we’re 
talking about housing, and the respect and all that  need to 
happen to a child to ensure that child’s educated properly. 
 
Following the 10, 11, 12 years that they are in school  it took 
me 15 years, but the average student takes 12  we see the next 
stage of employment is also a critical part of the whole 
development of a person in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
(2200) 
 
So we have to also address that so there’s a long-term solution 
to not only educating our children in the North, but supporting 
them to be educated so they do become contributors to the 
province and then their own children don’t become a burden to 
anybody else in this whole, whole wide world. 
 
So in closing, I just want to say the two things is that education 
in the North is a top priority; facilities are in desperate need. 
Innovative planning on addressing some of these problems that 
affect student enrolment and student success must be addressed. 
And last but not least, I want to hear from you  yes or no  
that you’re not going to force these northern school boards to 
become amalgamated. Because once you do that, then you take 
away local control, you take away local input, and you take 
away a sense of ownership that people have in that educational 
system. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well in terms of the member’s 
analysis, I want to say that he sounds very much like my 
colleague, the member from Cumberland. You have a similar 
analysis in terms of economic and social development and the  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

importance that is placed upon education and training. So I 
don’t know if . . . it seems to me that the member may be more 
comfortable on the New Democratic side of government than 
the Liberal side of government. 
 
I will say this to the member, that this government has made no 
decisions whatsoever as to the options presented in the 
restructuring paper, how we structure and govern education for 
the next millennium. I would strongly encourage you to 
encourage your local people in Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche, and 
elsewhere to come out to those public consultation meetings 
because we want to hear from people not only in northern 
Saskatchewan, but across the province. 
 
We had two very successful meetings last night, one in Swift 
Current, one in Outlook. We had, I believe, over 140 people out 
to those two meetings and people have a lot to say. And I would 
hope that people speak up, speak out, and speak often, when it 
comes to these public consultation processes. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I’d like to 
also add to the welcome to your officials. Madam Minister, 
there are other people here who would like to pose some 
questions, so what I’m going to ask of you I would hope to be 
able to get from you in the House tomorrow or any time within 
the next few days. 
 
I would just like to know about the funding cuts to the Wakaw 
School Division, and Saskatoon East School Division, and the 
Humboldt School Division. And also I’d like to know if you 
have heard how they intend to deal with these cuts. And that’s 
one request I have of you. 
 
The other thing that I wanted to ask you is, I know that there is 
Fransaskois school being added onto in Vonda, so there’s some 
capital costs. I’m just wondering whether the provincial 
government is contributing to those capital costs at all. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I will get you the information that you 
required or asked for, and as you may know, capital is paid for 
by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Also welcome to your officials. 
We spent a fair bit of time this evening discussing the various 
numbers around funding of education, and I think we’re aware 
that in many of the jurisdictions mill rates have gone up and 
there’s been a cut in staffing. 
 
And there have been different kinds of creative ideas that have 
come up. I think the one that impressed me the most, and we 
did discuss this briefly in question period a while back, is the 
Scenic Valley situation. And I think there’s a couple of unique 
things about the Scenic Valley situation. One is that this is a 
result of past amalgamations so we know that these people are 
prepared for change and to look at things in different ways. 
 
And basically did that on their own and I think they’ve done 
that fairly successfully. When they looked at the particular 
project that they’re creating, they did just an excellent job of 
consultation with all the players that were involved. And 
keeping that part in mind, they did come up with very close to  

100 per cent support  90-some per cent  which is unusually 
high. 
 
And I know when I asked this question last time, you said that 
the information or the request had come in late. But I would 
like to bring that issue up again and ask if you as a minister do 
not have the power to recognize that as a pilot project in spite 
of that time-line glitch that may have been there. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I have had the opportunity to meet with 
the Scenic Valley School Division. We met late last week and I 
advised them at the time that it was very difficult for our 
government, in such a short period of time, to properly assess 
whether or not this pilot should go forward for the fiscal year 
1996-97. 
 
Some of the difficulties we have has to do with some of the 
legal and administrative complexities surrounding this 
variation. I also explained to the Scenic Valley School Division 
that this really is a departure from how we have historically 
structured the school week in Saskatchewan —we’re moving 
from a five-day school week to a four-day school week — and 
that it has some implications not only for Scenic Valley but for 
the entire province. 
 
As well, I indicated to the school division that I wanted to 
personally visit a school division that had done this  and I 
understand there are some in this country  to get a better 
understanding of how this works and what sort of impacts it has 
upon small children and middle years children  elementary or 
primary, kindergarten children and middle years children. 
 
I think that the central issue here is the quality of education for 
our students. With this proposal, as you know, there are already 
people that believe that we don’t spend enough time in 
Saskatchewan in our classrooms, that our school year is too 
short, in fact it should be longer than 197 days. There are 
people . . . I just received a letter today from a person in the 
province who said, how can you possibly consider a four-day 
school week when our students need to be in school much 
longer than they presently are. Not only should we have longer 
numbers of days in this province but we should have a longer 
day in this province. 
 
So I guess I believe that local school divisions need to be 
creative and need to think in new ways as they genuinely try to 
sustain the quality of education in this province, but I also 
believe that we need to concern ourselves about the quality of 
education. And I should tell you that I certainly have not said no 
definitively for the rest of our life as members of the legislature, 
or my lifetime as a cabinet minister, Minister of Education. I’ve 
not said no definitively but I do want to examine some of these 
issues because they are complex and have some implications for 
the rest of the province. 
 
I would also share with the member that we now have a 
provincial committee of our stakeholders in education that are 
looking at this whole question. And this committee wants to 
ensure that we have uniformity across the province and that we 
ensure quality in this province. 
 



1960  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I appreciate the concern that you 
voiced for these particular changes. And as I attended one of 
those meetings, the concern about teaching time was one that 
came up there. And I think one of the first things we addressed 
is that with this system there would be more in-class teaching 
time on what we would traditionally call the three R’s than 
there might be at any other time. 
 
And you’re right. It’s also a departure from the traditional 
school day and the traditional school week. However I think 
we’re aware of the fact that having school start around 9 
o’clock in the morning and ending at 3 has a whole lot more to 
do with going home and milking cows and the sunlight not 
being there for some of those old schools to be open, than any 
learning abilities that are there. 
 
Switching gears here. Last October, Prince Albert Public 
School Board chairman Maurice Sorokan expressed concern 
about the effect of the government’s gaming policy and 
educational system. And the statement that he made was that 
poverty remains a significant issue in Prince Albert, and gaming 
certainly would exacerbate the problems faced by a family in 
poverty. We have to make sure that money is directed in 
providing services for children who are affected. 
 
And my question is this. Has your department done any studies 
on impact of gaming and poverty on education? You probably 
have some on poverty, but what about gaming? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well obviously we know that about 40 
per cent of kids in this country come to school with some sort 
of difficulty. The difficulty could be a learning disability or 
coming from a family environment where there are difficulties 
in the home. It could be a whole myriad of problems. And 
obviously some of those problems could be associated with 
poverty. 
 
Our department is aware of the 40 per cent factor and the 
difficulty that many of our students have in terms of coming to 
school. But we have not done any kind of research or developed 
analysis of gaming in the province. That would be an issue that 
the Department of Health deals with and the minister 
responsible for Gaming. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. In the discussion that’s gone on 
over education and a few other things over the last while, terms 
such as “sustainable” keep showing up and then the concept of 
putting school divisions together, such as happened in Scenic 
Valley. My question is, in affirming that division amalgamation 
would be voluntary  and I’m taking for granted that that’s 
your position  what is your interpretation of voluntary? 
Because the Minister of Municipal Affairs has mused about this 
being tied to educational funding. Are those ideas going around 
in your mind as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well obviously it has not been my 
practice to muse. What I do try and do is look at various 
options. And if you look at the paper that has just been released 
by the province, we have developed four options for public 
discussion. We define voluntary in the . . . as one option and the 
voluntary would be that school divisions would continue to  

determine whether or not they wanted to restructure and look at 
the possibility of coming together. 
 
We have an example of the Blaine Lake School Division, where 
that school division is looking at part of the school division 
going with Sask Valley, the other part going with the Battleford 
School Division. That would be entirely up to them. That is the 
definition of voluntary. This government has made no decision. 
We want to get the results of those various public meetings that 
are going to take place across the province in the next four 
months and at the end of that process we’ll be in a better 
position to determine which option . . . or if there’s another 
option would be appropriate, given what people are telling us. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Madam 
Minister, a few areas that I’d like to touch on, if we could get at 
those. You have talked about the public consultation meetings 
that are occurring and I note that you have expanded the 
numbers to be around 50 in total. Is that what you’re . . . there’s 
going to be more, as I understand. Could you give us an idea as 
to when you expect the last one to end? I think you’ve indicated 
that it’s the fall. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It’s my anticipation that we will have 
meetings in the month of June, the month of July, the month of 
August, the month of September, and the month of October. We 
will have, by the time this is done, I would suspect several 
hundred meetings. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  If you’re looking at that number of meetings, 
that must have some cost implications. Is it within the current 
Education budget or is it within a global budget of the 
department? How will you be footing the costs for having that 
many meetings? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As you know, the regional directors are 
presently on the payroll of the Department of Education. The 
regional directors are on the payroll of the Department of 
Education. They are the people that are leading the discussions. 
So we aren’t bringing in a bunch of additional people to 
participate with local school divisions, parents, teachers, on this 
question, and any funding for this process would come out of 
the existing department’s budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Good, thank you, Madam Minister. You’ve 
identified that you’re going to have some meetings in July, and 
I hope that those don’t cause a problem with summer holidays 
and the like and that indeed you continue to get a good turnout. 
 
Your document that was released not too long ago, there were a 
couple of concerns that were raised by individuals to me and I 
would wonder what your response is to . . . On one of the pages 
it refers to amalgamations that occurred already. You have 
indicated Melfort-Tiger Lily is a possible . . . or something that 
has occurred. Could you clarify what you were intending to 
indicate to the people on the page when you referred to three or 
four amalgamations that had taken place in the province? I’m 
not aware of any amalgamations that have actually occurred. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as you probably recall, I believe it 
was in 1994  I feel like I’ve been at this for a while  we  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

approved three pilot projects. One of those pilot projects was 
Melfort-Tiger Lily. Then things changed. As you probably 
know, things changed in terms of the elections. And there have 
been ongoing discussions between Melfort and Tiger Lily 
School Division but it’s still considered a pilot. 
 
In terms of have any actual amalgamations occurred, the answer 
is no. What we do have is a letter of intent from the Kinistino 
School Division, the P.A. Rural, and P.A. for an amalgamation. 
But in terms of an actual amalgamation, the answer is no, but 
certainly these  Oxbow, Arcola, Melfort, Tiger Lily, 
Kinistino, P.A., and P.A. Rural were listed as pilot projects. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. As I have not 
been as close to the education scene as you had, I was 
wondering indeed whether I had missed something. Because the 
phone calls that I received said your documents said there were 
amalgamations, and I said well they can’t be, they must be pilot 
projects that were examples of what might occur, because to my 
knowledge they had not occurred. And you have just verified 
that. So we’ll just assume that my response to those phone calls 
was correct. 
 
In terms of the amalgamation document, Madam Minister, 
you’ve proposed four options. And I guess without showing or 
without probably trying to slant what you’re looking at, you’ve 
said that you’re open to any additional options. You’ve, I think, 
made some comments about status quo as probably not being 
necessarily one of the ones that you would favour, and tonight 
you made some interesting comments to the member from 
Athabasca regarding the preschool project that’s working very 
well within a school system. So by the comments that you’ve 
made over the last little while, if I’m . . . if you’re musing and 
I’m surmising as to where you’re headed, I think you’re 
indicating that your ideas around the delivery of education out 
in Saskatchewan is not necessarily just kindergarten to grade 
12, because you’ve mentioned a preschool system that has 
shown that it’s working well and maybe is something that we 
should work for. 
 
And you’ve also made reference, about a year ago, or maybe 
not quite that much, where you’ve indicated that you were 
talking about a regional board that might be responsible for K 
to 14. You expanded beyond grade 12, so that seems to indicate 
to me that, you know, that those are ideas that you’re 
considering. Without putting you on the spot, are there any one 
of the options that you favour more than any of the others 
personally? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Oh, sure. This is well known because I 
shared it with the divisions across the province. Personally I 
like option 4. I like option 4 because it brings together learning 
in the province under one particular governance and 
administrative structure. That is my personal favourite. 
 
Do I think that the public is ready for my personal favourite? I 
don’t know. We’ll see. My sense is that some people like it. 
People in northern Saskatchewan seem to like the notion of a K 
to 14 regional learning authority kind of concept. People in  

other parts of the province appear to like it as well. 
 
I think it’s important that high school kids in particular begin to 
think about pursuing post-secondary opportunities in their home 
region. I know that with the changes in the federal funding to 
the province for post-secondary education, post-secondary 
education is going to get more expensive in terms of tuition 
fees. When you’re a young person from rural Saskatchewan, a 
tuition fee represents one portion of the cost of an education. 
The other portion of the cost of your education is rent, food, 
and so on  living  associated with going to a larger centre. 
 
We now have several examples in the province where you can 
get your first and second year of university and not leave your 
region. You don’t have to go to Saskatoon and Regina. I’d like 
to expand that notion to many other parts of Saskatchewan so 
that young people can begin to look at receiving their 
post-secondary education in their home region. 
 
I think that we could look to the possibility of a more 
integrated, coordinated system of delivery and governance in 
the province. Do I think that’s where the public’s at? I don’t 
know. I’ve had the benefit of being the minister for K to 12 and 
post-secondary education, and I think that there’s some real 
possibilities there. And sometimes when you have two different 
systems, the K to 12 system and universities or SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), it 
makes it difficult to integrate and coordinate. And perhaps one 
governance system would begin to break down those barriers. 
But we’ll see. 
 
The other point I want to make, do I favour the status quo? The 
status quo is certainly a possibility. But do I think that the status 
quo means no change? No, I don’t think that. I think school 
divisions are going to continue to discuss the possibility of 
coming together. And I think school divisions will come 
together in cases across the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, you indicated that you’re waiting for options to come 
in. Do you expect that regional colleges, who are looking at 
change and are looking at improving their delivery of their 
program . . . and because of what you’ve just said about the 
delivery of post-secondary classes to other parts of the 
province, do you think that your committees as they travel 
across the province will actually get proposals from the regional 
colleges in terms of how they might restructure? Are you 
encouraging it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  These are public meetings. And we’re 
inviting everybody to come to those public meetings, whether 
you are a parent with children only in the K to 12 system, 
whether you’re an employee of a regional college, whether 
you’re a trustee of a regional college. We want people to come 
to these meetings. We want them to speak out about where they 
think we need to go to get ourselves into the next millennium. 
This is an open process and it’s not just for people interested in 
only K to 12. It’s for people who are interested in education. 
And education is a lifelong process. And if you look at what’s 
going to occur the next several years, people are going to have  



1962  Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

to be re-educated, retrained, many, many times over the course 
of their lifetime in order to keep up with the changes that are 
occurring in the workplace. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, when . . . you’ve indicated 
in a response to one of the other questions asked this evening as 
to what you intend to do after October when all of this 
information is before you, whether or not it’s just the four 
options, whether there are additional options. Are you planning 
on involving the stakeholders or is it just going to be within 
your department that you will assess the information and then 
go forward with a plan, or will you be still conducting an 
information-type meeting, a symposium, with the stakeholders 
to say, here’s what we might be looking at? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  At some point in this process we’re 
going to have to make a decision. Government is going to have 
to make a decision. Government will make a decision. After we 
make the decision we certainly will involve all of the 
stakeholder groups in any implementation plan that may be 
necessary. 
 
But I need to point out to the member that we may decide 
option 1 is where we want to head, and that we’re going to stick 
with the status quo. And if that’s the case we’re still going to 
need to consult with our stakeholders because we have school 
divisions that are speaking to each other and looking at the 
possibility of coming together voluntarily, and there are still 
many issues that need to be worked out, and that’s going to 
require our stakeholders’ involvement. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, a couple other issues as far as some expenditures that 
you’ve indicated. 
 
Regional services. I note that you are looking at an expenditure 
of about $3.8 million for regional services. Is that the cost of 
the regional offices, and the staff, and everything else? If that’s 
so, with technology improving the way it is and with boards of 
education I think talking directly with your departmental 
officials here in Regina or in Saskatoon, do you see . . . has 
there been any review of the current regional offices and is 
there any restructuring that might occur in those particular 
expenditure areas as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’re not looking at reducing the 
number of regional offices in the province. In fact I think it’s 
fair to say that our regional directors are going to be very busy 
over the next several months involved in the public consultation 
process. I should tell you that the regional services does not just 
include the regional offices and the staff associated in the 
regional offices. It also includes some people here in Regina, 
and it also includes student records. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  If I could refer you to page number 42 of the 
Estimates, in the subvote no. 4, Madam Minister  teacher 
pensions and benefits. You have indicated two areas of 
expenditure there. One is just entitled, teachers’ pensions, and 
the other one is entitled, Saskatchewan teachers’ retirement 
plan. Could you explain the different amounts of money that are 
allocated in both of those two areas? 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The teachers’ pensions and benefits is 
the old plan, and Saskatchewan teachers’ retirement plan is the 
new plan. We have the old formula plan and then we have the 
new money purchase plan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I note that the amount of money allocated for 
the teachers’ pension plan, the old plan, has declined by $2 
million last year to this year. Is that going to occur over the next 
number of years? Did you see a steady decline in that area 
because of the less number of teachers that are in that plan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No, we don’t expect that it’s going to 
decline. It will depend upon the numbers of teachers that are 
going to retire in a particular year, and obviously that will 
fluctuate year to year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  On page 140 in schedule A you have 
indicated that the costs of the dental plan for last year were $3.9 
million. With negotiations having just been completed, is there 
an estimate as to what the cost will be for the provision of the 
dental plan for the upcoming fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  There is no change in cost to the dental 
plan as a result of the collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  The premiums are remaining exactly the same 
as they were last year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I would like to thank you 
for your responses this evening. I’d like to thank all the officials 
for contributing to the discussions, that I can carry forward your 
answers to the public in terms of better explaining how 
education is funded and why certain things have occurred, not 
only in this budget, but the year before. Thank you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, first 
of all I want to thank the critics for the opposition parties for 
the questions that they asked. Obviously they’ve done some 
research and they asked intelligent, thoughtful questions. And I 
hope I’ve been able to provide you with the most accurate 
answers as possible. 
 
I also want to thank my officials, that have been on stand-by 
many hours over the last few months as we made our way 
through these estimates, for their diligence and their support 
and help in presenting the estimates for the Department of 
Education. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:32 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

EVENING SITTING 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 14  Support for the Canadian Wheat Board 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1937 
  Jess ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1937 
 Motion No. 15  Implementing a Regional Telephone Exchange System 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1938 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1940 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1941 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1943 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1944 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1944 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1945 
  Kowalsky .................................................................................................................................................................................1945 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1946 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1946 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1948 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Education  Vote 5 
  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1948 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1948, 1960 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1955 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1956 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1959 
 


