


















































April 17, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 943 
 April 17, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of greatly concerned citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan, primarily from Regina, whose petition prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from 
all over the city of Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The petition is signed from people in numerous southern 
Saskatchewan communities plus the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
my constituency of Canora-Pelly. They are from the 
communities of Preeceville, Sturgis, and Stenen. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise today to present petitions of names of people from 
throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina and 
Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also am 
presenting petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people who have signed this petition are from Scout 
Lake, Colfax, Balgonie, Truax, as well as Regina. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on day no. 
32, the 32nd day that we’ve presented petitions, along with the 
people from Saskatchewan and along with my colleagues 
regarding saving the Plains Health Centre here in Regina. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
mainly from the Preeceville area, but of course some from 
Regina and in particular from Regina Elphinstone constituency 
and Regina Albert South  the two areas that should have 
fought for the Plains Health . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the hon. member knows 
that presenting petitions . . . Order. Order. 
 
The hon. member knows that it’s improper to enter into debate 
while presenting petitions and I’ll ask him to conduct himself 
accordingly in the future. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to immediately repeal the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement and replace it with a 
fair tendering policy which awards all government 
contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, union or 
non-union, with no union hiring quotas. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and to members of the Assembly an important group of 
people from around the province of Saskatchewan who are with 
us here today, I believe in your gallery. 
  



944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

And it’s members of the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association 
who are with us here today to observe question period, but I 
think more importantly, to meet with individual members of the 
legislature. 
 
And in the letter that members recently received from the 
president of the real estate association, one paragraph indicates 
that: 
 

In 1994 we had the opportunity to meet with 38 MLAs and 
we look forward to a similar exchange of dialogue this 
year. 
 

I just read that part of the letter to indicate that this is a strong 
tradition here in the legislature, of members of the legislature 
meeting one on one with various real estate people from around 
the province. As well, I understand there’s a reception tonight. 
We look forward to that as well, where we can exchange views 
and enjoy each other’s company. 
 
So I wish all members to join with me in welcoming members 
of the real estate association here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have an 
important group to introduce today, Mr. Speaker. I see in every 
gallery actually there is a good number of the SaskTel 
workforce with us today. I’d like to congratulate these people 
on the fine service they have provided in the past, and I’d like 
the members to join with me to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the Deputy Premier in welcoming the people 
representing the real estate association to the legislature here 
this afternoon. We look forward to our opportunity to meet with 
them later this afternoon and also to meet with them later this 
evening at the reception. 
 
I too would like to join with the government members in 
welcoming them here this afternoon, and look forward to some 
very interesting discussions later this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly, a group of 
28 grade 3 and grade 4 from St. Josaphat School in the great 
constituency of Regina Sherwood. They’re seated in the west 
gallery opposite. And after their time here at the House we’ll be 
having a tour of the building and I’ll be joining them around 
2:30 to hopefully answer their questions from their visit here 
today. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my  

voice on behalf of my colleagues in the official opposition to 
also welcome the people from the real estate association, with 
whom we will also be meeting later. Welcome. We look 
forward to meeting with you. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members in the House, 
people seated, I believe, in all the galleries, Mr. Speaker, 
workers for SaskTel. And I’d ask my colleagues to join me in 
welcoming them to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
happy today to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, a very dynamic mayor who is in our 
midst and in your gallery today, Mayor Terry Haggart, from 
Eastend, Saskatchewan. Mayor Haggart of course is taking a 
little bit of breather just now coming into the city to discuss 
municipal affairs. She’s resting up as well from the ordeal of 
the floods that have just gone through her community on the 
Frenchman River in south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
We wish you well on your visit into Regina today, Mayor, and 
we hope that we don’t see a recurrence of the flood any time in 
your lifetime or mine. But we know that if it does happen, once 
again you and your community will come through and you will 
do what is necessary to work together to solve those problems 
and to save your community. Great job. 
 
And just as I’m on my feet, we would also like to welcome the 
members of the SaskTel delegations that are here as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Please welcome Mayor Terry Haggart. Please rise. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I just would like to 
join with my friend and colleague from Cypress in welcoming 
Mayor Terry Haggart to the Assembly. I would also join with 
my friend and colleague from Maple Creek in thanking her for 
all the work that she did during the recent flood. 
 
But also members of the Assembly will know that Eastend is 
also the home of Scotty and great work being done there based 
on that tourism development. The mayor of Eastend has had 
almost everything to do with that project going ahead and wish 
them the biggest success this summer in terms of tourism. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to my colleagues in the House, a new-found friend, 
a young woman I met this morning when I, along with many of 
my colleagues, had breakfast with the Saskatchewan 
Association for Community Living. And I would like to 
introduce the treasurer of that organization, Joann Simon,  
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 945 

 

please. And would you join me in giving her a warm welcome. 
Joann. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Welcome Back to Minister of Energy and Mines 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of all my colleagues over here on the opposition benches, I 
want to take this opportunity to offer a belated welcome back to 
the Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
I understand the minister has recently undergone surgery on his 
back, and we’re all glad to see him back on his feet. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think anyone can understand the torture that is 
constant back pain until they have lived through it. I too have 
suffered from back trouble so my sympathy lies with the 
minister, and I hope his problem is now cleared up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone in this House knows it takes a strong 
spine to get through the day when you’re in politics. And my 
guess, as a cabinet minister your spine has to be even stronger 
than most. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been told that in my present role as 
opposition leader and interim leader of the party, Liberal Party, 
I should be watching my back constantly to see what’s going on 
behind me. 
 
But I digress, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we sincerely wish the 
minister a full recovery, but I offer a little warning to him and 
all of his colleagues in cabinet. Our opposition will continue to 
dog them daily as we fight for the people of Saskatchewan, 
maybe even to the point where the minister thinks we give him 
a pain a good deal lower than the back. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Innovation Place Expansion 
 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today there are 
over 1,400 people working in a park in Saskatoon, but this is no 
ordinary park. Because of Monday’s announcement of a $7.8 
million expansion at Innovation Place in Saskatoon, there will 
be literally hundreds more working in this research and 
development park. But if we travel back in time 15 years to 
1981, there were only nine lonely companies in Innovation 
Place. Now there are 94. 
 
Now travel back to 1991. Innovation Place generated $54 
million worth of economic activity for Saskatoon. And today 
that’s more than doubled to 119 million in economic activity for 
Saskatoon and 150 million for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Monday’s announcement of an expansion at Innovation Place 
brings a new industrial building designed to serve the needs of 
agriculture and environmental companies, also an addition to 
the greenhouse and labs at the Kristjanson Biotech Complex. 
But it’s more than that. It’s concrete proof that Saskatchewan is  

preparing for the 21st century and is building more than a vision 
for the future, but is building that future to give Saskatchewan 
people jobs, security, and one of the world’s true centres of 
excellence to build and diversify our provincial economy. 
Thank you. 
 

Students Fast for World Vision 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the weekend of 
March 23 and 24, 75 young people between the ages of 10 and 
18 years old participated in Naicam’s fifth World Vision 
30-hour famine. These students came from Star City, 
Pleasantdale, Spalding, Quill Lake, and Naicam. Youth Alive, 
the interdenominational youth group of Naicam, sponsored this 
successful event. 
 
These young people went without food for 30 hours and in the 
process raised $3,300. This money is being used to combat 
world hunger and poverty. 
 
While raising this money, they discovered some of the physical 
effects of going without food, like headaches, nausea, and 
chapped lips. They also realized, especially in the final hours of 
the fast, that it is increasingly difficult to stay focused in their 
thinking and to keep up their normal level of activity. They now 
know some of the effects that chronic hunger has on people. 
The sponsors of this event also provided activities geared 
towards knowledge of hunger and work being done by World 
Vision to fight poverty. Mr. Speaker, this is just one way our 
society is being reminded about those who are daily suffering 
from hunger and poverty. 
 
I would like this Assembly to join me in commending this 
youth group and their leaders for trying to make a difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Law Day 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to report 
that today is Law Day, a day established by the Canadian Bar 
Association and the legal community to educate the public 
about our legal system. And the theme once again this year is 
access to justice. The goal is to provide the public with 
information about the laws and legal issues which affect our 
daily lives. 
 
I’d like to mention a few of the events that are taking place 
around Regina. The Law Day committee has organized a 
noon-hour panel discussion at the main library on the very 
timely issue of whether cameras should be allowed in the 
courtroom. And the panel is composed of academics, lawyers, 
and members of the media. 
 
Also, lawyers from several firms are participating in a one-day 
service whereby they will take inquiries from members of the 
public seeking general legal information and give free advice. 
Members of the legal community will be talking to high school 
students today as well, and tomorrow, about the legal system 
and the impact on young people. 
 
  



946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

The Department of Justice, the Provincial Court, and the Regina 
Law Day committee are offering some free mediation sessions 
this week for people that want to explore alternative ways of 
resolving legal disputes. And Law Day committees in Regina 
and Saskatoon have sponsored an edition of The PLEA, which 
is a quarterly newsletter distributed to elementary and high 
schools by the Public Legal Education Association of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the purpose of Law Day is to 
establish rules and guidelines by which we live and to celebrate 
that we live in a legal system that is characterized by 
democracy, which they don’t enjoy around the world. So I 
commend the legal community for doing this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Route of SaskPower’s Proposed New Line 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Caribou West 
Pipe Line Co-operative in my constituency provides a 
pressurized water line which connects rural homesteads just 
west of Moose Jaw to the treated water from the Buffalo Pound 
water filtration plant. 
 
Recently the Moose Jaw district warmly welcomed the 
announcement that Cargill will build another terminal near 
Moose Jaw on 32nd Avenue. SaskPower, however, intends to 
service the site by building a line which will virtually infringe 
on the right of way occupied by the cooperative’s water line. 
 
The route chosen may also involve a costly procedure of 
punching lines under the double-lane Trans-Canada, which 
could be avoided by taking another route. Members of the 
cooperative inform me that this provincial road, which also 
services other major facilities, may need to be upgraded in the 
future, forcing SaskPower to move the proposed line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cooperative suggests that the Minister of 
Highways expand the right of way, allowing the power line to 
be placed safely away from the water line. 
 
In closing, I strongly urge the government to address this 
situation so Cargill’s arrival is welcomed by all. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Habitat 2000 
 
Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, recently National Wildlife 
Week was held across Canada. Saskatchewan students played a 
big part in this event, as they always do. I take particular 
interest in this matter because my constituency includes 
territory that is home to all kinds of wildlife habitat, and that 
includes Prince Albert National Park. 
 
Educational kits were distributed to schools in the province by 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management for 
Wildlife Week. These kits, called Habitat 2000, included a 
wildlife habitat improvement action program for young people. 
Students are encouraged to improve as much habitat as possible  

for wildlife by the year 2000. 
 
In the past six years, Saskatchewan schools have come up with 
impressive projects, schools that have won awards or have been 
recognized for their achievement. They include Palliser Heights 
School in Moose Jaw; the 1991 grade 11 class at Carpenter 
High School in Meadow Lake; the 1993 grade 5 class at St. Pius 
X School in Regina; K to 6 students at Winston Churchill 
School in Lloydminster; the Westmount Elementary in Moose 
Jaw; and Reynolds Central School in Melfort. 
 
Congratulation to those schools and all the students who are 
participating in these projects. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Golden Grains Farms 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, not long ago I reported on 
the growing success of Prairie Malt in Biggar. Malt, as we all 
know, is made from barley, which has been around for a few 
thousand years at least. 
 
Today I want to mention another business in my constituency 
also based on barley, which is taking this traditional grain and 
creating a new line of barley products for the discriminating 
consumer. This is another case of Saskatchewan enterprise 
which combines an available resource, modern technology, 
entrepreneurial excellence and cooperation, and current 
marketing techniques  a Saskatchewan success story at 
Dinsmore in the Rosetown-Biggar constituency. 
 
Golden Grains Farm Co. is the creation of Gord and Marge 
Thomson, Marg’s two brothers, and the Joe and Arlo Lytle 
families. They have taken hull-less barley, an old grain with 
special food and fibre value, and explored new uses for it. From 
this new strain they have developed three new products  
hull-less barley flour; rolled hull-less barley; and hull-less 
barley cereal  Saskatchewan grown and Saskatchewan 
processed. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan area REDA (regional 
economic development authority) — another wonderful success 
story — Entrepreneurs 2000, worked with Golden Grains to 
bring the products to market where they are today: available in 
Rosetown, Saskatoon, Regina, and Edmonton, and soon to a 
much wider market area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good news story of diversification, 
cooperation, and entrepreneurship. I wish the Golden Grains 
Farm all the best and urge members to try a new barley product 
 this novel, non-beverage form. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Municipal Government faced some tough questions  
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 947 

 

from municipal leaders this morning, and given the recent 
statements by the minister, it’s no wonder. 
 
On the issue of amalgamation the minister has stated that these 
determinations are best made at a local level. On the other hand, 
the minister has threatened to tighten the purse-strings on local 
government who may not wish to amalgamate. 
 
This morning the minister indicated her government has, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . finally reached a point where using the round-table 
discussions as the vehicle and we’ll get back to talking 
about a framework and protocol for how we’re going to 
approach municipalities that have expressed a wish to have 
some change. 

 
Will the minister explain why it took her and this government 
so long to finally realize that proper consultation should have 
proceeded legislation on such a controversial issue? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, if the member is 
referring in terms of legislation again to The Service Districts 
Act, The Service Districts Act is about everything except 
amalgamation, everything except governance. Although the Act 
has been tabled in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, it appears the 
members opposite haven’t read it yet. And I would, you know, 
I’d be glad to answer their questions at any time in any form. 
But first of all I wish they’d read the legislation so that their 
questions would make sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the municipalities in this province want to 
move into the 21st century. They want to move forward. 
Municipalities have, local governments have, served the people 
of this province well, but for 90 years, Mr. Speaker, there hasn’t 
been any change. There are those who have indicated to us that 
they want to change. 
 
So unlike the members opposite who want to live in the past, 
who want to keep their heads buried in the sand, municipalities 
are progressive, Mr. Speaker, and we’re working with them to 
move into the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the 
minister that the members of SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) must also have their head 
in the sand because they agree completely with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister and this government have claimed 
that full and proper consultation took place before they 
introduced The Service Districts Act. However the minister 
admitted this morning to the media and again I quote: 
 

We don’t intend to proceed with it any further at the 
current time until we’re sure that we have a pulse on what 
the majority view is out there. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this statement is a clear indication that there was 
no proper poll consultation. This government would know the 
pulse out there if they had taken the time to hear what local  

leaders have to say instead of telling them. 
 
The minister indicates her government does not intend to 
proceed with this Act at this time. Will the minister make a 
commitment in this House today to go one step further: give 
local governments time to come to decisions on sharing services 
and withdraw this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I am very surprised at 
the members opposite trying to put words in the mouth of the 
leaders of the municipal organizations in this province. I had a 
meeting this morning with members of the executive, including 
the president of SARM. It was a very cordial meeting. Had a 
meeting last Friday with the executive of SUMA, a very cordial 
meeting. 
 
We have agreed. We have a scheduled meeting for April 26 to 
talk about a framework for how we will move together with 
municipalities who feel they want to share services more 
efficiently, that we will develop a protocol for how they will do 
that. It’s very cordial, Mr. Speaker. We’re working with those 
organizations and with their members, and the atmosphere is 
very good, and we’re making very good progress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, as this House is aware, I 
introduced a private members’ Bill earlier this week that would 
require liquor outlets to post signs indicating that drinking 
alcohol could be harmful to the health of an unborn child. The 
Minister of Health indicated to the media yesterday that this 
initiative was too simplistic. He further stated that a committee 
was formed in 1992 to study this issue and are looking at 
something much more complex. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this working group studies the issue and 
looks for a more complex solution, an estimated 47 
Saskatchewan children are afflicted with fetal alcohol syndrome 
each and every year. 
 
Will the minister make a commitment in this House today that 
he will introduce a Bill that isn’t so simplistic during this sitting 
of the legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’d like to say to the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that this issue of children affected by fetal alcohol 
syndrome is not a political issue or a partisan issue with respect 
to which that member and I would have any disagreement. 
Something should be done about it, and the member has made a 
useful suggestion, I think. 
 
But what I want to say to the member is, there is a working 
group established which includes representatives from the 
community, including the Saskatchewan Institute on Prevention 
of Handicaps in Children, and I’ve asked the community to  
  



948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

come forward with some recommendations. 
 
And what I say to that member is, this isn’t political. This isn’t 
partisan. Let’s give the community an opportunity to come 
forward with their suggestions, which we’ve asked them to do 
— and which I have every confidence they’ll do in the next few 
months — before we come up with a solution without 
consulting the people whose opinion we’ve asked for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Strike 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
union representing striking SaskTel employees made a request 
earlier this week that a mediator be appointed to help end the 
labour dispute. The union obviously believes that the two sides 
in this strike are at an impasse, and mediation is the only route 
by which a settlement might result. As union spokesman Ron 
Carlson states, there’s a need to bring somebody in who can 
look at this from an unbiased point of view and make a 
recommendation. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SaskTel explain why she is so 
opposed to mediation, if in fact she favours an end to this labour 
dispute? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  I have to remind the guests in the Assembly 
that the rules of the Assembly don’t provide for participation in 
the proceedings of the Assembly, and I’ll ask you to simply 
note that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, through you to the 
member opposite. I thank him for his question and I think the 
best I can do is read a letter that I provided to the 
Communications, Energy & Paperworkers Union prior to noon 
today. It reads: 
 

Dear Mr. Carlson: Thank you for your letter of April 15, 
1996, requesting the appointment of a special mediator to 
assist in the resolution of the dispute with SaskTel. 
 
Officials of my department have talked to both parties in 
this dispute about your request for mediation. They advise 
me that there does not appear to be sufficient flexibility in 
the bargaining positions for mediation to be successful at 
this time. 
 
My officials will continue to monitor the situation very 
closely. If there is any change in positions which indicates 
that mediation (would) . . . be helpful in reaching an 
agreement, it will be provided. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the union wants an end to this 
labour dispute and the people of Saskatchewan also want an end 
to it. And in spite of the fact that SaskTel is saving two and  

a half million dollars a week in salaries, the minister indicates 
her government wants an end to this labour dispute. 
 
However, she refuses to consider mediation as an alternative. It 
would appear that the striking workers are more concerned 
about supplying the proper services to people of Saskatchewan 
than the government. 
 
One might go as far as suggesting that this government is 
attempting to use this collective bargaining process, not as a 
means to an end of the dispute, but to their advantage. Will the 
minister explain if that is the case, and if not, will she make a 
commitment in this House today to bring a mediation into this 
dispute? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I clearly indicated to the 
member opposite that we have not ruled out mediation. There is 
no point in putting a mediator into place when the position 
seems to be as hardened as is indicated from the galleries here 
today within this legislature. 
 
We feel that the collective bargaining process can work and will 
work. I encourage the parties to go back to the bargaining table, 
discuss what their positions are, and when it’s indicated to me, 
as Minister of Labour in Saskatchewan, that there’s movement 
from the positions that are so entrenched at the current time, if 
there’s a need for a mediator to come into place to successfully 
find a resolve to the situation that we’re all concerned about, at 
that time I will in fact appoint a mediator, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  I will have to remind the guests in the 
Assembly that it’s not permitted to participate in the 
proceedings of the floor, and I will ask for the cooperation in 
respect to the rules of the Assembly for all members, all guests 
who are here. 
 

Addictions Treatment 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have recently spoken to a counsellor who 
works for school divisions counselling youths suffering from 
drug and alcohol addictions, and this counsellor is extremely 
concerned about your government’s decisions to close 
Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre and move it to the Calder 
Centre. 
 
He has tried to admit youths to the Whitespruce centre but has 
been told that no more admissions can be made until after 
August 1 when the move to Saskatoon is completed. 
 
Mr. Minister, addicted youths who finally agree to go through 
treatment can’t wait four months for the help that they need. 
And as this counsellor put it, you have to strike while the iron is 
hot, otherwise most addicted youths change their mind. 
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 949 

 

Considering that fact, the fact that treatment only takes two or 
three months, Mr. Minister, why are you refusing to allow these 
young people the treatment into . . . that they need at 
Whitespruce centre? Why are you turning them away? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Leader of the 
Third Party that you do have to strike while the iron is hot. And 
the instruction I have given to the department and to 
Whitespruce is that admissions should indeed continue. And 
that’s my position; that’s the position of the government; that’s 
the position of the Department of Health. 
 
If somebody has given the member information contrary to that, 
I’d like the name of that person and I will deal with that 
situation, because that person that needs treatment should get 
the treatment and that’s the position that we’re taking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ve been told that a 
couple of exceptions to this rule have been made, such as the 
young mother who took her concerns to the newspaper last 
week and as a result of that received treatment for her addicted 
child. 
 
We think that it’s unacceptable, Mr. Minister, to leave youths 
hanging at a time when you are making renovations at the 
Calder Centre and making it available in Saskatoon effective 
August 1. 
 
Will you commit today not to turn any youths away from the 
Whitespruce Centre who need help? And if you have to move 
the centre to Saskatoon, so be it; but at least allow Whitespruce 
to treat addicted young people in the meantime. 
 
Will you commit, Mr. Minister, to allowing Whitespruce to 
operate at full capacity in the meantime so all addicted young 
adults will receive the treatment that they need? Will you make 
that commitment this afternoon, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I will make the commitment 
that young people will get the treatment they need. 
 
The member is correct that when the matter has been brought to 
our attention that somebody has been turned away, we have 
said, don’t turn them away. If somebody’s being turned away, 
I’m as concerned about that as the member is, and that is not the 
position of the government. 
 
At some point, because Whitespruce will be moving, they will 
have to accommodate the young people in another centre; 
there’s no question about that because they’ll be moving. But 
the member’s point is well taken that these young people, if 
they need treatment and they’ve been properly referred, they’ve 
got to get the treatment. That’s the position of the government. 
That’s the position we’ve been taking. 
 
If anybody’s turned away, I want to know the details of that 
person’s situation, in confidence, and the member can give that  

to me. And I assure the House, Mr. Speaker, that, as I have to 
date, I will ensure that young people that need treatment, get 
treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Political Function Advertising 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation). It seems like the minister is a little 
bit of a slow learner, Mr. Speaker. Two years ago we caught the 
minister using his MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
communications allowance to mail out information to NDP 
(New Democratic Party) members. This included fund-raising 
information for an NDP raffle and an NDP curling bonspiel. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister is at it again, only this time he’s 
a little more hi-tech. He’s now using his MLA fax machine to 
sell tickets to the Yorkton-Melville NDP spring banquet which 
was held last Friday in Yorkton. The tickets were $15 a piece, if 
you were interested, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Minister, Board of Internal Economy directives clearly 
state that your MLA allowances are not supposed to be used for 
material which solicits donations to a political party or 
attendance at a political function. Why did you do this again, 
Mr. Minister? When are you going to learn that the MLA 
allowances are not to be used for partisan political activities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the question from the member. I want to advise the 
member opposite that the function that was held in our 
constituency this past week was a federal function. And the 
information that was circulated to the constituents, not only in 
the community of Yorkton, but was circulated to members 
across the entire constituency. That information was put out in a 
variety of different forms. 
 
It was a wonderful event, Mr. Speaker. We had well over 160 
people who attended it. We had fine representation outside of 
our building that day. And I want to inform the member that 
we’re very pleased with the kind of support that we got at that 
constituency banquet that evening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems 
that the minister not only admits it but is indeed proud that he’s 
using taxpayers’ money to solicit funds for the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, your 
member doesn’t seem to learn. Your minister for SPMC and 
your member for Last Mountain-Touchwood and your former 
member from Melville were all caught using their MLA mailing 
privileges for partisan purposes. Your Provincial Secretary was 
caught selling NDP perogies out of his cabinet office. And now 
your minister for SPMC has again been caught using his MLA 
fax allowance for partisan purposes. 
 
Mr. Premier, what action are you going to take to discipline  
  



950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

your minister? When are you going to send the message that 
this is not appropriate activity to be conducted out of MLA 
offices? Will you put a stop to these ongoing activities; save the 
taxpayer the cost of paying for a token cabinet minister by 
removing this two-time offender, the minister for SPMC, the 
member from Yorkton, from cabinet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As I commented on my first statement that the constituency 
event that was held in Yorkton was a federal event and that 
there were a number of individuals who participated. We have a 
federal riding constituency that looked after the mailing out of a 
variety of different amount of information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of the fact that my fax 
machine in my constituency office was used for the sending out 
or the printing of any tickets. And I make that statement without 
any knowledge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if in fact there was some involvement by the previous 
members, as the member from the opposite benches states, 
that’s a matter that I think the other members will need to speak 
to on their own. But I . . . and I know that in the past those 
members have made their retractions public. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Surgery Waiting-lists 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to bring to the attention of this House a news item 
indicating that the NDP government in British Columbia has 
provided $100 million in funding to improve patient care and 
ease pressure on waiting-lists for open-heart surgery. And I’d 
like to send some of these Vancouver Sun articles across to the 
cabinet minister so that they could follow along with me here 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously $100 million is not the total answer. 
However, as the Liberal Party of BC (British Columbia) states 
rather appropriately, the NDP set a fire and are now trying to 
put it out. Given the fact that our health care system is an 
inferno here in Saskatchewan as a result of the cut-backs to 
front-line care and reductions of services because of the actions 
of this NDP government, will the minister indicate if his 
government is prepared to make the same kind of commitment 
here today in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member’s always 
fond of sending me over papers to look at. Well I’ve got a paper 
for the member to look at today. I’d like one of the pages to 
distribute this to the Liberal Party. And what this paper I’m 
going to distribute today is, Mr. Speaker, is a picture of a man 
kicking the door of this Chamber. 
 
Now who is this man? I’ll tell you who it is. It’s a former leader 
of the Liberal Party kicking the door of this Chamber down to 
protest the introduction of medicare in this province and this 
country because the Liberal Party has always been opposed to 
medicare, Mr. Speaker. And a few weeks ago the member from  

Kelvington-Wadena was up on her feet advocating that we go 
to American-style medicare where you pay 9,000 bucks a year 
for medicare. 
 
And you know, the member from Wood River will be familiar 
with this man, this former Liberal leader, protesting the 
introduction of medicare, because that man went from the 
Liberal Party . . . the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation) Party to the Liberal Party, and his son went from 
the Liberal Party to the Conservative Party, and that member 
was going to go from the Liberal Party to be an independent if 
he couldn’t get the former leader of the Liberal Party to leave 
the Liberal Party, but he succeeded so he could stay in that 
party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. The minister’s time had expired, but I 
want to remind all hon. members, as has been previously ruled 
in the House, if you expect to be recognized by the Chair, to 
follow the rules and the protocol in standing. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And if the 
Minister of Health wants to compare pictures, I recall a session 
or two ago where in fact the pictures that I brought in of a 
SaskTel phone bolted to the side of the Ponteix Hospital I think 
was a little more dramatic than what you could handle. It was 
all because of the Deputy Premier’s wife closing down the 
hospitals all throughout the province. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order. I think the 
hon. members will recognize that there’s no room for debate to 
bring in family relationships for hon. members. And he knows 
that the words he chose reflect that. I’ll simply ask him to 
withdraw those unparliamentary remarks and put his question. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will 
withdraw the comment about the Deputy Premier’s wife. She 
was the former minister of Health. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. I wasn’t asking the 
hon. member to explain his remark. I simply asked him to 
withdraw the unparliamentary remark and then put his question. 
Would the hon. member for Wood River just simply withdraw 
the remark and put the question, to withdraw it without 
qualification. Just withdraw the remark and put the question. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the remark. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government in British Columbia have 
admitted they made a mistake and are taking action. They 
realize that people’s health care is more important than 
balancing the budget. 
 
In Saskatchewan this NDP government fails to even 
acknowledge the devastation that they have created in our 
health care system. Hospitals are closing. Front-line care-givers 
are being fired, and services are a shell of what they used to be. 
Furthermore the waiting-list for open-heart surgery is two to 
three months, which is unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 951 

 

Will the minister indicate what it will take to wake this 
government up, which is so obviously out of touch, and that 
they’re not even aware of the chaos they have created in the 
health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, these people are not the 
protectors of medicare. These people are the opponents of 
medicare, and their cousins in Ottawa took $50 million out of 
the health care system in the province of Saskatchewan this 
year. We put in a dollar for every dollar the Liberals took out of 
health care. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, let me add that when the Liberals 
weren’t busy in the ‘60s opposing medicare, they were busy 
passing laws taking away the right to strike from the workers at 
SaskTel and everywhere else in the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When they pass Bill 2 and they get up in this House and pretend 
that they’re the friends of labour, when the third party proposes 
a law that would take away the right to strike, that party did the 
same thing in government. 
 
They get up and pretend they’re the champions of the people, 
for working people and for health care. Nothing could be 
further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, as I just mentioned in the 
House, the waiting-list for open-heart surgery is two to three 
months in this province. But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Justice, the member for Regina Lakeview, knows personally the 
anxiety that a family goes through when a family member is in 
need of open-heart surgery. His father was in need of 
open-heart surgery last fall and was lucky enough to receive 
such surgery. 
 
Will the Minister of Justice tell this House how long his father 
was on a waiting-list before undergoing open-heart surgery and 
whether he feels the current waiting-list is acceptable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’m going 
to rule that question out of order. The hon. member knows that 
in question period . . . Order. The hon. member knows that in 
question period, questions must be put to ministers to deal with 
matters related to their portfolios. 
 
And I’ll go to the next question. 
 

High-risk Offender Identification 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m in a 
welcoming-back mood today. Although it’s a little belated, I 
welcome back the Minister of Justice from Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for weeks in this House the official opposition has  

been pressing the government to act immediately and bring in a 
protocol that would allow police to fully identify dangerous sex 
offenders living in our communities. This would not only 
protect the police from legal action if they chose to publicly 
identify pedophiles or other such sex offenders, it would also 
bring some sense of security to our citizens, and particularly our 
children. 
 
Now that he’s returned from Ottawa, I wonder if the Justice 
minister can assure the House he will act immediately to 
implement such protocol and to support the Bill that the official 
opposition has put forward; not unlike, Mr. Speaker, when a 
dangerous situation is noticed, there is at least a temporary 
warning sign put up until the proper permanent directions can 
be put in place. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to answer the 
question of the Leader of the Opposition. I was in Ottawa on 
Monday and spent some time talking with the federal Minister 
of Justice about these issues, and we had agreement that this is a 
national problem that needs to be dealt with in a coordinated 
fashion by all of the ministers of Justice and the provincial 
governments in concert with the federal government. 
 
We will be having this as a major point of discussion at our 
meeting on May 9 and 10 in Ottawa of all the provincial 
ministers of Justice, together with the federal Minister of 
Justice. 
 
The area of community notification  we are working on that 
here in Saskatchewan with a able group of people including the 
Saskatoon City Police, the Regina city police, the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police). And I’d just like to close by 
quoting Chief Maguire in Saskatoon who I’ve been working 
with. He says: 
 

I think we’re on good track here. I would sooner have one 
(protocol) that we’re going to be able to live with rather 
than have to do patchwork. Saskatchewan has an 
opportunity here. 
 

We’re going to do this in a Saskatchewan way and in a way 
that preserves the safety of our families and our children. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Bill No. 74  An Act to amend 

The Government Organization Act and 
to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 
The Government Organization amendment Act and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
  



952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In keeping with our policy of open 
and accessible government, we table the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 71 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 45  An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
and to make a consequential amendment to 

The Provincial Mediation Board Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to 
move second reading of Bill No. 45 to amend The Tax 
Enforcement Act. 
 
This Bill will realize significant benefits to municipalities. This 
will be achieved in part by simplifying and clarifying the steps 
involved in local tax enforcement by reducing minimum time 
limits to allow the tax enforcement process to proceed more 
quickly and by enabling municipalities to recover more of their 
costs incurred in the tax enforcement process. 
 
This Bill has been developed following an extensive 
consultative process. Helpful assistance has been provided by 
members of an advisory committee and task force over 
countless hours during the past few years. Representatives have 
included members of urban and rural municipal administrators’ 
associations, the city clerks’ association, the school business 
officials’ association, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, a number of provincial departments, and eight city 
administrations. Their assistance and support is greatly 
appreciated. 
 
This Bill will speed up the tax enforcement process. Presently 
municipalities typically wait a minimum time period of 28 
months between the date when taxes are in arrears and the date 
when they are permitted to request a transfer of title. It is 
proposed that the time period be reduced to a minimum of 16 
months. In addition, the Provincial Mediation Board may grant 
a municipality’s request to transfer a title up to six months 
earlier if specific criteria is met. Consequently, if a property is 
in a deteriorating state that requires a high expenditure for 
clean-up or it has been abandoned by the owner, a municipality 
will be able to start proceedings months earlier than at present. 
 
Amendments will also streamline municipal proceedings by 
reducing administrative work for low-value parcels. Costs to a 
municipality, and of course the taxpayer, will potentially be less 
than they are at present. Accelerating the process will also bring 
matters more quickly to the Provincial Mediation Board, 
increasing prospects for negotiating successful payment of taxes 
rather than a municipality resorting to taking a property. 
 

These time lines are not mandatory. Municipalities may choose 
to give delinquent ratepayers more time, for example in rural 
areas where agricultural revenue varies annually. Minimum 
time lines will permit councils to be sensitive to local 
circumstances. 
 
Property owners rights will not be infringed upon by this Bill. 
Property owners or other parties with interests may continue to 
redeem the property before a municipality is granted permission 
from the Provincial Mediation Board to take the title. 
 
Proposed amendments will provide that municipal costs will be 
added to the arrears of taxes. Costs incurred in the tax 
enforcement process and associated with the property itself after 
a municipality acquires title will be recovered.  
 
Examples of costs and expenses to be recovered include repair 
and maintenance to buildings, structures, and fixtures, 
environmental clean-up, and other municipal expenditures such 
as fees for legal services and advertising. Many of these costs 
may be retrieved by a deduction from the surplus proceeds of 
the sale of the property by tender or auction. 
 
In terms of the effect of the amendments on taxpayers, the 
shorter process will reduce procrastination of property owners 
whose taxes are due. As a result, other taxpayers will not have 
to carry a financial burden imposed by tax dodgers for as long a 
time period. 
 
In comparison with other provinces, Saskatchewan will 
compare very favourably in terms of procedural time lines. 
These changes take into account the needs of all classes of 
municipalities in this province. 
 
I ask all members to support this Bill and to move second 
reading of it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
address the proposed amendments to The Tax Enforcement Act 
that have been put forward in Bill 45, The Tax Enforcement 
Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
This Bill has three or four key points that deal, for the most 
part, with the waiting periods on title transfers when taxes are in 
arrears. This Bill addresses the concerns that have been voiced 
on the part of associations such as SARM, SUMA, the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon, and many others over the past number of 
years. 
 
We as a caucus reflect these concerns, but there are still parts of 
this Bill that we feel need more clarification and research. We 
need to know the potential impacts and outcomes of these 
amendments. 
 
I agree that 28 months is a very long time to wait to change 
titles when taxes are in arrears, but we don’t want to see a Bill 
come into force that will allow titles to change on a whim. 
 
I understand that the waiting period for changing titles will be  
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 953 

 

reduced to 16 months. In some cases, the Provincial Mediation 
Board will be able to change a title up to six months earlier than 
before. That means there could be less than a one-year wait 
when it comes to changing titles. We are concerned that this 
may not be a sufficient amount of time to have all aspects of the 
tax problems sorted out. 
 
Some of the changes to this Act will hopefully clear up some of 
the confusion on the part of municipalities surrounding 
collection of taxes in arrears. The new sections do apply when 
the building for which the taxes have not been paid is not 
owned by the landowner. This clarifies the tax collection 
process goes to collect taxes owing on the building and not on 
the land. This Bill also simplifies the procedural requirements 
that must be met before the collection of tax in arrears can go 
ahead. 
 
There is a large part of this Bill that deals with the use of fees 
and how they are calculated in specific cases. 
 
This particular amendment ensures that the costs incurred by 
municipalities collecting taxes that are in arrears will be 
covered by payments made to the municipalities. I would think 
that everyone would agree that municipalities should not have 
to pay fees to get the tax money owed to them back. 
 
This Bill also clearly states that the conditions under which land 
may be sold in order for municipalities to collect taxes are met. 
When land is sold, the municipality’s council may abate or 
cancel the taxes owed on the land in question. 
 
This Bill deals with many other aspects of The Tax 
Enforcement Act that do need more research and explanation. 
And therefore I respectfully request the debate on this Bill be 
adjourned. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 46 
amends The Municipal Board Act. The changes being made 
complement amendments to the three municipal Acts respecting 
the assessment appeal process. This Bill focuses in particular on 
three areas intended to streamline the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board’s operations. 
 
First, the Act currently provides that assessment appeals 
concerning whether the assessment manual prepared and 
adopted by SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) complies with legislative requirements come to the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board, known as the SMB. 
 
This Bill changes this process since in essence there are legal 
questions. The Bill provides for review of such issues by the 
Court of Queen’s Bench on an application to the court. 
 
(1430) 
 

Second, the Bill changes the process for handling assessment 
appeals where legal issues arise in the course of an appeal. The 
present legislation requires the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 
to prepare a stated case, to refer to the Court of Appeal for this 
purpose. While this option is to be retained so that the SMB can 
seek legal guidance from the court for itself, it had previously 
resulted in significant delays to the process of resolving 
appeals. 
 
Instead, parties to assessment appeals will now be able to apply 
directly to the Court of Appeal to consider questions of law or 
the jurisdiction of the SMB if the court is willing to hear them. 
This change should speed up the process. It will avoid the delay 
of waiting for a stated case to be prepared and then submitted to 
the court as well as the conflict position that the previous 
process placed the board in. A judge will decide directly 
whether an issue raised by an appellant has any merit or not. 
 
The third general matter dealt with in the Bill relates to fees. 
The SMB has authority now to set fees to hear assessment 
appeals, but there is a significant backlog of such appeals that 
have been filed but for which the fee has not been paid. The 
appeal cannot proceed until the fee has been paid. The 
amendments will clean up this situation, requiring either the fee 
to be paid so the appeal can proceed or the appeal to be 
dismissed. The business of the board should not be left in 
limbo. 
 
Lastly, the Bill includes some other provisions relating to 
correcting errors made in previous board decisions, the size of a 
quorum for assessment appeals, and confirmation of the board’s 
authority to hear Lloydminster assessment appeals. These 
changes should have a positive impact on the SMB’s 
assessment appeal operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 46, An Act to 
amend The Municipal Board Act. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
legislation brings forth some very significant changes to the 
way the Saskatchewan Municipal Board will function, and how 
municipal appeals are handled. This Act would change the 
Municipal Board’s quorum to one. We do hope that reducing 
the quorum will give the board more freedom to hear more 
appeals. One of the problems with the current municipal appeal 
process is the length of time it takes for appeals to be processed 
and hopefully this amendment would improve access for any 
party filing an appeal. 
 
Some other sections of this Act do clarify the board’s 
jurisdiction in areas including Lloydminster. Lloydminster is 
now within the board’s authority. 
 
We believe another positive aspect of this new legislation is the 
amendment to section 40 that will allow the Municipal Board to 
correct any decisions it has made if that decision was based on a 
clerical error or incorrect information. 
 
Another major change that this Act proposes would allow 
challenges of SAMA’s assessment manual to be sent directly to 
the Court of Queen’s Bench while actually bypassing the  
  



954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

Municipal Board. The explanatory notes on this Bill say that the 
government is hoping this amendment will provide another 
avenue for parties to remedy their appeal, if they are not 
satisfied with SAMA.  
 
Unfortunately, this may be an oversimplification of the appeal 
process and raises some jurisdictional questions. The Court of 
Queen’s Bench will not usually hear an appeal of a judicial 
review until all other appeal avenues have been exhausted. 
 
Another section of this Bill places more restrictions on who 
may appeal a decision with the board. We have concerns any 
time access could be restricted, because the onus is now on the 
municipality or the person making the complaint to prove that 
they are affected by the order. 
 
The main changes proposed by Bill 46 will shift much of the 
responsibility of the appeal process onto the party filing the 
complaint. 
 
As this Bill clearly demonstrates, the legal process can be 
extremely complicated and confusing. If a municipality is the 
party laying the complaint, it may have the funding to hire 
lawyers to help process their appeal. But I am concerned that if 
an individual is a party filing the appeal, the costs might be a 
deterrent. Once again this a question of access. 
 
Overall, while the government’s intent for this legislation may 
be to give parties more direct control over the municipal 
appeals, unless they are comfortable with the legal process, they 
will have to seek help from lawyers. The question becomes, 
who picks up the tab. 
 
So while Bill 46 does propose some positive changes and 
clarification of the current municipal Act, I do see some 
potential major problems with the implementation of this Bill. 
We need more time to investigate exactly what these 
implications may be, and therefore I move we adjourn this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 70  An Act to amend 
The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 70 amends The 
Urban Municipality Act, 1984. This Bill is intended to ensure 
that provincial legislation pertaining to municipalities is 
responsive to evolving local government needs. 
 
Many of the changes will assist municipalities by providing 
increased authority to manage the effects of the province-wide 
reassessment in 1997. They will focus on improvements to the 
process for hearing assessment appeals and provide the 
necessary authority to locally established tax policies. 
 
Other legislation this session that is part of this initiative 
includes amendments to the rural and northern municipal Acts, 
The Municipal Board Act, and consequential changes to The 
Assessment Management Agency Act. 
 

Mr. Speaker, many of the changes being presented to this 
House have resulted from an extensive review of local 
government tax policy, facilitated by the Department of 
Municipal Government. The need for this work is driven by 
SAMA’s scheduled reassessment in 1997. This reassessment 
will update assessed values from 1965 to 1994, nearly 30 years. 
As a result, many shifts in assessments and tax incidence will 
occur that may need to be managed. 
 
As part of this review, the department prepared and released 
background papers for discussion purposes. Several 
consensus-building sessions were facilitated involving local 
governments and their associations and other stakeholders. 
Proposals were developed based on what was heard and 
submitted, and more discussion took place around these 
proposals, with changes being made to try to provide a balance 
of interests. 
 
I would like to particularly thank the representatives from the 
three local government associations  SUMA, SARM, and 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), for their 
partnership in developing the local government tax policy 
reflected in these amendments. 
 
I would also like to thank the numerous interested parties from 
across the province representing business, industry, residential 
associations, and other groups, who on many occasions shared 
their ideas with one another and provided advice to department 
representatives. Many compromises were reached and many 
problems solved in these consultations. More work will be done 
on a few remaining aspects of local government tax policy, to 
be undertaken over the coming months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first I will summarize changes relating to the 
assessment appeal process. The assessment appeal process 
provides an avenue for business or property owners to challenge 
the assessment values for their property or business as a means 
of testing their correctness or validity. The appeal process in 
Saskatchewan consists of two levels. Appeals are heard by 
boards of revision, often, in fact usually, constituted of 
members of councils in municipalities. These boards hear 
evidence and determine whether an assessment was properly 
arrived at. 
 
Decisions of the board of revision can then be appealed to the 
assessment appeals committee of the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board. The assessment appeals amendments before the House 
will ensure a more effective process and hearing of assessment 
appeals at local boards of revision, and will clarify the role and 
authority of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. This is 
particularly important in view of the coming reassessment in 
1997. 
 
More specifically, new requirements for better stating a 
person’s grounds of appeal and providing written submissions 
for consideration by the board of revision are included. 
Measures for allowing full disclosure of information among 
parties, while protecting the confidentiality of information, are 
advanced. Written reasons are to be prepared and provided for 
each hearing. 
 
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 955 

 

Recognizing that the time required for preparing materials may 
be greater than in the past, the times for filing appeals and 
documentation are extended. Appellants will be responsible for 
taking assessment appeal hearings seriously and will be 
required to attend hearings if they wish to preserve their right to 
further appeal a board of revision decision. New fees may be 
introduced for appeals at the local level, but would be subject to 
a maximum fee that would be set out in regulation. 
 
These changes will also improve the ability of the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board to hear appeals from decisions 
of the local boards of revision. A better record of the board of 
revision decisions will be available to the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board. The Municipal Board will be somewhat more 
restricted in the evidence it may hear on appeals, as the thrust of 
these amendments is to place the primary responsibility at the 
local level where assessments are determined and must be 
defensible. Where errors have been made there will be an 
ability to adjust an assessment up or down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now summarize amendments respecting tax 
policy. First, legislative authority to define property classes and 
set percentages of value to apply to property assessments in 
these classes will be provided by the provincial government. 
Previously this authority rested with the Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency. There was a wide consensus 
in the consultations that these were tax policy measures that 
belonged with an elected government. 
 
Province-wide property classes will be defined and percentages 
of value set on a broad basis across Saskatchewan. The 
province will set these by regulation. With reassessment, 
significant room must be provided for local municipalities to 
manage the changes and to feel comfortable with the balance of 
fairness and equity among property classes. 
 
Accordingly, expanded authority will be provided to 
municipalities through locally managed tax incidence, through 
new tax tools, including variable mill rate factors, a minimum 
tax, and phase-in of tax changes from reassessment. These local 
tax tools strike a balance between ability to manage these 
changes and consideration of taxpayers’ interests. 
 
Mill rate factors give the ability to manage tax incidence among 
property classes by adjusting the mill rate for specific property 
classes. A mill rate is set and then multiplied by factors for 
different property classes. 
 
Provincially defined property classes will be used by 
municipalities for setting local mill rate factors, minimum tax, 
and phase-in of tax changes. Cities will have authority to define 
sub-classes for these purposes. 
 
Mill rate factors may be subject to limits set provincially by 
regulation. The limits would specify the amount of difference in 
mill rates there could be among property classes. Mill rate 
factors will apply to taxes levied for municipal purposes, unless 
another taxing authority such as the school division agrees to 
have them applied to its levy as well. 
 
This approach respects the rights of other taxing authorities,  

offers potentially greater ability to manage tax incidence, and 
avoids potentially conflicting tax policies being set by different 
taxing authorities if set independently. 
 
School boards will continue to set uniform mill rates, but 
municipal mill rate factors can be applied to the school as well 
as the municipal rate by agreement of the school board. A 
minimum tax is already authorized now, but provisions will be 
fine-tuned to permit it to be levied for separate property classes. 
 
A council could raise a portion of its revenues based on a 
uniform amount of tax related to provision of certain services to 
property, for instance. 
 
Authority to phase in tax changes from reassessment over up to 
three years was provided in spring 1995. This will continue 
based on provincially rather than locally set uniform property 
classes. 
 
Business assessment and tax as a separate assessment, and tax 
on business occupants, will be optional. The decision will be 
made by municipal councils, since the decision implies a shift 
in tax burden at the local level. This option eliminates the 
requirement to maintain a business assessment roll and thus 
expands the current municipal authority to exempt from or 
abate business tax, while reducing administrative overhead. 
 
Where a business assessment is retained, existing out-of-date 
methods for calculating business assessment will be replaced by 
using a percentage of property value to calculate business 
assessment. This will be set provincially by regulation. The 
Department of Municipal Government is currently doing 
analysis as to the appropriate percentage. 
 
SAMA will be responsible for developing a method to allocate 
business assessment among multiple business occupants of a 
property. Municipalities that do their own assessments may 
determine this on their own, if preferred. 
 
(1445) 
 
A vacancy adjustment for commercial property is to be used if a 
municipality decides not to have a business tax on business 
occupants. This adjustment will reduce the tax shift to owners 
where commercial property is vacant or not used for business 
purposes. Regulations will set the method for calculating this. 
 
The rights of other taxing authorities, such as school divisions, 
will be respected by requiring a municipality that decides not to 
have a business assessment and tax, to still raise within that 
municipality the same amount of taxes for other taxing 
authorities that they would have received. This will prevent 
school tax shifts from other municipalities resulting from one 
municipality’s tax policy decisions. Such shifts are of particular 
concern in rural Saskatchewan. The method for calculating this 
will be set by provincial regulation. 
 
School board access to the revenues from business tax is also 
preserved if a municipality decides not to continue with 
business assessment and tax, since the municipality is required 
to adjust the school levy within that municipality to raise an  
  



956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

equivalent amount of taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, provincial legislation will be clarified in respect of 
assessment and taxation of machinery and equipment in the 
mining, pipeline, and oil and gas production industries. 
Amendments related to the mining and pipeline industries are 
essentially status quo provisions. For mines, machinery and 
equipment for extraction and primary production of a mineral 
resource will be assessed and taxed, but machinery and 
equipment for processing or refining will not. Machinery and 
equipment along pipelines will not be assessed and taxed. The 
line of pipe, plus land, buildings, and structures for pipelines, 
will continue to be taxed. 
 
Assessment and taxation of oil and gas well machinery and 
equipment will change. In summary, machinery and equipment 
used to produce oil and gas — including for enhanced recovery 
— to store oil and gas, to transport it to a battery or gas 
handling site, or to compress gas, will be assessed and subject 
to property tax. Machinery and equipment used to process, 
treat, separate, or dehydrate oil and gas at battery or gas 
handling sites will not be assessed. 
 
These changes are made following extensive consultations with 
industry and the local government sector. Industry 
competitiveness was a key consideration. Saskatchewan’s 
marginal wells carry a higher property tax load on a per-barrel 
basis than wells in other provinces. Over recent years, there has 
been a progressive expansion of the well machinery and 
equipment that has been assessed and taxed. There will be tax 
shifts resulting from these changes, but the alternative is to risk 
seeing less industry activity and losing the numerous benefits 
from this. 
 
The tax policy amendments have been drafted to reflect the 
input received and the extensive consultations that have 
occurred. Regulations to cover some of the more technical 
matters are currently being prepared in consultations with 
SUMA, SARM, and SSTA. In total, the tax policy package I 
have just outlined will help local governments manage the 
effects of reassessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also two reforms to the existing 
legislation regarding petitions to require municipal councils to 
hold a plebiscite. Firstly, this Bill implements a 90-day limit on 
the collecting of signatures on the petition. Secondly, this Bill 
streamlines procedures for verifying a petition. 
 
Both reforms echo legislation that has proved itself in other 
jurisdictions. Both reforms respond directly to requests from 
SUMA and the city clerks’ association. The 90-day provision 
will give ample time to gather signatures on a petition. However 
it will also ensure that the process of getting signatures does not 
drag on for a year or more and that the views expressed in the 
petition are current. It will help local councils do the job they’re 
elected to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the amendments in this Bill can 
be supported by members of the legislature. They are in the 
interests of municipalities and their residents. I beg to inform 
the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having  

been informed of the subject matter of the Bill, recommends it 
to the consideration of the Assembly, and I move that Bill No. 
70, An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to 
make consequential amendments to other Acts, be now read a 
second time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I appreciate 
the comprehensive outline of the proposed Bill by the minister. 
However, I welcome this opportunity to address the House on 
the amendments being proposed in this Bill. 
 
The Bill covers a wide variety of topics. It sets forth new rules 
for the destruction of older Bills that are no longer being used, 
and it establishes new rules for the preparation of consolidated 
version of by-laws. It will mean that the rules regarding the 
submission of petitions to municipal councils are changed. If 
this Bill is passed, it will mean that letters to councils will no 
longer be treated as petitions, but rather as simple 
communications. 
 
The amendment will allow for the creation of business 
improvement districts. It will require each of the districts to be 
governed by a management board. The amendment provides for 
the creation of business improvement districts even in situations 
where the urban municipality chooses not to assess business for 
taxation purposes. The Bill will allow for levies to be paid to 
the operators of businesses in these districts. 
 
On another vein, the Bill deals with regional parks, and if 
passed it will mean a cut-back . . . or it will cut back the role 
traditionally played by urban municipalities in the operation of 
regional parks service. 
 
Included in this Act are some complex rules regarding 
assessment. In the one case, the assessment will not take into 
account machinery and equipment from used pipelines, yet 
there is to be an assessment of resource production equipment 
which is used for oil and gas production in enhanced recovery, 
storage, and compression. 
 
Fair value assessment is to be determined by regulations, such 
as the classes of property, classes of improvements, classes of 
land, and the improvements according to use, and to be 
determined by regulation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a Bill with many parts and many 
ramifications. Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will require 
some further consultation with more of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. Under the circumstances, I therefore respectfully 
request that this debate be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 957 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, thank you for this 
opportunity to introduce important partners of the province of 
Saskatchewan from RBC Dominion Securities limited in the 
east gallery. We have with us Mr. Tony Fell, the chairman and 
chief executive officer; John Cook, the vice-president and 
director out of the Toronto office; and Mr. Dennis Mulvihill, 
vice-president and director from Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the members in the gallery, these people have 
been . . . were recently one of the important leaders in the very 
successful Cameco share offering and our ongoing rotating 
leads in a number of our other financial syndicates, and I want 
to introduce them to the House and welcome them here on your 
behalf. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989 and to make a consequential amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 71 amends The 
Rural Municipality Act, 1989. The Rural Municipality Act, 
1989 is the major statute setting out the powers and 
responsibilities of rural municipal councils across the province. 
 
This Bill forms part of a package of amendments to municipal 
legislation that includes Bills in many of the urban and northern 
municipal Acts respectively, as well as a Bill relating to The 
Municipal Board Act and consequential changes to The 
Assessment Management Agency Act. 
 
Tax policy changes are included that parallel the amendments 
the government is making this session to other municipal 
legislation. Municipalities will be able to manage the tax 
impacts of reassessment through a variety of optional tax policy 
tools. 
 
We are providing improvements to the assessment appeal 
process for rural municipalities to help cope with potential 
increases in assessment appeals resulting from reassessment in 
1997. These amendments will require more effort from rural 
municipal administrators, but they reinforce the role of the local 
board of revision as the primary appeal level for assessment 
appeals. 
 
Before describing the amendments, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
thank the many participants who provided information and 
advice and contributed to the development of the package of 
amendments before the House today. 
 
I particularly thank the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities for their partnership in developing the tax policy 
proposals, as well as the other local government associations 
and representatives of interest groups. SARM, SUMA, and 
SSTA worked closely together to develop a consensus position, 
and this is particularly noteworthy. 

This Bill, as well as the Bills amending the urban and northern 
municipal Acts, reflects many compromises that have been 
made, taking into consideration all interests that emerged at a 
series of consensus-building sessions in August and November, 
1995, facilitated by my department. The amendments do not 
necessarily represent everyone’s first choices, but trade-offs 
have to and have been made to reach a practical set of proposals 
that expand local government autonomy while protecting other 
interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tax policy tools that rural municipal councils will 
be able to use include the establishment of mill rate factors 
which are a form of variable mill rate, a minimum tax for one or 
more types of properties, and the ability to phase in tax changes 
over a three-year period of time. 
 
In addition, rural municipalities will also have the option of 
deciding whether or not to have business assessment and tax. 
This range of tax tools is necessary because even for RMs (rural 
municipality), the impacts of reassessment will differ widely 
among individual municipalities, depending on the respective 
amounts of different kinds of assessments within their 
boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these provisions do expand municipality authority 
and autonomy in making tax policy decisions. In the 
discussions I mentioned, some of those representing rural 
industry expressed concerns about how rural municipalities 
might use new tax tools since they don’t vote for rural councils 
but do pay taxes. 
 
The amendments in this Bill recognize other taxpayer interests. 
There are provisions for the province to set limits on local tax 
policy if need be. For example, limits on mill rate factors may 
be necessary under some circumstances. Province-wide 
percentages of value can also be set and applied to assessments 
in particular property classes. There are also provisions to limit 
school tax shifts to other municipalities that could arise from 
the tax policy decisions of individual municipalities. Such shifts 
in tax burden are a significant concern in rural Saskatchewan. 
The amendments being made recognize the principle that one 
municipality ought not to be able to arbitrarily shift tax to 
residents of other municipalities. 
 
In keeping with the goal of ensuring Saskatchewan’s economic 
competitiveness, this Bill clarifies the rules for assessment and 
taxation of machinery and equipment for mines, pipelines, and 
oil and gas wells. The provisions are status quo for mines and 
pipelines, but the trend in recent years to expand assessment 
and taxation of the oil and gas industry has been halted. Clearer 
limits on what machinery and equipment is to be assessed are 
spelled out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes, and parallel ones being made in the 
urban and northern municipal Acts, will provide more 
consistent tax policy and assessment legislation across all 
Saskatchewan municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support this Bill. I beg to 
inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, 
having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill,  
  



958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
And I move that Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Rural 
Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a consequential 
amendment to The Municipal Board Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to have the 
opportunity to speak to this Bill. It appears at first to be an 
earnest attempt to update and modernize The Rural 
Municipality Act which was enacted in 1989. I just have a 
couple of things that I would like to say at the outset about this 
Bill. 
 
Firstly, it is refreshing to see some indications that this 
government gives at least some recognition of the importance of 
the rural municipalities of this province. When we read the Bill 
33 entitled The Service Districts Act and hear the 
pronouncements of the Premier and the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs on the subject of rural municipalities, we can’t help but 
fear that the long-term plan of this government is to perhaps 
slowly but surely replace the rural municipalities with service 
districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that this fear is not well-founded. 
But I would be remiss in my duties to you, sir, if I failed to 
report the fear because the fear is widespread and sincerely felt 
in my constituency. 
 
It seems a bit ironic, Mr. Speaker, that on the one hand we are 
being asked to modernize and update The Rural Municipality 
Act of 1989 while on the other hand we are also being asked to 
pass a Service Districts Act which many right-minded people 
think is the forerunner to the eventual abolition of the rural 
municipalities. Mr. Speaker, we’re not sure which way this 
government is going. 
 
This Bill, The Rural Municipality Amendment Act 1996, 
contains a great many different types of provisions on a wide 
variety of subjects, and much of it is worthy of sympathetic 
consideration by the Liberal opposition. A number of the areas 
cause me to have some concerns, however, and I’ll just speak to 
them briefly. 
 
There are some completely new rules regarding the obligations 
of rural municipalities with respect to lost and unclaimed 
property. These are found in section 15 of the Bill which sets up 
a completely new section of the Act to be called section 255.3. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder whether the 90-day rule in this section is 
realistic. In the rural areas moveable property is often left 
unattended for periods of time that are longer than in urban 
areas. This Bill allows rural municipalities to sell unattended, 
unclaimed property after 90 days, and I think we shall have to  

have a careful look at that. 
 
The Bill also provides that a rural municipality may pass a 
by-law providing that businesses are not to be assessed within 
the boundaries of the municipalities in situations where 
buildings occupying the business have been vacant for some 
period of time or are vacant at the present time. We will want to 
examine these new rules in order to make sure they are fair, and 
particularly to make sure they do not result in the tax burden 
being unfairly shifted to those businesses that are occupied at 
the present time. 
 
My attention was drawn also to the provision of the Bill dealing 
with regional park services. The Bill appears to radically reduce 
the traditional role and responsibility of the rural municipalities 
in the provision of park services. The Bill seems to state that, 
except for certain exceptions, the rural municipalities will have 
no longer any meaningful role to play in the area of parks 
unless they have entered into an agreement with the park 
authority. 
 
It concerns me, Mr. Speaker, to see the traditional level of 
government  the municipality  being shut out or moving 
towards being shut out of decision making in the field of 
regional parks. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, there are the assessment rules as 
set out in this Bill. It’s interesting to see that machinery and 
equipment used in association with a pipeline are not to be 
taken into account when assessments are done, but that resource 
production equipment for the production and recovery of 
petroleum oil and gas are to be taken into account when 
assessments are done. We will want to review that carefully 
with the stakeholders in those areas where pipelines and oil and 
gas recovery operations are a factor in the valuation of land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill which the government says brings us 
one step closer to what they call fair-value assessment. The Bill 
sets out a vast power for the government to make regulations 
which will determine how fair value is to be determined. The 
power to make regulations extend to the creation of classes of 
property, classes of improvement, and classes are both 
determined according to the use of the land or improvement. 
 
The Act sets out new rules for the fixing of mill rate factors and 
review of them from time to time. We will also want to review 
these carefully in order to ensure that the procedures are fair 
and that the review mechanisms are economical and fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the view of these concerns that I have and the 
length and complexity of the Bill and importance of the rural 
municipalities in this province, I would hereby move that the 
debate on second reading of the Bill be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 72  An Act to amend 
The Northern Municipalities Act and to 

make a consequential amendment to another Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move  
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 959 

 

second reading of Bill No. 72 to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act. The northern Act is the major legislation 
setting out the powers, duties, and responsibilities of our 
northern municipal governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in general terms, this Bill to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act contains provisions that are very similar to 
those that are contained in the Bill pertaining to The Urban 
Municipality Act, 1984 and The Rural Municipality Act, 1989. 
As well, a Bill with related changes to The Municipal Board 
Act and consequential changes to The Assessment Management 
Agency Act form part of this broad legislative package. 
 
Many of the amendments contained in this Bill are bringing 
provisions of the northern Act into conformity with the other 
Bills before you this session respecting assessment appeal 
provisions, authority to locally manage tax incidence, and 
reforms regarding municipal referendums. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will refer the members of this House to my 
remarks respecting the nature and intent of those amendments 
to The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. Because the details are 
described more fully there to the members, I will only briefly 
review the northern amendments before this House. 
 
First, amendments respecting the assessment appeals process 
will complement and enhance the existing appeal structure and 
enable municipalities to manage an anticipated rise in the 
number of appeals which may result from the new assessment 
system. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, northern municipal councils will have the 
option to use tax policy tools to manage tax incidence changes 
which are expected as a result of reassessment. These optional 
tools include the establishment of mill rate factors, a form of 
variable mill rate, a minimum tax for one or more types of 
properties, and the ability to phase in tax changes over a 
three-year period of time. In addition, northern municipalities 
will also have the option of whether or not to have business 
assessment and tax. These are the same tax tools as are being 
provided to rural and urban municipalities. 
 
These provisions expand municipal authority and autonomy in 
making tax policy decisions. However, amendments in this Bill 
also recognize and protect other taxing authorities’ interests. 
Taxpayer interests are also protected with provisions for the 
province to set potential limits on local tax policy. For example, 
limits such as capping mill rate factors may be necessary to 
ensure that the province’s resources industry remains 
competitive, both with other provinces and globally. 
 
In keeping with the goal to ensure Saskatchewan’s economic 
competitiveness, this Bill also clarifies the rules for assessment 
and taxation on machinery and equipment for mines, pipelines, 
and oil and gas wells. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, this Bill describes changes in petitioning in 
response to concerns raised by the municipal sector. 
 
I would like to thank everyone who participated in the 
consultation processes and provided their advice respecting  

these policies for municipalities in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I respectfully urge members to join me in support 
of this Bill which will further enhance and improve the 
development of our municipalities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly, and I 
move that Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act and to make a consequential amendment to 
another Act be now read a second time. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you again, Mr. Speaker, and again I 
appreciate the comments and comprehensive outline of the Bill 
by the minister. I would just like to discuss this Bill regarding 
northern municipalities which is before us today. It’s fairly 
lengthy, Mr. Speaker, and it’s rather a complex one that deals 
for the most part with taxation issues on municipal land in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
It is obvious to us that this Bill will have an extensive impact on 
all municipalities located in the northern half of this province. 
As this Bill progresses, we must all question the amount of 
consultation that went into the formulation of these 
amendments to The Northern Municipalities Act. 
 
This Bill begins with definition adjustments, for the simple 
reason that consistency and continuity of definitions is required 
to carry through the body of this Act. The definitions in 
question deal with the assessment and taxation of pipelines, 
land, and buildings, on municipal land in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Two entire subsections of the original Act that deal with 
petitions have been repealed, only to be replaced by similar 
subsections that make changes with regard to declaration of 
petitions, address of people on petitions, and a new 90-day limit 
to obtain signatures. There is an amendment in this Bill that 
clearly states the clerk’s determination on the sufficiency of a 
petition is final.  
 
This Bill deals briefly with outstanding costs for services to 
property and the collection of those costs. 
 
Considerable changes are proposed concerning the disposable 
. . . the disposal, I’m sorry, of junked material. The changes 
remove the cost limit to dispose of this material by the 
municipality. This provides more options to the municipalities 
for the disposal of junk material. In a time of environmental and 
ecological concern, providing legislation that will allow, for the 
most part, environmentally sound methods of disposal to be 
used is certainly a positive move. 
 
Northern municipalities will, through this legislation, have the 
option of setting mill rate factors also. But these factors, along 
with the municipality’s budget, will still be under the scrutiny 
of the minister. This Bill proposes amendments to a great many  
  



960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

aspects of municipal taxation with regards to everything from 
land and buildings to oil and gas well machinery. 
 
This Bill also proposes revisions to the assessment system for 
northern Saskatchewan for 1997. Further analysis of these 
revisions needs to be done before approval of them can be 
given. Northern municipalities, through this Bill, will be given 
the option of removing the separate business assessment and tax 
system on business occupants. Upon their decision, northern 
municipalities need to inform taxing authorities so that mill rate 
factors can be applied to levies accordingly. 
 
Assessment appeals and those who can file those appeals are 
laid out clearly in this Bill. A long list of circumstances for 
appeals, the appeal hearings, pre-hearing disclosures, and so on, 
are also outlined in the Bill. 
 
The clarification, the changes in policy with regards to business 
taxation and assessment as well are included, together with an 
entirely new subsection with regards to mill rates and how they 
vary depending on different property classes. Northern 
municipalities will be able to choose a uniform mill rate or a 
varying mill rate as well. 
 
Through this Bill, the mill rate factors will be subject to 
approval, along with mill rates and annual budgets. And as we 
can all see, this Bill consists of rather a complex set of 
amendments to an already quite intricate Act. 
 
Due to the length of this Bill and the inevitable impacts that it 
will surely have on northern municipalities of this province, I 
believe it is only appropriate that some more time be spent 
consulting with the people involved to clarify their views on 
this Bill. I therefore respectfully request that we adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 73 An Act to amend 
The Planning and Development Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, The Planning and 
Development Act provides the framework for municipalities to 
manage the physical development of communities. 
Municipalities have suggested a number of ways that the Act 
could be improved. These amendments reflect our commitment 
of responding to the needs of local government. 
 
The amendments include adding a more effective framework 
for zoning by-law enforcement, eliminating the advertising 
requirements for amendments to municipal development plans 
and basic planning statements, eliminating the requirement for a 
subdivision approval for most minor oil and gas pipelines, 
expanding the scope for appeals to the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board with respect to zoning regulations, adding flexibility to 
deal with walkways and buffer strips in re-subdivided areas, 
and for the exchange or sale of municipal reserves in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 

(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities have expressed concerns that 
existing provisions on zoning by-laws do not adequately 
address enforcement. The government recognizes that 
municipalities must have adequate means to effectively 
administer local by-laws. Therefore we have established a more 
effective framework for zoning by-law enforcement, including 
authority for municipal inspections of suspected contraventions, 
issuing compliance orders, and appeals of compliance orders by 
alleged offenders. 
 
Amendments are included to broaden the definition of capital 
costs as it relates to development levies in a development 
agreement and subdivision levies in a servicing agreement. Also 
we have clarified how interest on servicing agreement accounts 
existing prior to May 1993 can be dealt with by a municipality. 
 
These changes will help ensure that the real cost to provide 
municipal services to new developments will be borne by those 
who will benefit from those services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that there is a need to streamline 
planning and public notification processes. We have eliminated 
the requirement for municipalities to advertise a notice of the 
minister’s decision on a development plan or amendment. We 
have removed the requirement for municipalities to submit an 
updated capital works program annually to the minister. 
 
Similarly, we have removed the requirement for the minister to 
publish notice of approval of statutory plans in the 
Saskatchewan Gazette. This will eliminate duplication and save 
costs for the municipalities. 
 
We have clarified subdivision approval requirements for 
specific instruments, such as easements and leases, and 
eliminated the need for approval of minor types of utility line 
easements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the issue of planning appeals available to all 
landowners in Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board will now be able to hear appeals on variation of 
maximum site area or yard size requirements in municipal 
zoning by-laws. We have also clarified that appeals may be 
made to the board where a minor variance has been allowed by 
a municipal development officer. 
 
Dedicating lands for public purposes is important for the 
physical development of our communities. They are required as 
part of most subdivisions. We have made a number of changes 
that will provide flexibility and assist in the administration of 
this land, including: allowing a municipality to identify specific 
policies and zoning regulations for municipal reserves in 
accordance with the Act; providing for the sale or relocation of 
walkways and buffer strips where there is re-subdivision; 
allowing for the sale or exchange of Crown-owned public 
reserves and buffer strips in unincorporated areas in northern 
Saskatchewan; and clarifying the types of uses which are 
exempt from municipal reserve dedication. 
 
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 961 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this Bill are evidence 
of our support for local governments and commitment to 
maintaining a legislative framework for effective land use 
management which serves the public interest and responds to 
the changing needs of Saskatchewan communities. 
 
I would now urge each and every member of this House to 
support this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this 
Bill No. 73. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, thank you 
to the minister for the comprehensive detail of the Bill that’s 
being introduced. 
 
I would just like to discuss some aspects of it, and upon 
reviewing it, we have come to the conclusion that a majority of 
the amendments are simply housekeeping. And we see a lot of 
positive things, but a couple of concerns I’d like to address. In 
those cases, the correction of grammar in some sections and 
modernizing the terminology in other circumstances is a 
necessary and an unopposed requirement. 
 
The purpose of the amendments to this Act, as we understand it, 
is to provide a legislative framework for effective land use 
management. This is necessary in order to continue to serve the 
interests of the general public while at the same time 
responding to the changing needs of people involved in 
planning and development across the entire province. 
 
This Bill eliminates the requirements to advertise for changes to 
development plans and planning statements. Through this Bill, 
appeals to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board on zoning 
requirements and their variations are clarified, and this we see 
as very positive. 
 
The Bill makes considerable amendments with regards to 
subdivisions of land and the controls thereof, specifically, with 
regards to restrictions on registrations and the exceptions to 
those restrictions. Many of these amendments are bringing the 
conditions for the potential use of parcels of land well 
throughout the 1990s. This is done by including 
telecommunications as one of the many uses of land in this 
particular section. 
 
Subsections dealing with certificate approvals have been 
revamped, making reissued certificates valid for a longer period 
of time, and that’s good. This is seen as a positive step as it only 
reduces administration and paperwork. 
 
There are parts of the Bill that we do question. One particular 
example is with regards to the minister now being able to 
authorize unilaterally the sale of a buffer strip that is a Crown 
title. Currently the minister may authorize this sale only on the 
request of a municipality. The minister may now do this on her 
own initiative. This is one area which would like to give closer 
attention and talk further with municipalities in order to get 
their input. 
 
The intention of this Bill is to add flexibility to the dealing with  

buffer strips and re-subdivided areas. We would like to look a 
little further at that. 
 
The Bill also proposes to make the exchange or sale of 
municipal reserves in northern Saskatchewan somewhat more 
flexible. We would also like confer further with the 
stakeholders and interest groups in northern Saskatchewan to 
get their input on the possible consequences that these 
amendments may have on the people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Although many of these amendments have been suggested in 
part by municipalities, we feel that some further consultation 
with stakeholders and interest groups is required in order to get 
a firm grasp of the effects that this Bill may have on the people 
of rural and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
It is for that reason, Mr. Speaker, that I respectfully request 
debate on this Bill be adjourned. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 43  An Act 
respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation 
of an Emergency 911 System and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before we even begin to talk about the specifics of this Bill, I 
think we should take a long, hard look at what it will mean to 
Saskatchewan. We need to look at what systems are already in 
place, and we need to look at the most effective way to bring 
emergency service to all in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we strongly support the principle of 911 
emergency service, particularly for rural Saskatchewan. We 
know far better than the members opposite that rural residents 
need some sort of security. As rural MLAs, we have seen the 
people of our communities lose access to health care. We have 
seen hospital after hospital shut its doors to rural residents. We 
have watched qualified medical and emergency professionals 
forced to leave our communities because the government just 
didn’t fund health care facilities adequately. And we have 
listened to our constituents who tell us they are afraid they will 
have nowhere to turn in an emergency. 
 
They are scared, Mr. Speaker, and they have every right to be. 
The provincial government is refusing to give them the security 
they need. People living in rural areas have been forced to stand 
back while this government chips away at the rural 
infrastructure. Their protests are ignored. What they find 
instead is that this government has a plan, and in that plan there 
is no room for rural Saskatchewan. This becomes clearer every 
day with every decision this government makes. 
 
  



962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than anything we would like to reassure our 
constituents. More than anything we would like to establish a 
reliable base of support to help save lives and to provide our 
communities with that sense of security. We want to keep rural 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
I think that this is the principle behind the government’s 
proposed Emergency 911 System Act. And as I said earlier, we 
agree with this principle. But, Mr. Speaker, we don’t agree with 
the tangible steps the Act outlines. 
 
As far as we are concerned, the government is just scratching 
the surface with their proposed plans. Instead of providing solid 
solutions, they are merely trying to distract people from 
noticing hospital closures and staff losses. Our biggest worry is 
that the system proposed in the government Bill doesn’t go far 
enough. It doesn’t provide an overall, comprehensive, effective 
emergency response system, and that’s what is needed most 
- an enhanced emergency system. 
 
If the government’s Bill passes as is, people will be able to dial 
911 on their phone, and that in itself is a good thing. Right now 
they are forced to call separate numbers for police, ambulance, 
and fire departments. The biggest complaint about this is that in 
an emergency people don’t always have access to a telephone 
book. Unfortunately though, 911 is just a number. If you pick 
up the phone to call emergency, it will only ring at the service 
provider location, and this could cause a serious delay in getting 
help. 
 
In the government’s proposed system, the call is taken and then 
passed on to the appropriate emergency provider. But what 
happens if they can’t reach anyone? What happens if a time 
delay could mean the difference between life and death? 
Imagine if a member of your family was choking and when you 
phoned 911 you were left talking to an operator who has no 
emergency training. 
 
By playing up this new system as the perfect answer, we are 
afraid that the government may be creating a false sense of 
security. An enhanced system could go a long way to avoiding 
this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am amazed that this government has not 
incorporated in the Bill some of the positive things already 
happening in Saskatchewan. For example, in the fall of 1991, 
the city of Swift Current struck a committee to consider a 911 
system in their region. 
 
They developed an extensive research proposal which looked at 
needs, cost-effectiveness, available services, and a number of 
other factors. By August ’94 people of the south-west of 
Saskatchewan had access to a comprehensive and enhanced 911 
system. According to an article in The Western Producer from 
February last year, the system in the south-west links 46 fire 
departments, 11 ambulance services, and 12 RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) detachments  all through a 
state-of-the-art computer system and trained communication 
technicians. 
 
This means that callers aren’t just getting a SaskTel operator,  

Mr. Speaker. They are getting a person who can help, and that 
could make all the difference. 
 
What would happen to the systems already in place? Would the 
government drag them back down to a level outlined in this 
Bill? Mr. Speaker, I certainly hope this isn’t the case. Wouldn’t 
the government be far better off raising the standards outlined 
in the Bill to match the highest existing marker within the 
province? This government says it wants to move into the 21st 
century. If this is true, why would they legislate policies that 
actually took the progress backwards? I hope the members 
opposite will think about this before they force it through. 
 
We are not the only ones concerned about this situation, Mr. 
Speaker. The east-central 911 steering committee raised similar 
concerns. I would like to read a section from an article 
published in the Melville Advance on March 27 of this year, and 
I quote: 
 

The government proposal provides no on-line continuing 
contact with a caller to provide assistance until the 
response team arrives on site; nor does it provide updating 
communication en route to the response teams. This 
proposal has no tracking system to aid the response teams 
to find the rural location or to coordinate time arrivals. 

 
We suggest that the government consider comments from 
groups such as these before forcing this Bill through. In the 
Committee of the Whole, we will propose an amendment to 
help alleviate these concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another major concern we have with this Bill is 
that RMs will be required to participate. I think these concerns 
are well founded, especially given the government’s recent 
threats to rural amalgamation. We need to know what sort of 
commitment the government will make to providing long-term 
funding to this system. It would be extremely unfair of this 
government to tell municipalities they had no choice but to 
participate and then force them to pay for the system. Especially 
after the government has told municipalities that their funding 
will be cut by $10 million each for the next two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government seems to relish its power over 
municipal governments. They have no qualms about forcing 
municipalities to surrender to the NDP government’s plan. Mr. 
Speaker, this is unacceptable, and we will not let this minister 
lord her power over municipalities’ heads. It’s dirty politics, 
and we will not stand for it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will say that the 
system can be paid for with $5.6 million of VLT (video lottery 
terminal) money. The minister will say the system can be run 
on a cost-even basis. 
 
(1530) 
 
But what the members opposite seem to forget is that the money 
from VLT revenues was supposed to go directly to the 
municipalities and health organizations; 5.6 million is just a 
fraction of what the government has sucked in VLTs. The  
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

 

government should make good on its promise. With all the 
promises this government breaks, though, I guess it shouldn’t 
surprise us that they would go back on their word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined some of our basic concerns with this 
Bill. In the Committee of the Whole, we will bring forward 
some amendments that we believe will make the Bill stronger 
for all people in Saskatchewan. Before we agree to pass this 
Bill on to committee, though, one of my colleagues would like 
to bring forward some further concerns his constituents have. 
Unfortunately, he was not able to be with us today in the House, 
so I ask that this debate be adjourned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 32  An Act 
to amend The Local Government Election Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was trying to get 
my breath. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have a chance to address 
this Bill once again before it is passed to Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
We find most of the proposed changes outlined in this Bill 
acceptable, but we do have some concerns about a couple of the 
sections within the Act. I briefly touch on those today, but we 
would like to bring forward some comprehensive amendments 
when the Bill reaches Committee of the Whole. 
 
As a former municipal reeve, I am familiar with the election 
process for local governments. I know that the Act, as it stands 
now, details the accepted procedures for municipal election. 
Some of the sections in the Act are simply outdated. For 
example, the Act presently names the minister of Urban Affairs 
as the person responsible for appointing temporary members to 
a local council or board. 
 
Because this government has a minister of everything but Urban 
Affairs, it only makes sense to pass the responsibility to the 
Minister of Municipal Government. I know she’s been busy 
lately  and this week in particular, Mr. Speaker but I’m 
sure she is willing to accept this extra responsibility. I’m just 
happy to see the government didn’t create yet another million 
dollar minister plus department to keep the Bill up to date. 
 
The amendments in this Bill will also address some of the 
issues relating to elections in resort communities. For years, 
member of the Provincial Association of Resort Communities 
of Saskatchewan, PARCS in abbreviation, have raised the issue 
of voting, especially as it relates to taxes. Some cottage owners 
were upset that they were forced to pay equal taxes on their 
resort property yet were not given the option to run for elected 
positions or to vote. 
 
This amended Act seems to address this issue in a way that 
should satisfy at least some of the unhappy property owners. I 
know if this government actually listened to PARCS’  

recommendations . . . Or if it just managed to work it out this 
way. Given the government’s reputation for hearing without 
listening, I suspect that making property owners happy is a total 
coincidence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have little objection to the changes to 
most of the voting procedures. In fact we strongly support some 
of them. For example, section 65.1, which provides greater 
accessibility to disabled people, is extremely important and 
welcome. Every citizen in this province has a right to vote, and 
we must make sure there is no physical barrier for anyone. 
Accessible polls are essential if we truly want to promote 
equality in our province. 
 
The change to voting qualifications also seems straightforward. 
For one thing, the amendments make the qualifications 
consistent with citizenship and age requirements. Changes like 
this are simply housekeeping, and we won’t delve on them once 
we ensure that they will not seriously affect the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
One concern we do have however relates to section 13. This is 
the section which has eliminated the requirement to place 
newspaper advertisements before an election takes place. Mr. 
Speaker, we will be asking for further clarification on the 
wording of reasonable notice. 
 
Because this Bill will allow owners of properties in resort 
community who live outside of Saskatchewan to vote in an 
election, this is also particularly important. People must be 
given enough notice to ensure they have the opportunity to elect 
representatives in local communities. In Committee of the 
Whole, we will introduce an amendment to help define what 
qualifies as reasonable notice. We also have some reservations 
about the responsibilities of the returning officer and of the 
scrutineers. The Bill may transfer responsibility from the 
returning officer to the scrutineer, and that is not acceptable, 
Mr. Speaker. We would like to have some further clarification 
on the division of responsibilities. 
 
Although we have voiced a few of our concerns today, we do 
not have any concerns grave enough to hold up this Bill at this 
stage. When we go through the Bill as Committee of the Whole, 
my colleagues and I will bring our concerns and an amendment 
to the Assembly. With further discussion and clarification, 
hopefully we will be able to support this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that this Bill now be passed to Committee of 
the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 5  An Act to 
amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
join in this debate. I believe that any piece of legislation that  
  



964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

will have a direct impact on our education system and 
ultimately the children of our province needs to be closely 
scrutinized. As the past president of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association and a long-time teacher in this province, I 
have been fortunate enough to gain valuable insight into the 
way education is delivered in Saskatchewan. 
 
I take great pride in our education system, and I sincerely 
believe that our teachers and administrators are highly skilled 
and competent people. Mr. Speaker, I know all members of the 
Assembly will agree with me when I say that education is the 
backbone of our province. A sound education system goes a 
long way in defining the people and the quality of life that 
Saskatchewan residents have grown to expect and to enjoy. A 
quality education can lead to unlimited opportunities for our 
children who will one day be the leaders of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the future of our province depends upon the 
students of today. With that in mind, we cannot sit back and 
take our education system for granted. We cannot continue to 
offload our financial problems onto already cash-strapped 
school boards. We have seen the effects that provincial 
offloading has on our education system. The teacher/student 
ratio is increasing due to bigger classes. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to point out that the student ratio in Saskatchewan is the 
largest of any of the provinces in Canada. Schools don’t have 
adequate resources to hire more teachers, and the threat of 
school closures is becoming a frightening reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this must stop. The Minister of Education and her 
government have a responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan 
to provide quality, accessible education for everyone. Several 
years of inadequate funding from this government is taking a 
toll. Hundreds and hundreds of people have cried out to stop the 
cuts, but apparently this government has chosen not to listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier stated six years ago that education is a 
priority for the NDP, and we simply have to find more money. 
Well we have seen what happens when the NDP claim 
something is a priority. All we have to do is look at their dismal 
job creation record, their neglect for the rural residents of 
Saskatchewan, and of course the absolute decimation of our 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid that the NDP are now taking their 
wrecking ball to our education system. Mr. Speaker, we cannot 
impose legislation without ensuring that it will be beneficial to 
our educators and to our students. After all, they are the ones 
who will feel the effects each and every day for years to come. 
 
The approach of our caucus when examining the Bills 
introduced in this House comes down to one specific objective: 
is it in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there appear to be four main issues in this 
amendment. The amendment that would change the name of the 
Saskatchewan Book Bureau to the Saskatchewan Learning 
Resources Distribution Centre is indeed worthwhile. The name 
change seems to reflect more accurately the scope and purpose 
of the services provided by the bureau. Mr. Speaker, this is in  

the best interest of the public, and I don’t see a lot of concern 
with it. I do however wonder what the cost analysis of the name 
change will be. Obviously there will be some associated costs in 
terms of stationery, material, information, etc. 
 
The amendment that would also allow students to consent to the 
disclosure of his or her records in an attempt to provide 
information sharing is also worthwhile. The existing provision 
is in conflict with the local authority of information and 
protection of privacy Act. Currently students are not able to 
disclose their records and may not be able to access their own 
records unless they are accompanied by their parents. Since The 
Education Act currently is the most restrictive, it must be the 
one adhered to rather than the privacy Act. Repealing this 
provision would improve sharing of information and give 
students access to their own records. 
 
The amendment also deals with various methods of conducting 
financial transactions. Currently school boards and conseil 
scolaires have restricted authority in the way in which they can 
conduct financial transactions. The proposed clause would 
allow boards and conseil scolaires to keep pace with 
technological advances such as electronically transferring funds 
and an automated payroll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome changes to legislation that will better 
serve our educators and our administrators. Some of the 
proposed changes in this Act will indeed be beneficial. 
 
However there appears to be some division between the key 
stakeholders involved, namely the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation. Mr. Speaker, I have to question whether this 
amendment will address the issues of concern between the 
SSTA and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) where 
a consensus has not yet been arrived at. It is vital that these two 
key stakeholders are given the opportunity to discuss particular 
issues in order to reach an agreement that satisfies both parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue that seems to be causing a great deal of 
concern for both of these stakeholders is the provisions 
regarding replacement and temporary teachers. I believe that we 
cannot take any action without the stakeholders having reached 
a consensus. 
 
A very important stakeholder in the administration of education 
is the group that includes directors and superintendents of 
education. The LEADS  which is the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents  group must 
be assured that the amended Act is indeed workable and in the 
best interest of teachers affected but also to ensure that it 
addresses the needs of students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment to this Act will affect all 
concerned stakeholders. I can guarantee the minister that these 
stakeholders will be keeping a close eye on her. This opposition 
must be assured that all stakeholders are in agreement. The 
minister must convince all the concerned parties that this Act is 
indeed doable. 
 
I have been consulting with many concerned people, such as  
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

 

the SSTA, the STF, LEADS, individual boards of education, 
individual directors, and I want to continue to do so. So 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn 
debate on this Bill. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1545) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. On my left is Bill Reader, the deputy minister of 
Municipal Government. On his left is Larry Chaykowski, the 
director of administration. On my right is Ron Davis, assistant 
deputy minister in municipal services; and right straight behind 
me is Ron Styles, ADM (assistant deputy minister) of housing. 
And on his left is Ken Alecxe, who is the associate deputy 
minister for culture and recreation. 
 
And we’d be pleased to answer any questions that members 
may want to pose, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to also 
welcome the officials with the minister today. It’s good to see 
Bill again; I met Bill before. So welcome to the House today. 
 
First question I have, Madam Minister, is to do with the 
infrastructure money that we have had, and I notice here that it 
has dropped from 47 to 28. Could you give us an explanation on 
that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this just reflects 
the winding down of the program. As you know, the program 
has concluded, and there are some projects yet that are 
incomplete that will be paid out. But essentially the program is 
finished and is being phased out, and the reduction is a 
reflection of that. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you. Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask . . . 
with that infrastructure money, some roads were carried over 
because due  in some cases  due to wetness last year . . . 
under the infrastructure program. And I understand now this 
year that some of them have been cancelled and some not. Can 
we get an explanation why some of them  I actually thought 
were guaranteed to be carried on to this year  for one reason 
or another have now been cancelled? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  In response to the member’s question 
I would say this, that the infrastructure money was integrated 
with the rural road money that’s in the revenue-sharing pool. 
And so it would be a decision of the rural municipality whether 
or not they proceeded with the project and nothing to do with  

the terms of the infrastructure program or any decision made by 
either level of government that was involved in that. It would be 
a local decision. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  I must be misinformed, Madam Minister, 
then, because it’s been brought to my attention that some of 
these projects were cancelled by your department. So possibly 
I’m wrong on that one, but I guess we’ll have to leave that one 
at that. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  To the member opposite, there are 
some projects in the infrastructure program that was stacked 
with the rural revenue sharing for roads that are still undergoing 
a screening process. It basically would be a local decision not to 
proceed. 
 
But if you have any specific facts, you know, if you want to 
share them with us, we would certainly undertake to ascertain 
what their situation is and get back to you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thanks, Madam Minister. I’ll check and 
verify those certain situations and who they are. 
 
In the Estimates here, Madam Minister, I notice under gaming 
funds in ‘95-96, we have $4.372 million but in . . . in ‘96-97 we 
have that, but in ‘95-96 we do not. What is the explanation for 
that, where that came from all of a sudden? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  That item in the Estimates represents 
the anticipated proceeds from casino revenues that will be 
designated as an entity called the associated entities fund. There 
is nothing in the fund now because there is not a lot of casino 
profits yet. But this is the projected share of profits, and that 
will be distributed by agreements that are already in place  25 
per cent to mitigate revenue losses to exhibitions; 25 per cent to 
Metis organizations; and the balance of the fund will be 
distributed to communities by a method that has not yet been 
determined. We haven’t decided what agency to use and the 
criteria aren’t there yet, but it will be related to probably 
non-government organizations dealing in child poverty, in 
family violence, that kind of initiative. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Now are we 
talking here VLT money or casino money or . . . that this fund 
was set up from  or both? Or where does that come from? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  This arrangement relates strictly to a 
portion of the profits from casinos and it flows into this budget 
directly from the Gaming Corporation, which is the corporation 
which operates the casinos only. And this year it’s anticipated 
that the only one that will be profitable will be the one in 
Regina. There are others, as you know, that are just opening 
now but the revenue stream that’s anticipated here is for this 
coming fiscal year and will accrue mostly from the one in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to 
move on to futures that the municipalities have, Madam 
Minister. Can you tell me how much are out in futures or 
forwarded in futures at this time? 
 
  



966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I’m advised that the amount that’s out 
in futures right now, or accrued to that, is 18.9 million at the 
present time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Would it be possible for us to get a list of 
where the futures are owed, Madam Minister? I realize not 
today, but after today? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I’m told that such a list does exist and 
we could provide it for you probably by as early as tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to get 
in . . . after the budget now we’ve had cut-backs in full-time 
employees. I believe that 13 is the number  is that right?  
of full-time employees from your department that has been laid 
off? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  There were actually 19 positions, but 
some of them were vacant. So there were actually 13 people 
affected. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Under administration in our estimates, we 
have here salaries have gone down somewhat, so I presume that 
was due to this. But under the operating part of that, actually 
costs have gone up by quite a bit. Can you explain why, when 
we have less employees, all of a sudden that the operating costs 
would go up for administration? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  There are a couple of factors at work 
here. One is that there was a consolidation of the 
communications functions, and the other is that the 
infrastructure program moved from intergovernmental or the 
Provincial Secretary’s department into Municipal Government. 
So that affected the accommodation . . . like we inherited their 
establishment that was still related to the infrastructure 
program. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. As the 
infrastructure program is winding down, would we expect next 
year that that would go down again, then? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  We would certainly expect that to 
happen over a year or two as the program winds down, unless 
of course there’s something to replace it. Or, you know, there 
wasn’t anything in the last federal budget, but knowing what we 
know now it would appear that the establishment would reduce 
somewhat over the next couple of years. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Under 
accommodation and central services I see that instead of the 
budget going down it has gone up. Can you explain really the 
function of this and why that would have gone up? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  That again would be . . . that’s really 
the answer to the question that I just gave. I thought that was 
your question. 
 
Yes, it was the consolidation of the communications functions 
and the transfer of the infrastructure where we would be now  

responsible for the space that those people occupy and so on. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to 
touch just for a minute on SAMA funding, Madam Minister. 
 
And can you give me a breakdown and go back to ’91 and what 
the funding was in ’91, ’92, and so on, and how it has gone 
down to the point we are now? Have you got those numbers 
available? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  We don’t. As SAMA is an 
independent agency, although the money comes out of our 
budget for the core services  we don’t have the history with 
us but we certainly can undertake to provide it. 
 
As you know, the $4 million this year and last year . . . In the 
most recent years there has been some transitional funding  a 
million dollars last year. But they knew this was a negotiated 
transition and there weren’t any surprises there. Everyone was 
aware that there would be a reduction. 
 
But 4 million is dedicated to the core services and the integrity 
of the provincial data base and so forth, and that’s seen as a 
provincial responsibility. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m delighted to 
see that there’s an increase in the money given to the heritage 
department and that the government recognizes the growth and 
realization of the importance of heritage in our province. Can 
you briefly outline to me the government’s vision for the next 
four years in this very important area of heritage? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Actually in the heritage branch there 
is a decrease. I’m just finding it here. Just from memory, the 
increase, I think it’s 400  just a little over $400,000. And that 
is the proceeds of some fire insurance that relates to the 
museum, the royal . . . Museum of Natural History. The fire was 
about five years ago, and the claim wasn’t settled until just 
recently. So the proceeds of the insurance policy as the result of 
that incident are going straight into the budget of the museum, 
and that is really the only increase. Otherwise it is the status 
quo. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Just to clarify for me, I see that there was 
6.991 million last year, and this year is going to 7.199 million, 
and that difference is the fire insurance. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, just the proceeds of the insurance 
policy. 
 
And the second part of your question was about our vision. And 
as you know, we have been circulating cultural or discussion 
papers through all the areas of heritage, arts and culture. And 
there are focus groups and public discussions going on. Last 
year there was a summary called Responding to the Community. 
 
So the future vision, if you like, of all of those areas of 
endeavour that fall within the arts and culture realm within the 
budget are being determined now by interested parties and 
community groups, and we’ll respond to what they see as their 
vision. 
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there going to be a decrease in staffing in 
this whole area of heritage preservation in the province, or is it 
going to remain the same as last year? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  There were some position reductions. 
One related to the Eastend T-Rex, Scotty. Part of the dig was 
actually over, so they were keeping the interpretative centre 
open and so on, but the level of activity there has decreased. So 
there’s one person less there and one person less in the 
museum. There were some contract positions that expired, I 
think, at the end of the fiscal year, and one of them was not 
renewed. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The Heritage Foundation will receive the same 
amount of money as it did last year. Can you break down for 
me the money that was spent on actual staffing and lease of the 
building compared to the money that was given to projects, to 
the communities through the foundation grants? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  We don’t have the breakdown in 
exactly the manner that the member asks for, so we can 
certainly undertake to do that and provide you with those 
figures within the next couple of days. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Okay. I was just wondering if the amount of 
money spent on projects that the people could apply for, if that 
money is still the same or if it’s going down, as compared to the 
last couple of years. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, the amount that’s shown in the 
Estimates, the $345,000, that money is all earmarked for 
projects. And the salaries of the branch and so on are shown 
separately. So that 345 is all available to be applied for and 
disbursed for projects. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Can you tell me how often the Heritage 
Foundation board meets? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  They meet four times a year. 
 
Ms. Draude:  There’s additional money, I think, unless I’m 
reading this incorrectly, I think there’s additional money given 
to the Archives Board. Can you tell me how that money will be 
spent? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The additional money for the 
Archives Board is for the rental of additional space in . . . this 
space is the R.J.D. Williams Building in Saskatoon, the former 
so-called school for the deaf on Cumberland Avenue just down 
from the university. The University of Saskatchewan now owns 
that property. And we’re renting some space in there for the 
archives because we have a real space problem. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I was looking at the Western Development 
Museum and I’m just wondering if the number of visitors there, 
is it remaining fairly constant? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The Western Development Museum, 
the attendance is remaining constant. In fact in some of the 
special events and promotions that they’ve introduced in the last 
couple of years has actually increased the number of  

visitors. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Wanuskewin Park, does it receive funding 
from the federal government or from native affairs as well as 
the grant money that’s given from the provincial government? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The 250,000 represents the provincial 
contribution to operations there. The federal government, 
during the development of the park around the time that it was 
designated as an internationally recognized heritage site, did put 
in some capital money. But to my knowledge the federal 
government has never contributed any operating money. 
 
The city of Saskatoon contributes some. And then of course 
they have their funding from owned sources in terms of 
admissions and the food service that’s on site, and that kind of 
thing. What their total operating budget is, I’m not quite sure. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Has the government spent any more money on 
this park for promotion of it as a world-class tourism facility or 
is all the money that’s spent on it just in this total of 250,000? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, the provincial contribution would 
be represented entirely by this figure, and any other money that 
they use for promotions and their activities would be 
self-funded. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’d just like to change into a different 
department here for a second and talk about the housing 
department. Can the minister explain if the rental amounts 
charged in small towns like Spalding, Naicam, and so on  
there used to be quite a variation in the amounts that was 
charged by each town. Has that amount been evened out? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Generally the rent is determined as a 
percentage of the income of the tenant, so that’s basically why 
it would vary. The rent is 25 per cent of the income of the 
tenant. So you might have two houses, either in the same town 
or in nearby towns, that are very similar but the income of the 
tenant is different, so therefore they would pay a rent that’s 
related to their income, not the size or value of the house. 
 
Ms. Draude:  But I guess I’m not really clear, but there must 
be a maximum limit or minimum limit of some sort in the 
towns. Because in towns in my constituency they are saying 
that people are trying to go from one town to another because 
the amount of rent is different. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The 25 per cent of income that I 
referred to is a maximum, but within that, there are some 
pricing policies for the rent that are levered by the vacancy rates 
in the town, some factors like that. But it’s done very carefully 
to make sure that lower or higher rents don’t affect people 
moving from one community to another. But there are some 
other factors that are taken into consideration. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I know that there are some problems even 
within a small locality like my own where there is . . . some of 
the towns have their homes absolutely filled at all times and 
some of them are having a vacancy problem. And I’m 
wondering if these boards have the option . . . do they have the  
  



968 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

ability to change this basic rent or maximum or minimum? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I would respond to the member’s 
question in this way, that local housing authorities don’t have 
the authority to unilaterally make those decisions. But Sask 
Housing, each year on a regional basis, assesses the market and 
the needs, and using the CPI (consumer price index), for 
example, the cost price index, will make some changes that 
seem reasonable that relate to the market conditions. 
 
And then if . . . so they sort of set guidelines. And if housing 
authorities want to respond to some need that they see, they 
would apply to Sask Housing to make changes within those 
guidelines, but they can’t do it unilaterally. 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Okay, on the home improvement program, I 
see that there’s quite a dramatic decrease in money. Could you 
explain to me how this happened or what’s going to be 
happening? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  That is the . . . The home 
improvement program is that approximately 10-year-old 
program for loans for hot tubs and cupboards and things. A lot 
of those loans are now being paid down, and this reflects the 
drop in interest rates that applies to those, the remaining 
portfolio. 
 
Ms. Draude:  With the changes to the district health or with 
the health Act, a lot of the seniors are encouraged to remain in 
their own homes now. And I’m wondering if there has been any 
money allocated or if your department has looked at a way to 
allow the seniors to remain in their own homes and have . . . 
whether it be wheelchair ramps or whatever would make their 
life a lot more acceptable or living conditions at home. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  There are two parts to the answer to 
that. One is the rural . . . the RRAP (residential rehabilitation 
assistance program), the repair . . . residential repairs assistance 
program, the federal money. 
 
They had announced, the federal government had announced, in 
the budget a year ago that that program was ending and so we 
were preparing to wind it down. And then in December of 1995, 
they announced that there would be a continuation for one year. 
 
So we don’t know how long-lived it is. They just committed 
themselves to this year, that there would be $50 million 
federally in that program, which works out to around two and a 
half million dollars for Saskatchewan. 
 
We administer the program and people make application to us. 
And its purpose is for repairs, emergency repairs, and things 
like ramps and things to help people stay in their houses longer, 
to keep them in good repair. 
 
And then we have a  we don’t have money for it  but we do 
a facilitating function with other agencies for enriched housing 
for seniors or disabled people as part of the Sask  

Housing activities. 
 
Ms. Draude:  All the money for actually . . . Like the old 
RAPP program, that’s actually still federal money then? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, that was a federal . . . Well it’s a 
joint . . . It’s their money  we administrate it. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Is the administration part of it paid for by the 
federal government then? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The amount that the province 
contributes to it is about $480,000 and it represents 25 per cent. 
So it’s a 75/25 per cent split. 
 
Ms. Draude:  With the housing out in rural Saskatchewan  
I think it’s called low income housing  is there a set policy on 
when appliances should be changed, or is that a local board 
decision? Appliances like stoves and fridge. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  There is, with respect to appliances in 
the Sask Housing portfolio, there is a policy of a cycle of 
replacement of appliances. And our inspectors would know the 
condition. And the local housing authorities are encouraged to 
make those replacements on a cyclical basis so that we’re not 
faced with a huge capital cost all at one time. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Is the money that’s allocated for this program, 
does that include the remuneration that’s given to the local 
housing authority boards? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  For the payments . . . there are no 
payments to the local housing authorities. The people that serve 
on them serve as volunteers. And they make recommendations 
or requests for expenses from the portfolio, but they don’t have 
any remuneration directly themselves. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Still on the same 
topic, Madam Minister, around rural housing, is there a 
construction policy still in force where a community can qualify 
for the construction of some homes, low rental or senior citizen 
or otherwise? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Unfortunately since 1993 when the 
federal government totally vacated their role in funding social 
housing, we just simply don’t have money available for new 
housing programs. So the answer to your question would be no. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  It would be short and sweet. With that answer 
then and with no construction occurring, we know that there 
have been demographic shifts of population with many of the 
smaller communities. 
 
There are communities that had a number of homes built 15 
years ago, 10 years ago, and now the situation is occurring 
where another community has actual needs for those homes. Is 
there any consideration for moving some of the homes from one 
of the communities that now, as indicated by my colleague, is 
maybe having a vacancy problem and moving it to a 
community somewhere else where indeed there is a need for 
homes. 
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  There are . . . I should say, when you 
talked about money for new housing, the only program that’s 
been recently in operation is the remote housing program. And 
we had a really good example where we opened a development 
with 11 south-built houses. That was a federal-provincial 
initiative at Cumberland House just about a month ago. And 
there were also some homes in La Loche. But this is remote 
only, so there’s no new money for anything else. 
 
On the other front, where we have actively been moving 
houses, we’ve moved so far 77 from communities such as you 
described, where they were built at one time when there was a 
need, and for some reason the character of the community has 
changed, and they’re vacant. And there’s needs somewhere 
else, so we have actively moved 77 of them. 
 
We have a protocol for negotiating with communities. We do it 
on a voluntary basis. And sometimes the local housing authority 
just doesn’t want to believe that the houses are going to stay 
vacant. They always have hopes that the population is going to 
grow or whatever. So we work with the local housing authority 
until, well they agree after a certain length of vacancy; well you 
know, I guess you’re right. We’re not going to need this house 
any more. And then we move them to wherever it’s 
economically feasible to someone that has a request. 
 
And we have active negotiations now with approximately 20 
communities where there is housing available to be moved. And 
that program will become probably more active in the near 
future. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m interested 
to hear that. The procedure that is followed then, has it been 
made clear to all housing authorities as to how they can apply 
for this relocation program, I guess, of homes? And my 
question would be then, is the authority, the local authority, 
then responsible for that moving cost if there are no monies for 
construction? Or is there a special levy, a special grant, I guess 
then, that would be available? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  For the moving costs and of course 
building a basement in a new location and so on, there is a pool 
of money that is available for that. And we have about 50 
requests from about 50 southern  I’m talking, you know, 
anything other than northern and remote  communities who 
want relocated or new housing units. 
 
So all communities are given the opportunity to address their 
chronic vacancy before houses are moved away. Like they may 
want to advertise and you know, try to keep the house. But if 
there’s no response, then meetings take place with the housing 
authorities of the various communities, and it just . . . it’s 
worked very well. It’s just a good process of communication 
and it works itself out. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Just switching to another topic of 
provision of service and that service is policing service. Can 
you explain to me how the policing service outside the major 
cities is paid for; who pays for it, and what are the kind of 
grants that are available for policing outside the major cities? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well the first part of . . . or the last 
part of your question is really easy, that there isn’t any money 
directly earmarked for policing or policing grants. The RCMP 
is the official police force for rural Saskatchewan. And for those 
communities that don’t have their detachment . . . and as you 
know, you probably know, the population of 500 is the 
demarcation  any community above 500 is required to have 
policing. If they don’t have a town police or their own local 
police force, they’re required to contract with the RCMP. 
 
And I think it’s becoming more and more recognized . . . As 
you’re probably aware, the RCMP did a presentation on their 
community police model at the SARM and SUMA conventions 
and spoke about the distribution of the cost of policing, because 
it really does . . . there’s something really unfair where, say, a 
town of just over 500 might have to pay 60 to $65,000 towards 
service from the RCMP, from a detachment that’s not even in 
their town. They don’t have any member of the force living 
actually in their town. 
 
So they’re paying, on a per capita base, maybe $115 per person 
for this service while the rural municipalities all around them, 
and villages, of under 500 don’t pay anything at all. 
 
So I think it’s inequity that at some point we’re definitely going 
to have to address, because in some communities, this cost, if 
they’re over 500, almost makes a difference as to whether the 
town is viable or not. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. When we look at the conditional 
aspect then of saying that a community of about 500 must have 
that policing service, it must either provide it locally, or it must 
contract with the RCMP, is there a provision within the 
revenue-sharing grant that says that if a community is obligated 
to provide that police force, is there any recognized expenditure 
for police costs? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The answer to your question is really 
no. Policing is not a cost that’s recognized. I mean obviously 
part of the revenue sharing is unconditional. And if the 
community is required to have policing, if they’re of that size, 
they could use some of that unconditional funding. But no, it’s 
not recognized in the formula. 
 
And our department, SUMA, SARM, and the Justice 
department, who are obviously responsible for the operations of 
the RCMP, are actively working to try and find some acceptable 
solution to this dilemma. 
 
I know I was in two separate towns within just a day or two, 
where one of them was paying. They have a population 560; I 
won’t name the town. But the population’s 560, and they’re 
required to contribute $62,000 a year towards RCMP service, 
towards a detachment that’s located about 30 miles away from 
their town. And they’re actively trying to get people to move 
out so that the population will drop to under 500. 
 
And then just a few miles away is another town, population 
462, that is fortunate enough to have an RCMP detachment 
right in their town, but they don’t have to contribute to it 
because of their population. And they’re actively trying to keep  
  



970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

people from moving in because they don’t want the population 
to go to more than 500. 
 
So I mean this is an example of how unfair it is, really, to have 
some kind of an arbitrary cut-off that has such a dramatic effect 
whether you’re on one side of it or the other. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  You’ve spoken about urban centres. Do rural 
municipalities have contracts with the RCMP in terms of 
provision of police? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Rural municipalities, even if their 
population is over 500, are not bound by that same requirement 
as urban centres are. So there are some rural municipalities, a 
very small number now, I believe, who engage a police 
constable who, under The Police Act, has the status of a special 
constable. 
 
And it’s optional for rural municipalities. They can if they want 
to and some do, especially some that have resort areas within 
their borders or some particular non-rural situation where they 
feel that they need to have the regular services of the RCMP at 
some distant detachment supplemented. But it isn’t common 
and there’s no requirement for them to do so. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Madam Minister, I’d first of all 
like to sort of just cover some of the other questions they’ve 
asked for maybe some more information. The discussion that 
just took place on the funding for RCMP town pay and the 
RCMP rural, and some of those discrepancies. I guess my one 
question is, exactly how do you propose to address those 
inequities that I think we all agree are inequities? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well as I mentioned, that members of 
our department are working with SUMA and SARM and Justice 
to try to come up with some acceptable solution in order to 
address the inequities in funding. As you know, for example, 
the rural municipality of Corman Park that you’re familiar with 
has, because . . . they’re not required to have policing, because 
even though their population is much over 500 — it’s closer to 
8,000 — but they are a rural municipality so they’re not 
required under The Police Act to provide policing services. 
 
But because of the nature of the municipality, you know, all of 
the river banks and the recreational areas and the country 
residential, you know, cluster developments and so on, it’s 
imperative that they supplement the services of the RCMP. But 
for many years now, over probably 25 years, they’ve had an 
in-house police force but there’s never been any recognition of 
it in funding formulas. And the only thing they do get to keep is 
a portion  an ever-declining portion, I might add  of the 
fine revenue. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  The question was asked a while back about 
what was happening with the attendance on the Western 
Development Museum  and I believe that includes a package 
of museums  and the answer was that the attendance is going 
up. Do you have a breakdown of what’s happening specifically 
on the different museums, and which ones the attendance is  

going up and which ones it’s dropping? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  We wouldn’t have that kind of detail 
here but we certainly could provide that for you if you’d like to 
have it. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Moving on to a rather unhappy topic, but it’s 
one that I’ve had some association with. From time to time 
municipal bodies run into a serious financial problem and your 
department has to sort of step in and make sure it sort of comes 
together. How many municipal bodies of Saskatchewan 
presently are in those sorts of financial straits where you sort of 
have to oversee them? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The response to that, about 
municipalities in financial distress, or administrative distress I 
guess, is that it’s relatively very, very few  probably less than 
10 at the current time. So I guess it’s all part of that you and I 
are familiar with, that local governments cannot deficit budget 
and generally they’re very responsible and very careful. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Good. That number’s more reassuring than I 
was afraid it might be, so that was good to hear. 
 
You’re probably aware of the global estimate questions that our 
caucus sends to you, on a yearly basis, to your department. Do 
you have any idea when we’re going to receive the answers to 
those particular set of global questions that we asked? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I was informed by my staff either this 
morning or yesterday I think, that work would be beginning on 
answering the questions I think as we speak. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  You’ve made a number of comments 
recently, and the first word I want to use is amalgamations, but 
whether we use amalgamation or cooperation or sharing, 
whatever term we want to use of local governments, do you 
have a specific time frame in mind by which you would sort of 
like to see, whatever the process is called, come to an end and 
we can look at it and say we’ve accomplished whatever we set 
out to accomplish? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  We don’t have that kind of a plan at 
the moment. As we’ve said, we don’t have a plan because we 
really do believe that these kind of decisions should be in the 
hands of local people, that they are in the best position to make 
those decisions. 
 
But we have discussed with SUMA and SARM at our meeting 
on the agenda for our round-table meeting on the 26th, that we 
would like to develop a sort of a protocol for how we would 
approach some of the mechanical difficulties in the way of 
doing this. 
 
Like, for example, in the case of a reversion of a very small 
urban community into the rural municipality, if it had, for 
instance, a leaky lagoon or a water treatment plant that needed 
fixing or an underground gas tank, who would be responsible, 
you know, for those liabilities? 
 
And we have actually a number of municipalities who have  
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

 

come voluntarily forward with a variety of different requests 
like, will you help us develop a plan to amalgamate? Like, will 
you help us with the formula that would bring our mill rates 
even, for example, if one municipality wants to amalgamate 
with one beside it and the mill rates are very different. 
 
You will recall in Corman Park we had a 10-year equalization 
formula to bring the mill rates of the three municipalities even. 
And that kind of technical advice some people want. 
 
So this isn’t something that we’re forcing on any municipalities, 
but we truly have had a number of them come forward and 
indicate their desire to change something about the way they 
operate. And we want to, with SUMA and SARM, have some 
collective way of approaching this so that if we respond to the 
requests of some of these municipalities, be they small, urban, 
or rural, that we’ll be able to use that pattern, and others that 
may want to follow in the same path will see how the problems 
had been overcome. 
 
So we would hope to, and I think it’s the wish of the municipal 
organizations too, to proceed with this right away and maybe 
accomplish some of these in this calendar year before the fall, 
before the budgeting and administrative year of 1997 comes 
along. So there isn’t really a set goal at the moment, but we 
want to work that out together. And if it’s to be voluntary on the 
part of those local governments, then it’s presumptuous for us 
to set a goal. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  I’m aware, from the cooperation that has 
taken place presently between municipal bodies, that some of 
that has happened to some degrees. I’m aware of one particular 
community, and you sort of alluded to something like this, 
where the infrastructure of this community has basically just 
collapsed and they’re asking an RM basically to take them over. 
 
But they’ve become an ugly sibling and really no one wants 
them. Because the RM is saying, well we’re going to have to do 
your lagoon and your water, plus we have possibly 
environmental costs because of the half a dozen service stations 
that used to exist there. And so they probably aren’t willing to 
accept this ugly sibling unless there’s some extra cash put into 
place to sort of help them along. Is your department prepared to 
work with them on a financial basis? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well so far we have in our budget for 
this year  I forget what we called it now  it’s $100,000 
anyway. It’s sort of transitional funding for that effort. But it’s 
not meant to be . . . it’s meant to be more organizational and not 
specifically to pick up liabilities. So those are the things, for 
instance, at the next round table we will be inviting 
representatives from the Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management to look at, because those liabilities, the 
plumbing and the underground storage tanks and so forth, are 
within their purview. And we’d like to involve them to try and 
work something out with respect to those liabilities. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  I appreciate the fact that you’re looking at 
those, because I think they present a real problem for some of 
the cooperations that people are trying to get going on. 
 

You’ve intimated in various ways over the past couple of days 
that if municipalities don’t start working together they may 
have some of their funding cut a little further. Is that statement 
correct? And if not, exactly what were you trying to get across 
with those statements? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well as I said yesterday, I was trying 
to be provocative, and it worked. But I think that what I was 
thinking out loud about was, I was reflecting on a suggestion 
that was made to me by a member of one of the municipal 
organizations. And we were talking about how much 
intermunicipal cooperation there is in so many parts of the 
province, and yet there do remain those parts of the province 
and those individual municipalities who don’t have any sharing 
agreements with anyone. 
 
And you can’t legislate cooperation, but we were just 
discussing how can we encourage these people. How can we 
show them how easy it is to enter into these agreements and 
how much benefit there is in sharing equipment, be it road 
equipment or fire agreements or whatever? Is there some way? 
 
And it was suggested to me that, well, you could say that every 
municipality in the province has to enter into three 
intermunicipal agreements during this year, or else they’ll have 
their revenue sharing reduced. And I thought, well that gets 
about as close to legislating cooperation as you can possibly 
get. But it wasn’t an idea that sprung from me; it was a 
suggestion that was made by someone else. So I just threw it 
out, and we haven’t done any numbers on it, and we’re not 
contemplating doing that. 
 
But I think in these times of change that it’s worthwhile to have 
these discussions and to throw out all kinds of different ideas. 
And who knows? I mean, we have to do things different ways. 
We all know that. And we need to adapt to the changing times. 
 
And there’s some things that . . . I mean, when you and I were 
young  or at least when I was  when I used to read in comic 
books about people going into space and Captain Marvel and all 
that stuff, I mean, it was like a fairy tale. And here we are; it’s 
happening. And so some of these ideas that may seem 
farfetched at first blush may be the way we’re going to go. But 
we need to listen to each other, and we need to talk about all 
these ideas. And that was one that somebody mentioned to me, 
and I thought it could have some currency. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, I’m not sure if you’re 
trying to goad me into saying what comics I read when I was 
young to guess my age, but I don’t think that’s going to work. 
 
With your background in municipal affairs, I think this next 
question is something that you could relate to very well with the 
fact that there’s been a downloading of responsibility onto the 
municipalities for a number of years, and the most recent is the 
$20 million from municipalities for next year. And I guess both 
of us having had that kind of a background, how do you 
propose municipalities can absorb this kind of hit, you know, in 
the situation they’re going to find themselves in? I must admit 
that personally I’m almost glad I’m not on municipal council at 
present. 
  



972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 1996 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well I would say to the member, I 
could tell you a funny little story about the reason I’m standing 
in my place in this House today . . . is while I did enjoy my 
work with local government very much, in the late ‘80s it was 
becoming highly exasperating  all of the cuts in revenue 
sharing that were occurring and the programs that were being 
cancelled. And I thought to myself, I’m going to get elected at 
that level, and I’m going to change all of that. So of course, it 
got worse instead of better. Eventually, you know, you get a 
touch of reality. 
 
But this really represents 3 per cent of total municipal revenues. 
And as you and I both know, the contribution of the province 
through the revenue-sharing pool to various municipalities has a 
very disparate effect. I mean, in some municipalities it 
represents a major portion of their budget. To some 
municipalities it represents a very tiny amount, and if it were to 
disappear altogether, it would hardly make any difference to 
them. 
 
So this is the other subject of the round table meeting on the 
26th that we want to take up with the municipal organizations 
too . . . is how can we restructure the distribution formula for 
revenue sharing in such a way that it can be more fair 
because. . .I mean the formula is very complex now, but as the 
size of the pool continues to shrink as it has. . . It’s less than 
half its size now of the highest level it was at, or close to half. 
The formula skews things in different directions. 
 
The same as with the foundation grant for education  the first 
time that we reduced the size of the pool by 2 per cent, because 
of the provisions of the formula, it delivered a 10 per cent 
increase to some people, you know, and a 20 per cent decrease 
to others. It just was all over the map. So we want to talk to the 
municipal organizations about how we can make the 
distribution formula more sensitive to the municipalities that 
need help the most. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You mentioned 
fairy tale a minute ago, Madam Minister, and I think  I know 
 the RMs are definitely hoping this $20 million cut next year 
is part of a fairy tale, but I’m afraid it isn’t. 
 
Madam Minister, I have grave concerns as being a past reeve 
out there of what this $20 million cut is going to do to people, 
especially in rural Saskatchewan. And I know everyone’s 
affected, urban and rural both, but I know firsthand what the 
situation has been out there in rural Saskatchewan with our road 
systems. And in my estimation, the road systems have been 
deteriorating badly for the last few years with the extra traffic 
that has come on them and with the funding cuts we have 
already taken since..well I won’t even point the finger at you 
people across  in ’91. They’ve started earlier through 
necessity or for whatever other reason. 
 
I think that the thing I’m trying to get to you, Madam Minister, 
is that we’ve already had tremendous cuts out there, and some 
of our roads are 30-years-old-plus, some of our grid road 
systems, and they’re not even close to being on our list now  

because we’ve had to drop a lot back. 
 
Has your department in any way studied what the $20 million 
cut and the effect it will have on rural road system out there? 
Have you looked into that at all, what this is going to do to the 
roads in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Sorry I missed that profound remark. 
We haven’t done any detailed study on it yet because it is a year 
away. And what the Finance minister said in the budget speech, 
and what is in fact the case, is the only decision that has been 
made is that the total size of the pool will be reduced by $20 
million even. It hasn’t been decided how much will come out of 
the rural pool and how much out of the urban. Hasn’t been 
decided how the distribution formula might be changed. 
 
And I had a meeting this morning with the president and the 
executive director of SARM, following which they had a 
meeting with the Minister of Highways. And I know that 
they’re trying to work out some comprehensive plan where 
rural councils can be involved with the Department of 
Highways in coming up with a plan where there would be local 
input to rationalize the road system in the province and to try to 
make sure that those arteries that are absolutely essential have 
the kind of maintenance that they need. 
 
And we know that the road system has deteriorated. And the 
pressure that the changes in the transportation regime and the 
loss of the Crow and the changes in the grain industry moving 
towards the large concrete terminals and away from the small 
wooden elevators is going to have profound effects upon the 
transportation system in this province. It’s a huge challenge for 
all of us. 
 
So this is why we’re involving the municipal organizations, the 
Department of Highways, and ourselves with respect to the 
future of revenue sharing in a concerted and consolidated effort 
to have a comprehensive look at how we can each play our part 
in maintaining the system that we need. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Madam Minister, I’m not sure if you 
possibly answered this in that or not. But I think maybe that was 
one of the questions I wanted to ask here . . . was the 
breakdown of what the urban part of the cuts will be, what the 
rural part of the cuts will be. What programs are going to be 
cut? Do we have any idea? Because I mean if we wait till next 
year to tell these people where these cuts are coming . . . I think 
what I’m saying is they’re going to need time to adjust here 
because this is going to be a great adjustment after already 
being hit with all this downloading. 
 
And they have to make an adjustment, and I would suggest that 
they only have really two ways to go. They either have to raise 
their mill rates which is totally unacceptable after they’ve 
worked hard to keep them where they are now, or they have to 
also cut services which we definitely can’t afford with the way 
the traffic is changing. 
 
So I guess the question is, have you got a breakdown of 
urban/rural? Where are these cuts going to hit? 
 
  



April 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I did address that in my previous 
responses, that this will be the subject of our communications at 
the round table with SUMA and SARM starting on the 26th . . . 
is that we want to talk about how will it affect rural and urban. 
 
I mean, I’m sure they see that it should be pro rata in some 
way. But how can we also change the distribution formula so 
that people will be affected as little as possible or so that those 
communities that need the help . . . change it into more like an 
equalization formula? 
 
And those are discussions that we will have starting before the 
end of this month because . . . well we did give a year’s notice 
if you like, but time goes very quickly, and we know that they 
need to have answers to those questions at the earliest possible 
time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  When the hon. member beside me asked a 
question about amalgamation and that and agreements that are 
out there . . . possibly some RMs there have joined into three 
agreements. That would suffice to continue with their funding. 
 
If you went that far, would that also include . . . Like, I know 
my home RM is already, I think, in three or four. They’ve done 
it voluntarily And I think I’ve said this before. I think a number 
of RMs and towns are way ahead of the game here, and that’s 
why I think I feel so strongly about forcing them in any way 
and using funding especially to do it. 
 
Would that, if you’re talking about . . . now are you talking 
about three agreements on top of what they already have, or 
would that suffice as what they’ve already been into? Because I 
know a number of RMs and towns already have a number of 
agreements. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, well actually what I was talking 
about, as I said, it was just a concept that was suggested to me, 
and, you know, I just repeated it, threw it out there for 
consideration. No detailed work has been done on that. 
 
But I would assume . . . I think the intent of the person who 
suggested it to me was that it would be an effort to have each 
municipality be involved in at least three  not three new ones 
or three additional ones but three because there are some 
municipalities out there who are not in service sharing or 
intermunicipal agreements of any kind, if you can believe it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I would 
suggest, Madam Minister, that even by bringing the Act 
forward already, you’ve woke a lot of RMs up  if that was 
what your intention were to do  to get off their behinds, get 
moving, and let’s try and join services. As I said, many have 
already. 
 
I think that’s where we’re at the point now, Madam Minister, 
and I think we’ve talked about it earlier in question period for a 
number of days. But I’m not sure that the legislation itself is 
even needed at this point because I think the wake-up call has 
got through, you know. And I’m not agreeing with the way it’s 
been done, but I know many RMs and towns are already 
talking, well maybe there is ways we can do this. 

And I think that’s what I was saying earlier, that I think the 
need of the legislation right now . . . I would like to see it put on 
the back burner, and let’s see what they do now on their own. If 
they do not respond to what you have tried here, then possibly 
two years down the road would be a fine time to bring it back 
and say, look I warned you. You wouldn’t do it; here it is. I 
would hope that you give these municipalities of all sizes and 
kinds, urban and rural, a chance now to show you what they can 
do. They’ve had the wake-up call. Let’s give them that two 
years. 
 
So I hope that suggestion would be taken seriously because I 
know my experiences with the RM out there is I know we were 
already doing it, and maybe there was more things we could do. 
But I think you’ve scared them fairly deeply now, and if that 
was what you intended to do, that’s fine. I would hope we 
would not force it any farther. 
 
One thing I would like to touch on, Madam Minister, is . . . I 
know in our home RM we are running out of gravel, and I think 
there’s a number of other RMs that are running out of gravel 
too. And it’s a tremendous expense. I know at home it’s just 
sky-rocketed. 
 
Is there any plans anywhere within your department to assist, 
number one, RMs in finding gravel and, number two, to assist 
these RMs that are caught where . . . I know in our case, we’re 
going to be hauling gravel 40 to 50 miles in the near future, if 
we can find it. And the cost is sky-rocketing. So is there 
anything in the works to help find gravel and, number two, fund 
it, when you do find it, extra and above what we already are 
being funded? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  We don’t have any plans in place 
along those lines at the moment. I recognize the problem. But 
it’s not Municipal Government; it would be the Department of 
Highways that generally, over the province, does the acquisition 
of pits and gravel rights and does the locating. And then often, 
as you know, then they allow rural municipalities to have access 
to those supplies. But it is a serious problem. 
 
I know that work is being done by the Research Council and 
others in alternate materials for road building and that sort of 
thing. And you know, surely if we can put a man on the moon, 
we can figure out some more economical way to build roads. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 943 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 943 
  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 943 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Lingenfelter ....................................................................................................................................................................... 943, 944 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 944 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 944 
  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 957 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Welcome Back to Minister of Energy and Mines 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 945 
 Innovation Place Expansion 
  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 945 
 Students Fast for World Vision 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 945 
 Law Day 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 945 
 Route of SaskPower’s Proposed New Line 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 946 
 Habitat 2000 
  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 946 
 Golden Grains Farms 
  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 946 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Municipal Government Amalgamation 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 946 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 947 
 Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 947 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 947 
 SaskTel Strike 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 948 
  Anguish ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 948 
 Addictions Treatment 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 948 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 949 
 Political Function Advertising 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 949 
  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 949 
 Surgery Waiting-lists 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 950 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 950 
 High-risk Offender Identification 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 951 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 951 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 74  An Act to amend The Government Organization Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 951 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 



 

 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 952 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 45  An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act and to make a consequential amendment to The Provincial 

Mediation Board Act 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 952 
 Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 953 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 953 
 Bill No. 70  An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 954 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 956 
 Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a consequential amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 957 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 958 
 Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act and to make a consequential amendment to another Act 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 958 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 959 
 Bill No. 73 An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 960 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 961 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 911 System and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 961 
 Bill No. 32  An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 963 
 Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 963 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Municipal Government  Vote 24 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 965 
  Bjornerud .......................................................................................................................................................................... 965, 972 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 966 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 968 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 970 
 
 


