
















































May 6, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1365 

 May 6, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf 

of concerned citizens from the province of Saskatchewan with 

respect to the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on the petition besides being from Regina are 

also from Yorkton, Kisbey, Kipling, and many other small 

communities in southern Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise, Mr. 

Speaker, to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names are from numerous southern Saskatchewan 

communities plus the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Pilot Butte, Carlyle, and throughout Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens concerned about the impending closure of the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from the city of 

Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, but 

also from Lampman, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Weyburn, 

Bienfait, all over southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition of names from people throughout southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre, the prayer 

reading as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed pretty much by the people of 

Arm River and specifically from the community of Eyebrow. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre, and the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

This does truly represent a cross-section of Saskatchewan when 

we start out with regions in the east with Moosomin, 

Broadview, Wapella represented here; Rocanville, White City, 

Regina, Moose Jaw, and then all the way across to in my 

constituency with the town of Herbert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

from Regina here; there are many of them from Indian Head, a 

neighbouring community here; and there’s also one from 

Manitoba, I believe, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to present this to 

the Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today  day 45  the 45th time I’ve been with my 

colleagues to present petitions on behalf of the Plains Health 

Centre in trying to save its existence. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see a lot of the people that have signed this  



1366  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

petition are actually from out of province  Toronto, some 

from B.C. (British Columbia)  but obviously many from 

Regina, and in particular, Regina Dewdney, Elphinstone, 

Regina Albert South. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The province of Saskatchewan has been honoured by a visit by 

His Excellency Anthony Goodenough, High Commissioner of 

Britain, and his wife Veronica. I would ask them to stand if they 

will, to be introduced. And Mr. Patrick Holdich as well who’s 

with them. I’d ask the Assembly to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  After a distinguished career in the 

foreign affairs with the British government, Mr. Goodenough is 

now the high commissioner to Canada. It’s the first time he’s 

been in the commission in Canada and he tells me it’s his first 

time ever in Saskatchewan, so we are honoured indeed. 

 

I assured, when I met with the high commissioner this morning, 

His Excellency this morning, I assured him this is the way the 

weather always is  this is a very typical day in this province. 

 

Our trade relations with Britain are important, as of course are 

our cultural ties, and we seek to strengthen these. We are very 

pleased that Mr. Goodenough and his wife and associate were 

able to come, and we look forward to return visits to the 

province by them. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to once 

again reiterate a welcome to His Excellency, with whom I had 

the pleasure of meeting this morning. On behalf of the official 

opposition, welcome, and thank you for coming to visit our 

great province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too, 

joining the Leader of the Opposition and the government 

members, would like to welcome the high commissioner and 

his wife and the other people accompanying him to the 

legislature here this afternoon. 

 

I look forward to our visit later this afternoon, and discuss the 

various issues that may be of interest to the country of Great 

Britain and certainly Canada. So we look forward to that later 

this afternoon, and we would add our voice of welcome to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted 

to be able to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of the Assembly, a group of 57 students who are seated in your 

west gallery. These are grade 6, 7, and 8 students from Peart 

School in my constituency. They’re accompanied by their 

teacher, Bruce Baldwin, among others. 

 

And I look forward to meeting with this group after the 

question period and to answer any questions that they may 

have. And I look very much forward to that visit. And I would 

ask the members to make these students feel very welcome here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of this 

Assembly and ask you to make them welcome, a group of 32 

students from the Cowessess School on the Cowessess Reserve, 

grade 4 and 5 students who are in the east gallery. They’re 

attended by their teachers, Ms. Sayer and Mrs. Bear; chaperons 

Susan Gunn, John Denis Lerat, and Curtin Agecoutay. I hope 

I’ve got that name correct. 

 

And I look forward to visiting with this group after question 

period for some pictures and just a photo opportunity, and a 

time of question and answers as well. Welcome them, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 

and through you to the Assembly, a group of seniors from Good 

Shepherd Lutheran Church in Saskatoon. I’m especially pleased 

to introduce them because my parents are with them, but also 

my godparents, my aunt and uncle, Curtis and Gertrude Satre, 

from Irma, Alberta. I’d like you all to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’d like to 

also welcome all the students that are visiting here today, and 

especially the students from Cowessess School. As a native 

member of the House, it’s always nice to see native people 

come in and watch the proceedings. And I encourage all the 

students up there to continue on with their education. Again on 

behalf of the Liberal caucus, we welcome you and we ask the 

Assembly to join me in also welcoming them. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you and members of the Assembly, two special friends from 

Saskatoon who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. These 

individuals farmed south of Shaunavon for many years and 

retired in Saskatoon, but I’d like all members to join with me in 

welcoming Mr. and Mrs. Ralph Aadland to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mental Health Week in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 

Speaker, to recognize Mental Health Week in Saskatchewan 

which begins today. I would like to share with you its theme: 

Open Mind: A New Attitude on Mental Health. Stop Stigma. 

 

We must constantly challenge ourselves to fight against stigma 

and public misunderstanding about mental disorders. The future 

well-being and quality of life of persons with mental illness 

depends on our ability to change attitudes towards mental 

illness. This is critical because the stigma attached to mental 

illness discourages people from seeking help. 

 

Only one in five people with a mental illness seek professional 

help. Sometimes it seems there’s nothing we can do. But this is 

a case where we all can help. Sensitivity and empathy on the 

part of us all can go a long way to understanding mental illness 

and ending the fear of stigma. 

 

This in turn will encourage people to seek the services that will 

help them overcome or manage their illness. It is up to all of us 

to show sensitivity to those with mental illness. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

recognize this week’s designation as Mental Health Week. In 

fact psychiatric and emotional disorders are more common in 

Saskatchewan than anywhere in Canada, affecting about 28 per 

cent of Saskatchewan people every year. 

 

Activities and public events planned for Mental Health Week 

are designed to fight the stereotypes that are often attached to 

people who suffer mental health problems. This negative view 

of mental illness can add to the problem by lowering one’s 

self-esteem. 

 

By raising the profile of mental illness, hopefully more people 

will become aware of, understand, and respect, the challenges 

that face many people with mental illness. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to just 

comment on the recognition of mental illness in our province 

on behalf of our caucus. And certainly indicate, Mr. Speaker, 

that it’s important that each one of us as individuals recognize 

the other person around us and those, especially those, that 

we’re acknowledging this week  individuals suffering from 

mental illness. 

 

As we’ve heard by the government member and the Liberal 

opposition, for too many years we have basically put these 

people in the back rooms, if you will, or behind closed doors 

and haven’t recognized the problem for what it is; and the fact 

that as individuals if we would reach out and give them a 

loving, warm hug, at many times we could help many people 

combat and fight this problem that people in our society face. 

 

So it’s certainly fitting that we take this time to recognize the 

problems of mental illness and give the encouragement that’s 

needed to reach out to combat this problem at this time. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Forest Week 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, this week is National Forest 

Week. The Saskatchewan forest is important, and not only to 

my constituency but the entire province. Our forests enhance 

the environment, provide habitat for wildlife, produce the air 

we breathe, and add beauty to the overall province. 

 

Forest is one of the driving forces in our province’s economy. 

Almost 8,000 jobs depend upon the forest industry which 

contribute $635 million to the Saskatchewan economy annually. 

As well, other forest-based activities, including such things as 

recreational fishing, trapping, and hunting, are carried on in the 

forest. 

 

As part of the National Forest Week, the Saskatchewan Forestry 

Association has organized Tree Trek to encourage the 

understanding of our forests. The money raised by this activity 

is used to maintain the association’s interpretive trails in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The general public is invited to hike along the well-marked 

trails. Participants will be collecting pledges as they take part in 

the Tree Trek. Our forests provide an important resource that 

contributes to the quality of our life. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Safety Colouring Book Available 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A farm has the 

potential for many accidents and teaching children safety about 

the farm is extremely important. Donna Prosko, a constituent 

from Rose Valley, is promoting farm safety to children 12 and 

under through a new colouring book. The 30-page book is 

called Farming Today with Fun and Safety. This book takes 

children through the seasons of farming. About 18 farm safety 

rules are included to help remind the children and parents how 

important safety is. 

 

Donna began this project when she wanted to teach her own 

three children as much as possible about farm safety and found 

there is little information on it for the modern version of how a 

farm operates in the ‘90s. Donna gathered stickers, a farm 

video, and an activity book that she used to do a farm safety 

walkabout on her farm. Then she made a presentation to her 

son’s classmates and was surprised in the amount of interest 

they showed. They wanted to learn about machinery, crops, 

nature, and the environment. 

 

Last spring she decided to go ahead with publishing a book, and 

so far she has sold over 2,500 copies across western Canada. 

 



1368  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 

commending Donna Prosko for seeing the need and taking the 

initiative to promote farm safety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Learning Grounds Project 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

approximately 250 people in the Whitmore Park neighbourhood 

of Regina came together to start working on a very special 

ecological and educational project. 

 

The project at St. Matthew School in my constituency will turn 

the school yard back into a more natural environment that can 

be enjoyed by students, and used for many hands-on outdoor 

educational opportunities. As such, it’s been dubbed a “learning 

grounds” project, as it will turn the school ground into an 

environmental and educational experience and encourage 

healthy environmental attitudes while promoting physical and 

psychological health. 

 

St. Matthew School is leading the way with this project, as it is 

the very first of its kind in our province. It’s also a true 

community project, since it involves the resources of the 

community, University of Regina, the school’s PTA (parent 

teacher association), hundreds of individual parents, teachers, 

and students. 

 

The students have been involved from the start in the 

development, design, and construction of the project, that will 

include new marshlands project, planting many indigenous 

Saskatchewan plants, and a natural prairie area. They’ll also be 

involved in the care and maintenance after the project is 

complete. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this project reflects a strong commitment to the 

environment. I’d like to congratulate St. Matthew School and 

the many people involved in this worthwhile project, including 

the principal, Aline Wilkie, Regina Separate School Board, 

Sask Ed, the Learning Through Landscapes Foundation, U of R 

(University of Regina), and Environment Canada. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lumsden and Craven Seniors’ Program 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure to recognize the initiative of the progressive 

community of Lumsden in my constituency, and today I would 

like to pay tribute to the people involved in a program 

responsible for helping seniors. 

 

I am referring to the Lumsden and Craven seniors’ program. On 

March 13 they held their annual meeting at Lumsden Manor. 

Through this program seniors receive valuable services such as 

transportation and help with household chores. The group is 

also looking at adding to the list of services that are currently 

offered. 

 

The Lumsden Lions Club has donated $1,000 towards the 

operation of the program for 1996, and the Craven Elks have 

agreed to match this donation. The Regina Health District has 

also helped offset some costs for the programs. 

 

By the middle of March some 20 people had signed up for this 

program which is in need of additional volunteers. I would like 

to congratulate Kathy Reimer, who is the program coordinator, 

and all of the volunteers who are contributing to the quality of 

life for our seniors. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 16 the 

very first Saskatchewan Achievement in Business Excellence 

Awards will be presented at the Centennial Auditorium in 

Saskatoon. As many as 31 businesses could receive an award in 

various categories. 

 

Meanwhile the SABEX (Saskatoon Achievement in Business 

Excellence) Hall of Fame Awards will go to the Buckwold 

groups of companies, and posthumously to Joe Leier, the 

former owner of the Sheraton Cavalier. 

 

Harry Buckwold started his dry goods operations in 1925, and 

in the 1950s Sidney and Seymour Buckwold expanded it into 

the wholesale flooring distribution. Today the company has 

distribution centres in Winnipeg, Edmonton, Vancouver, as 

well as Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Bruce and Richard Buckwold are currently the managers of this 

long-standing, successful Saskatoon family business. 

 

The second recipient of the Hall of Fame Award, Mr. Speaker, 

goes to the late Joe Leier. Not only did Joe Leier own the 

Saskatoon Sheraton Cavalier, but he also owned the Sheraton 

Cavalier in Calgary and the Prince Albert Marlboro Inn. 

 

Mr. Leier was known for his contributions to charity. In 1991, 

the year prior to his death, he received the B’nai B’rith 

Humanitarian Award. He was the first person in Saskatchewan 

to receive this honour. 

 

I commend the Saskatoon Regional Economic Development 

Authority and the chamber of commerce for encouraging and 

supporting business achievements with these awards, and 

congratulations to all the businesses that have been nominated. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Labour. The concern surrounding  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement is not going 

away. In fact it is growing stronger every day. This NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government refuses to deal with the problem 

that they  and only they  have created. They have 

repeatedly heard the pleas from the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association, the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, 

the school boards, and municipalities, but they blatantly refuse 

to do anything. 

 

Construction firms belonging to the SCA (Saskatchewan 

Construction Association) have boycotted bidding on jobs that 

are subject to the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement). Mr. Speaker, this is hurting construction firms. It 

is detrimental to job creation and it is significantly costing 

taxpayers more money. It is harming our economy. 

Saskatchewan needs jobs and economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Labour finally admit that the 

CCTA is not a fair and open tendering policy and will he 

commit to tearing up this agreement today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I would inform the 

Assembly in regard to the hon. member’s question that 

meetings as late as today have taken place between the Crown 

Investments Corporation and the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association. I believe we’re making progress. We want a 

harmonious relationship with all the parties involved in the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, and I believe that 

we’ll achieve that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  These meetings, Mr. Speaker, must come as 

quite a shock to the SCA because I was talking to him just 

before lunch and he still hadn’t been in attendance at one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve an apology 

and this NDP government owes it to the public to tear up this 

agreement. In a recent publication  and I’ll send a copy to the 

minister  by the Merit construction contractors entitled, 

“Saskatchewan NDP Rewarding their friends,” current 

chairman Brent Waldo said, and I quote: 

 

“There are really two sets of rules for construction in 

Saskatchewan,” . . . “One for the unionized shops and one 

for the rest of us. Unfortunately, our set of rules keeps us 

from competing and could end up hurting our industry in 

the long term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 80 per cent of construction workers have chosen 

not to belong to a union. This agreement has a serious impact 

on these workers. Will the Minister of Labour admit that the 

CCTA is devastating the construction industry by giving a 

bidding advantage to unionized contractors over those 

contractors whose employees have chosen freely not to join a 

union? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No, I’ll not admit that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this NDP government 

attempted to justify CCTA when it was first implemented, by 

claiming the goal was to establish fair wages. This has not been 

the result. The result has been local construction contractors 

refusing to bid on jobs. That hurts the firm, the firm’s 

employees, the corporation receiving the work, and the 

taxpayers, because bids aren’t based on the lowest qualified 

bidder. The sole reason for all these problems is the CCTA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a fair wage policy. The contractors 

aren’t opposed to a fair wage policy, but they’re opposed to the 

CCTA. Will the minister, in attempting to rectify these 

problems, admit to immediate, true dialogue with the SCA? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  As I informed the Assembly earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my understanding that as late as today a meeting is 

taking place between the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association and the Crown Investments Corporations. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions today are again for the Minister of Health. Mr. 

Speaker, on Friday I tried to get answers for the people of Fort 

Qu’Appelle and for the Touchwood File Hills Tribal Council 

regarding Fort Qu’Appelle’s hospital. All I got back was the 

same political rhetoric and nonsense we’ve come to be used to 

from these ministers. But I’ll try again, Mr. Speaker. There is a 

crisis developing in Fort Qu’Appelle with threats of lawsuits 

because of broken agreements with the tribal council. 

 

My question to the minister in charge of what’s left of our 

health care system is this: will he step in and ensure that 

promised level of funding is restored to Fort Qu’Appelle Indian 

Hospital, or is he willing to continue to ignore the situation and 

let the situation turn uglier than it already is? Yes or no, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud to 

be the minister in charge of the wonderful health system that we 

have in this province, and I want to say, which people across 

North America consider to be a very enviable health system I 

might add, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to say the member that the district health board in 

the area that that member represents in the legislature, is 

responsible for making decisions about operating funding 

throughout the district and as between various institutions in the 

district. That is a decision that is made locally, not by the 

Department of Health, not by myself as minister. 

 

And when the member gets up and talks about a crisis which is  



1370  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

a dispute between the Fort Qu’Appelle Indian Hospital and the 

district over how much how much money the hospital should 

get, he’s not attacking me or the department or the government, 

Mr. Speaker, he’s attacking the local district, the people from 

his own area that are responsible for allocating health care 

dollars. 

 

With respect to that issue, Mr. Speaker, I understand the district 

is carrying out an operational review. I have every confidence 

that the district and the tribal council and the hospital will arrive 

at a sensible arrangement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try once again to 

give the minister another opportunity to give a straight answer. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Touchwood File Hills Tribal Council signed 

an agreement in good faith with your government when it 

agreed to join the health district. Now, Mr. Minister, that 

agreement is broken due to your own lack of commitment and 

faith to the people of Fort Qu’Appelle and the tribal council. 

We see more workers laid off and doubts cast upon the 

promised and much-needed new facility in Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

I ask the minister what he is willing to do, beyond blaming 

others, to straighten out this ludicrous situation we see 

developing in Fort Qu’Appelle. Will you live up to your 

commitment, Mr. Minister? Yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not me who is 

blaming others; it is the member over there. 

 

And what I am saying to the member is, let the district and let 

the Fort Qu’Appelle Indian Hospital and the tribal council 

negotiate and resolve their differences. It is not the place of the 

Minister of Health to get involved every time there is a dispute 

between a local facility and the district health board which must 

make decisions about funding in the district. 

 

But while the member is saying that he wants definitive 

answers, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the member this question: 

is the member and his party . . . are they going to support The 

Health Facilities Licensing Act to keep our medicare system a 

public, single-tiered system? 

 

The member says he wants straight answers from me. He’s got 

them. Now I’d like a straight answer from that party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Personal Care Home Regulations 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions as well 

are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan 

seniors and their families have been waiting for your 

government to bring forward regulations for personal care 

homes for more than 10 individuals. 

 

The former Health minister promised these regs would be 

released by December of 1994. And then on the eve of the 

election, the Health minister sent out a news release on this very 

issue and promised regulations would be in place by May 1995. 

Well it’s May 1996 and there are still no regulations in place. 

 

Mr. Minister, there is no good reason why these regulations 

should take up to two years to release. What is the hold-up? 

Why is it taking so long to bring these regulations forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I can advise the member, Mr. Speaker, that 

the regulations will be released within the next two weeks. So 

they will be released in a very short space of time. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard that promise 

before. In fact we’ve gone through it three or four times in this 

Assembly. One of the main problems with your health 

government’s reform . . . or your government’s health reform is 

that you cut and slash health services and beds with no 

alternatives in place, and this is just another example. I’m 

looking forward to hearing whether or not that promise comes 

forward in the next two weeks. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, it’s important that it be brought forward for 

. . . A couple of examples. Just last week Souris Valley 

extended care lost 20 beds because of lack of funds, leaving 20 

seniors with nowhere to turn. And the Eaglestone seniors’ lodge 

in Kamsack is on the verge of closing altogether, again leaving 

many seniors with no home. This week we hear that the North 

Central Health District is announcing the closure of another 30 

beds in Melfort that will affect many seniors who need care. 

This is happening all across the province and all you have to do 

is bring forward the regulations. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have just indicated that within two weeks you 

will be bringing forward those regulations. Will you make a 

firm commitment, Mr. Minister, this afternoon that those 

regulations will indeed be brought forward within the next two 

weeks? Or is this just another political ploy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I already have answered the question, 

Mr. Speaker, and . . . But I want to say to the member that 

there’s an article in The Globe and Mail today talking about 

health reform in Saskatchewan, and I would encourage the 

member to read it, because one of the things it points out is that 

we’re moving in a very proactive and positive way to provide 

creative housing alternatives and living alternatives, including 

enhanced home care, to seniors so that they can live 

independently in the community. And I think what is 

happening, Mr. Speaker, is actually quite positive. 

 

But while we’re getting commitments, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

ask that member from that party whether his party too would 

support The Health Facilities Licensing Act and thereby support 

legislation which will safeguard the public medicare system that 

we enjoy in our province. I’d like a commitment from the 

member as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

Funding for the Arts 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board. Madam Minister, you are now saying that you want 

the arts community to do more to justify the money it gets from 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. You also said your government will be 

looking at taxpayer-funded Saskatchewan Arts Board and 

deciding whether there’s still support. 

 

I’m glad to see you’re finally coming around on this particular 

issue, Madam Minister. I’m wondering if you could explain 

these comments in greater detail. Madam Minister, what 

changes are you planning to make to the arts funding, and what 

changes are you planning to make to the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board to make it more accountable for the $3.6 million a year it 

receives from Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 

opportunity to answer that question from the member opposite. 

And I would suggest that at the arts forum which was held in 

Saskatoon, which is a mere half-hour’s drive away from the 

where the member opposite who raises the question lives, that if 

he had attended the forum and listened to the presentations, 

listened to the address I made and the spirited question and 

answer period, Mr. Speaker, which followed, instead of relying 

on a press report from this morning’s newspaper which rather 

doesn’t reflect what the situation was or what I said correctly, 

that he would be much better served, Mr. Speaker, and he 

would have the answer then to his own question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad that the 

madam minister had an opportunity to get involved in some 

spirited answers, because I’m sure the questions were very 

pointed. 

 

Your own budget consultation process showed that arts funding 

has one of the lowest priorities of Saskatchewan taxpayers, yet 

within your own department your priorities did not reflect that 

at all. Arts funding was cut by less than 3 per cent while 

funding to municipalities cut by 25 per cent. 

 

Madam Minister, I completely agree that artists should do more 

to justify the money they receive. In fact many artists 

completely justify the money they receive by creating their art 

and then selling it without any help from government. 

 

Madam Minister, if people like what an artist is producing, 

they’ll buy the art. If they don’t, taxpayers shouldn’t be forced 

to subsidize it. 

 

Madam Minister, if you want to make the arts community more 

accountable, why don’t you simply end taxpayer-funded grants 

to individual artists and let the artists sell their products in the 

market-place just like everyone else who produces a product or 

supplies a service. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I would say this about 

the figures that the member opposite uses, in that the reductions 

to the Arts Board funding in the context of our whole fiscal 

situation since the year 1992 have totalled 10 per cent; they’re 

not 10 per cent in this year. In this year, they’re about . . . just 

around 3 per cent; whereas the cut to municipalities doesn’t 

even take effect till next year. So he should get his arithmetic 

straight to begin with. 

 

In the second place, Mr. Speaker, we are reflecting in our 

budget the priorities of Saskatchewan people when they say 

they do not have a high awareness of the arts community, in 

that our funding of some $3 million directly to the Arts Board 

represents less than one-tenth of 1 per cent of all government 

spending. 

 

Now if that isn’t already reflecting the wishes of the people of 

Saskatchewan, I don’t know how low it would have to go. 

 

I want to say further that I think that it is no accident that our 

free-standing Arts Board that has existed for 50 years has 

resulted in the creativity being developed to the point where we 

have artists of every medium . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Seniors’ Eye Care Costs 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Social Services. 

 

I recently received a call from a 73-year-old widow who 

desperately needed a new pair of glasses but cannot afford 

them. Her total income is $812 per month, and this money goes 

toward clothing, shelter, food, and medication. 

 

This woman called the departments of Health and Social 

Services, as did I, and was told that this government has 

nothing in place for low income seniors to cover the cost of 

glasses. In fact the Department of Social Services told me that 

in order for her to get funding for new glasses, she would have 

to go on social assistance. 

 

Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan seniors are proud people. They 

have contributed a great deal to this province. They do not want 

to be a burden on their fellow citizens. However, they need and 

deserve respect and should receive help to meet their needs 

when necessary. 

 

Mr. Minister, what will you do today to ensure that people are 

not forced into social service lines so that their basic safety 

needs such as glasses are met? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as always, I will take the 

member’s concern and individual case under advisement. I 

again would invite her, when she has individual cases, to 

contact me, to call me to discuss these issues in the House, Mr. 

Speaker. We have discovered in other experiences of this 

member and of her caucus, when issues have been raised in this 

House, that some of the fact that is brought to the House is not 

accurate, Mr. Speaker. 



1372  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Now to address the member’s issues. We are of course 

concerned, this government  I’m certain all Saskatchewan 

people are concerned  about sharing to those who need our 

assistance in our communities, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

fundamental principle of this government. It’s reflected in this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, where we have back-filled every federal 

dollar taken from social services 100 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, when this NDP government came 

into power, one of the first things that it did was to take away 

supplementary health coverage for low income earners. This 

woman that I have spoken to is just one of many Saskatchewan 

seniors who call me. Many of them have also been told by your 

department that their best bet is to go on social assistance. 

 

When this government proposed its new welfare reform plan, it 

said it was aiming to reducing welfare rolls. If the minister 

believes in this government’s welfare reform plan, why is the 

government encouraging more people to apply for social 

assistance in order to get essential health services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to deal with 

these important issues in the House when the member from 

Humboldt and others bring misinformation into the debate. 

 

Now where the member from Humboldt suggests that we have 

eliminated supplemental health benefits is simply not the case, 

Mr. Speaker. It is a sign of what appears to be a growing 

disarray of the information coming from that caucus. 

 

Again I say  again I say, Mr. Speaker  when the member 

has an individual concern, I plead with her to bring those 

concerns to my attention. I plead with her, secondly, to bring 

accurate information into this House. 

 

And third, if I may, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on feet, again I 

plead with that caucus to join with us and join with the rest of 

Saskatchewan in focusing some attention on their federal 

Liberal cousins as their federal Liberal cousins walk away from 

social programing across Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Surgical Waiting-lists 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Liberal opposition has brought to the attention of this House a 

number of examples that demonstrate the ever-widening cracks 

in the health care system. 

 

The minister has responded with statements such as, and I 

quote: 

 

When people need to get into the hospital for emergency 

surgery, they quite routinely do. This happens every single 

day. 

 

I would encourage the minister to read a letter  and I’ll send 

copies over to the cabinet members so they can follow along 

here today  from Mr. John Ballantyne, a Saskatoon resident 

who ruptured a disc in his back and was forced to endure two 

months of torture before having an operation that lasted less 

than one hour. In this letter, Mr. Ballantyne states and I quote: 

 

Your policies must change to deal with the serious cases 

like mine in a more compassionate and common sense 

way. 

 

Will the minister explain when he and his government will 

acknowledge and begin addressing the fact that the current 

health care system is not compassionate, or common sense, or 

meeting the needs of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  You know, Mr. Speaker, when I . . . I am 

sympathetic to somebody who’s on a waiting-list. But 

waiting-lists are nothing new in the province, and waiting-lists 

exist in every province in Canada. And actually our province 

fares fairly well. But when I hear a question like that, Mr. 

Speaker, I must say it’s not a surprise to hear in the media 

today, that that party is now in third place in the polling of 

political preferences in Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to tell the member and the House, that 

notwithstanding the gloom and doom and reports of people who 

have waited to get into . . . for elective surgery, that we hear day 

after day from the Liberal Party, most people who deal with the 

health care system are very, very happy with the treatment they 

get, Mr. Speaker. And I meet people every day who say, you 

know, we have a very good medicare system. We want to keep 

our medicare system and keep up the good work in terms of 

trying to keep a one-tiered system instead of the American-style 

medicare that those members are advocating. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s quite a 

quote from some of his colleagues that he’s referring to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the two months that Mr. Ballantyne waited 

for surgery he had to take morphine and other pain-numbing 

drugs in increasing quantities; and he writes and you’ll follow 

along: 

 

Sometimes I did not know what drug I’d taken or how 

much or when. 

 

Finally, two days before his surgery, Mr. Ballantyne was 

admitted to hospital because pain had escalated his blood 

pressure to a dangerously high level. Mr. Speaker, these are the 

kind of stories one hears about when examining third world 

countries, not Canada, and surely not Saskatchewan. 

 

Will the minister explain why his government has chipped away 

at our health care system leaving us with a system that in many 

ways resembles what one might find in a third world country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, I’m sorry that that gentleman had to 

wait two months for his surgery, Mr. Speaker, but I want to say 

that for elective surgery that is not uncommon in Saskatchewan 

or any other province. And in fact our record is probably better 

than most other provinces. 

 

And the number of elective surgeries actually over the last 10 

years has gone up quite considerably, Mr. Speaker, and more 

surgeries are being done, because of day surgery and shorter 

hospital stays, than have ever been done before. But the 

complaint about waiting for surgery is a political football that is 

tossed around by successive oppositions in governments for the 

last 30 years. 

 

But I want to say to the member from the Liberal Party that I 

think strike one in this whole medicare debate was when they 

would not object to the federal Liberals taking $50 million out 

of medicare. I think strike two was when they started 

advocating an American-style medicare system; and strike three 

came last week when the member from Arm River said that 

their position was in support of a two-tiered system where you 

pay for your medical services. 

 

I say, strike three and you’re out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the member can talk about 

strike one, two, and three all he wants. Saskatchewan is not 

even in the ball game in health care any longer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, surgery has relieved much of Mr. Ballantyne’s 

pain. However the long wait he endured resulted in a number of 

problems. His health deteriorated, his family encountered 

thousands of dollars in bills, his business lost about one-third of 

its contracts. Mr. Speaker, the truly unfortunate part of this is 

the fact that it is the typical way in which people are being 

treated under the current NDP version of health care. As Mr. 

Ballantyne so aptly puts it in his correspondence: 

 

I do not think that what we went through can ever be 

justified in our society. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you justify what Mr. Ballantyne and his 

family, and in fact what many others go through, in the name of 

NDP cost-effective health care system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the information I have, Mr. Speaker, 

is that Mr. Ballantyne received his surgery on February 3 and he 

was not on a waiting-list for months and months. That’s the 

information I have. And I think that’s consistent with what the 

member says. 

 

But I will say this to the member, that in our health care system 

everybody should be treated the same and should be categorized 

on the basis of whether they are a case of urgency, emergency, 

or elective surgery. That is a decision for the medical people to 

make, Mr. Speaker. There may be room for some improvement 

in our system, better coordination. I think  

the . . . actually the district health board model gives us some 

hope to do that. 

 

But at least in our system, Mr. Speaker, we’re all going to be 

treated the same way and our surgery is going to be based upon 

medical criteria, not the criteria that involves how much money 

we have in our wallet  which last week is what the member 

from Arm River said should be the criteria for deciding when 

we get our surgery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 83  An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Limitation of Actions Amendment Act, 1996 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. And I’m going to ask for the 

cooperation of all members when the Speaker is on his feet, to 

maintain order in the House, please. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Keeping with our policy of being an 

open and accessible government, I table the answer to 84. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 84 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  And we’re able to table the answer to 

no. 85, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 85 is tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47  An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I’ll be moving 

second reading of The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Agri-Food Act was passed in 1990 to provide new 

options for the establishment of producer-operated research and 

development funds through producer-elected boards and 

commissions. The Act was consistent with the desire to 

encourage producers to take a more direct role in their industry 

development. 

 



1374  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

It has recently been determined that The Agri-Food Act is 

unclear regarding the reporting and accountability requirements 

ensuring that producers’ elected boards operate in the best 

interest of their industry as well as the public. And, Mr. 

Speaker, producers’ elected boards are primarily responsible to 

producers through the democratic structures and reporting 

requirements provided in regulations. 

 

The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 1996 is being proposed to 

clarify accountability. Mr. Speaker, producers’ elected boards 

should be held directly responsible for their actions because 

they are chosen by producers to perform work on behalf of the 

producers with producer dollars. Producers themselves are the 

best ones to decide if their check-off research and development 

dollars are being administered wisely. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s with that note that I ask members of the 

Assembly to support these amendments, and therefore I move 

the second reading of a Bill, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 

1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to have a few moments today to discuss the proposed 

amendments to The Agri-Food Act. 

 

Due to the fact that the agriculture and food industry is the 

backbone of our economy, it is only right that considerable time 

be given to debate any changes to legislation that will affect this 

industry. 

 

The amendments to this Act do a variety of things including: 

altering the definition of marketing; classifying responsibilities 

of producer-elected boards under the Act; permitting councils 

to extend reporting periods; clarifying that producer-elected 

agencies may select their own auditors; as well as permitting 

government to make regulations that will modify the powers of 

the supervisory council. 

 

This is all fine and good, but it is my opinion that this 

government should be spending more time following through 

on the promises made in the Agriculture 2000 document before 

it goes on to make further amendments to this Act. 

 

In 1993 this NDP government came out with a document 

similar to the current Partnership for Growth document. 

Agriculture 2000  A Strategic Direction for the Future of 
Saskatchewan’s Agricultural and Food Industry was initiated 

as a way to promote prosperity in the agricultural sector of our 

economy. 

 

It is almost three years later and where are we? Have any of the 

proposals initiated in the Agriculture 2000 document been 

fulfilled? Are there any current plans to follow through on 

them? 

 

This government has spent the first session of their second term 

bringing forth all sorts of legislative changes and amendments 

while forgetting what kind of promises they made in their 

previous term. 

This government may be short of memory when it comes to 

promises that they made, but the people of this province 

remember very clearly what was promised to them. Getting 

caught in the trees when shooting for the stars when it comes to 

fulfilling promises may wash in the cities, but there is no reason 

for getting caught in the trees out on the prairies in the middle 

of a wheat field. And that’s what’s happened to the Agriculture 

2000 document. 

 

Agriculture 2000 was supposed to improve the lives of all 

Saskatchewan people by continuing to develop an economically 

and environmentally sustainable industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, it 

is three years later. The number of child poverty cases is up. 

The number of rural and urban people relying on food banks is 

up. Yet this government continues to say that Saskatchewan 

people are more economically sound and prosperous than ever. 

 

It is due time that this government opens its eyes. Take a walk 

through rural Saskatchewan and see what the people out there 

really want and really need. 

 

There were three main objectives behind Agriculture 2000 in an 

effort to improve the lives of all Saskatchewan people. They 

were, first, to provide the opportunity for farm families to 

manage their land, control their future, and be economically 

successful. Number two, to diversify the agriculture and food 

sector and add value to our agricultural products. And thirdly, 

to promote production, marketing, research, education, and 

training institutions which contribute to the development of 

family farms, diversification, and value added products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask this government how they 

expect the farmers who received multi-thousand dollar GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) bills to become and remain 

economically successful. 

 

I would also like to ask what has been done over the past three 

years to promote these educational and training institutions. 

One of the key areas of discussion with regards to Agriculture 

2000 was to provide: 

 

 . . . support systems for family farms under emotional and 

mental stress due to financial difficulties. 

 

Is it safe to assume that the money being received from these 

GRIP bills will go towards the implementation of such a 

program? 

 

In 1993 value added processing was a key phrase that promised 

great things for the farming people of this province. In 1993 

this government promised to create a favourable climate for the 

expansion of intensive cattle and hog operations. Well this has 

been done to some extent, even if it’s only been by moving jobs 

from one part of this province to the other or potentially from 

one province to the other. There was also mention of strategies 

to promote the dairy and poultry industries. It would be great to 

see if this actually happens. 

 

From my point of view, this Bill intrinsically related to the 

agriculture and food sector of Saskatchewan goes out of its way 

to ignore the real issues at hand. Yes, this Bill does clarify steps  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

that producer-elected boards must take when reporting and 

accounting for research and development funds, but I feel that 

the real issue should be research and development and not the 

glossy document that it is written on. 

 

How is this province going about diversifying our crops and 

food industry? What programs are in place to promote 

diversification? How available is this information? Why are we 

wasting time deciding how many people are elected to 

producer-elected boards when we really should be 

concentrating on the possible profitability of the agri-food 

industry in this province. 

 

The stability of the agricultural industry in this province is 

always in question. There are no guarantees when it comes to 

weather and prices. The government obviously sees this. Instead 

of supporting this industry fully, it is making amendments to 

The Agri-Food Act in order to remove responsibilities and 

lessen liability when it comes to producer-elected boards. 

 

Through this Bill, the Minister of Agriculture and Food is trying 

to download responsibility onto the backs of local bodies. We 

have heard time and time again this government complain about 

federal downloading, and now this government is the one who’s 

going out full force to download its responsibilities. 

 

With the passage of this Bill into law, these producer-elected 

boards will no longer be accountable to the public. What is the 

reason for this? Do the people of this province not deserve an 

elected body that is accountable for its actions? This needs to be 

looked into more closely before we can take a stand on it. 

 

Shortly after this Bill was first tabled in this House, the minister 

responsible for Agriculture and Food announced the 

Saskatchewan vegetable producers have voted in favour of 

removing levy powers of these producers. This wish will be 

followed up on changes being made to the regulations of The 

Agri-Food Act. This brings to question what other changes to 

this Act that the government plans to make through amendment 

to regulations. I guess we’ll have to wait and see what else this 

government has in store for the agricultural industry of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1993 this government saw that the agricultural industry in 

Saskatchewan was changing. This government acknowledged in 

the Agriculture 2000 document that, quote: 

 

The future of Saskatchewan agriculture will depend upon 

international markets, domestic policy and the ability of 

the people who make up the industry, to adjust and adapt. 

 

While it is clear that the Minister of Agriculture has been 

working on improving trade on the international scale — we see 

this as he has just come back from a trade mission to the Pacific 

Rim — we also see that the people involved in the agricultural 

industry in this province are able to adjust and change. This can 

be seen by looking at the growing number of farmers 

diversifying their crops and going into raising specialty 

livestock. 

Now it is this government’s turn to work on their domestic 

policies. What is being done domestically to promote and foster 

the agri-food sector of our economy? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are still so many questions that go 

unanswered each and every day. The people of rural 

Saskatchewan want and need to know what this government is 

doing to promote and foster the agricultural sector that is the 

backbone of rural Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

(1430) 

 

The people of this province need to know that they can count 

on this government to support and foster their industry. Many 

of the people that I have spoken with, Mr. Speaker, do not feel 

that they can count on this government to live up to their 

promises, be they electoral campaign rhetoric or documented 

proposals put forward in Agriculture 2000 and the Partnership 

for Growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is unacceptable to make the people of this 

province survive on blind faith. These people need a reason to 

believe in democracy, to believe in the party that governs them. 

It has been five years and nothing has happened and been done 

by this government to secure the faith of the people of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province need more than empty 

promises  they need an open and accountable government. 

The people of this province need to know what is being done 

for them with regards to the agri-food sector here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would like to take some more time to analyse 

on an in-depth basis the agricultural food industry of this 

province in relation to the rest of the country and in relation to 

the promises made in the Agriculture 2000 document. It is for 

this reason that I move that debate on this Bill be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 48  An Act to amend The Animal Identification Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, at the end of my 

remarks I’ll be moving second reading of The Animal 

Identification Act, but before I do I just want to say several 

words about this small amendment. 

 

First of all, the animal identification is an important part of 

almost every livestock operation, as we know, in this province, 

and with the growing numbers of livestock in Saskatchewan we 

must strive to make our systems as efficient as possible. 

 

Brands are now issued for a four-year period, as we all know, 

and all registrants are sent a renewal notice in advance to the 

expiry date on the fourth of the four-year anniversary and must 

submit a renewal request along with $25 fee if a renewal is 

desired. An option to own a brand for a lifetime of the applicant 

would eliminate the need for this recurring application. There 

would then be the need to be able to cancel the registration to 

encourage adherence to the legislation. 



1376  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

And, Mr. Speaker, the lifelong registration option will result in 

a reduction in the paper flow for both the applicant and for the 

government as well. The change is consistent with the 

government’s objective of simplifying process for the public 

and minimizing costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the expected $200 registration for a lifetime 

option is not onerous as the Alberta government charges $220 

for its lifetime brands. Once registered the brand could be 

transferred for a fee and all fees will continue to be placed in 

the regulation. 

 

This type of amendment comes after consultation with a 

number of the industry organizations and as well, they agree 

that a lifetime brand should be available as an option to the 

producer. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will do three 

main things: first, provide an option to register brands for the 

lifetime of the registrant, in addition to the four-year term which 

now exists; secondly, it will clarify procedures for cancelling a 

registration; and third, it will update the powers of the inspector 

consistent with the current constitutional requirements related 

to individual rights. 

 

These proposed amendments are based on the close contact 

with the industry and an understanding of their concern and the 

desire for the amendments to the Act providing for further 

options to producers. 

 

And it’s therefore, Mr. Speaker, with those comments, I would 

ask all members of the Assembly to support the amendment and 

I therefore move second reading of a Bill No. 48, The Animal 

Identification Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 

pleasure to be able to take some time to discuss a Bill that will 

have a great impact on the agricultural industry in this province. 

 

This Bill will affect for the most part people who raise 

livestock, be it on the family farm or within a large corporation. 

 

When we think of agriculture in this province, we often think of 

only grain farmers. Due to the changing times and the growing 

economy, diversification is common on Saskatchewan farms. 

 

Cattle and hogs are no longer the only types of livestock raised 

on Saskatchewan farms. There are a large number of bison and 

elk ranchers as well as ostrich farms, llama farms, and sheep 

and goat farmers in this province. 

 

This Bill will have a substantial effect on farmers that raise 

livestock that are required to be branded in March. Other types 

of wild game farmers whose animals are not required to be 

marked will not be affected by this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the changes put forward in this Bill 

simply make sense. Farms are oftentimes a family business, and 

now all aspects of the farm will be transferable to spouses,  

siblings, and children. 

 

This government is starting to realize the importance that 

livestock farming plays in this province’s economy. The 

Minister of Agriculture has made three major amendments to 

The Animal Identification Act. The first major change deals 

with the option of a lifetime or a four-year registration of a 

brand. Currently the only brand or mark available is for four 

years. Allowing for a lifetime brand option is a welcome change 

for most if not all livestock farmers. 

 

The second major change that has been proposed through this 

Bill is to clarify the procedures that must be followed in order 

to cancel the registration of a brand or mark. This is similar to 

the clarifications that have been initiated in The Land Titles 

Act. The processes that have been followed in both cases are 

complex and confusing, and both of the Bills state clearly what 

needs to be done in each case. 

 

The third major change initiated by this Bill is with respect to 

the powers of the inspectors. This Bill proposes to update these 

powers in order to make them consistent with requirements of 

current constitutional legislation. 

 

There are a number of small changes proposed in this Bill. The 

first one shifts responsibility from this Act away from the 

Department of Agriculture and into the hands of livestock 

operations and land revenue branch. I certainly hope that this 

does not end up being another example of the provincial 

government’s downsizing powers and responsibilities. 

 

Many of the Bills that have been tabled this session have 

amendments that shift responsibility away from the department 

in question and move the responsibility into the hands of local, 

elected boards or council. I question the reasons behind such a 

move and intend to look into this amendment further. 

 

The first amendment to this Act deals with providing for a 

lifetime registration of a brand or a mark. This has been 

mentioned briefly already. I will add though, that in the case of 

a corporation, the lifetime registration is limited to 20 years. 

This is logical as corporations are often in existence much 

longer than individuals. 

 

There are significant changes being made in order to ensure that 

violations of this Act are dealt with fairly and with just 

punishment. Registration of brands or marks can be revoked 

and not reissued. The person or corporation who is accused of 

violation of certain provisions in this Act has 30 days to appeal 

this decision. 

 

This Act, once amended, will also allow for re-registration of a 

brand by immediate family members of a deceased registrant. 

This is not a controversial change as it now allows for all 

aspects of the family-run livestock operation to be passed on to 

the immediate family members who want to run, and be 

responsible for, the family operation. 

 

There’s also requirements set out for the cancellation and 

re-registration of similar or identical marks. There is no point in 

branding or marking an animal if there is no safeguard in place  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

to ensure that they are all different. The Bill sets out provisions 

for the replacement of a mark that is identical or similar to any 

other mark registered within the province. 

 

All of the above amendments are reasonable and are fair to all 

players involved. There are though a couple of amendments that 

do cause concern. 

 

These ones are in regards to allowing an inspector to search any 

property and be allowed to examine and seize any animal, 

animal product, document, or record that the inspector believes 

to be in contravention of the provisions of this Act. There’s also 

a clause that states that an inspector may not enter a private 

dwelling without consent, but it makes no mention of entering 

private property without consent. 

 

This Bill states that the inspector needs a warrant in order to 

search and seize any documents or animals, but section 22.1(3) 

also states that any of the above-mentioned actions may be done 

by an inspector even if he or she does not have a warrant. 

 

Well this does not give anyone a peace of mind. All it really 

says then is that a warrant is needed to search property and seize 

documents, but if the inspector does not have the time to get a 

warrant, he or she can search private property anyway. This may 

define the powers of an inspector within current constitutional 

requirements, but it still causes some concern. 

 

As I have already mentioned, the majority of the amendments 

proposed in this Bill are housekeeping changes that make good 

sense. The only ones that I am a bit worry are with regards to 

the requirements for search and seizure on the part of the 

inspector. 

 

I would like to spend time and more time looking into the 

possible implications and the outcomes of the amendments of 

this Act and I therefore move that the debate on this Bill be 

adjourned. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, at the end of my 

comments I will move second reading of The Crop Insurance 

Act. 

 

The crop insurance program in Saskatchewan is currently under 

review. The review is a process moving us towards a new 

five-year Canada-Saskatchewan crop insurance agreement due 

to take effect for 1997-98. The review responds to concerns 

expressed by farmers regarding coverage levels, premium costs, 

and participation levels in the complexity of the program. 

 

Farmers have been directly involved in this review, through 

currently held consultations meetings around the province. They 

have been well represented by Saskatchewan’s Farm Support 

Review Committee who have, over the last number of years, 

closely examined safety nets and crop insurance on behalf of 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both Saskatchewan and the federal government 

have expressed support for crop insurance as the key 

component of the overall farm safety net package. To this end, 

Saskatchewan proposes to amend its Crop Insurance Act in 

order to allow for changes which may come from crop 

insurance review programs. 

 

The proposed amendments would provide for more flexibility 

in program design than is currently possible given the existing 

wording of the legislation. The current wording limits the 

program which can be offered to one where governments match 

producer premium contributions at all levels of coverage. The 

amendment would allow programs to be offered with different 

premium-sharing arrangements. 

 

Saskatchewan is reviewing a number of program options. One 

of the alternatives under consideration is a basic coverage 

program under which governments would fund most of the 

costs of the first level of coverage up to the 50 per cent of 

producers’ long-term yields, while farmers would pay the 

majority of the costs of higher coverage levels. 

 

This type of program was recommended by Farm Support 

Review Committee in its August 1995 report on crop insurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, crop insurance is a valuable risk-management 

program for the farmers of Saskatchewan. The comprehensive 

crop insurance program and its potential changes to the 

program necessitate amending the legislation in order to 

provide the proper time line to develop and deliver a complete 

program for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

The amended legislation will put Saskatchewan at par with 

most other provinces who have already had their own enabling 

legislation in order to modify their own crop insurance 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food and its Crop 

Insurance Corporation work closely with farmers and industry 

organizations in preparation for any proposed changes to 

legislation that affects their industry. 

 

These proposed amendments demonstrate that characteristic. 

Farmers’ concerns with crop insurance programs have brought a 

comprehensive review involving consultations with farmers 

themselves. 

 

The proposed amendments will provide Saskatchewan and 

Canada the flexibility to put together a new crop insurance 

program and a new five-year agreement that addresses those 

concerns and targets crop insurance dollars to best meet the 

needs of farmers. 

 

I ask members of the Assembly to support these amendments. I 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, move second reading of Bill 60, the 

crop insurance program . . . The Crop Insurance Act. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

have this opportunity to address the amendment proposed 

within Bill 60. Although just one change, this Act could affect 

every farmer in Saskatchewan who buys crop insurance. The  



1378  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

change outlined in clause 11 will expand the factors the 

government uses to determine its financial obligation to the 

crop insurance plans. The amount paid in premiums will still be 

a factor, but with the changes the government will also consider 

the corporation’s needs along with the government’s 

appropriate share of the cost. 

 

In general, we would like to know exactly why the government 

feels this new legislation is necessary. Don’t get me wrong. 

There are many, many aspects of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

which need drastic improvements. But we question the amount 

of input Saskatchewan farmers had when the government 

drafted this legislation. 

 

(1445) 

 

More importantly. we wonder if the government was even 

listening to farmers’ concerns and suggestions when it held 

meetings to discuss crop insurance options in March. The 

government obviously was not listening to farmers when it 

demanded farmers repay their GRIP overpayments, even after 

promising in this very House that this would not be done. The 

government did not listen or really even ask farmers for input 

before it slashed away at the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

structure. 

 

Over 100 crop insurance agents across rural Saskatchewan will 

be out of work. The only farmer input into the cuts was a 

year-and-a-half-old survey done on services provided by crop 

insurance agents. The bulk of this government’s decision was 

based on a consultant’s report done by Ernst & Young. 

 

I would like to ask this government to seriously rethink the 

whole process involving legislative changes. If the Minister of 

Agriculture seriously has the concerns of rural people and 

Saskatchewan farmers at heart, then he’ll make himself 

accountable. Accountability means upholding promises made 

by your department, and above all else, gathering input from 

those that will be affected by any legislative changes. 

 

It seems to me that this government is having a problem 

understanding what accountability means. It needs to look 

beyond the city limits of Regina and Saskatoon to see what a 

devastating impact provincial funding cuts are having on rural 

people. Agriculture has long been the backbone of 

Saskatchewan’s economy, yet this government felt the need to 

slash over $52 million from the Ag budget. 

 

I know taxpayers across the province are also wondering why 

this government is not being accountable for funding cuts in 

other areas, such as cuts to municipalities. The bottom line is 

that the government is simply shifting its fiscal responsibility 

onto the backs of Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Then, incredibly, the government then tries to disguise this 

offloading as presenting new challenges for the 21st century. I 

have a challenge for the Minister of Agriculture. I challenge 

him to take a close look at the crop insurance needs of 

Saskatchewan farmers. If this government decided to genuinely 

listen to the farmers, it would hear the same complaints that we 

have heard from farmers — that the current crop insurance  

program are extremely inadequate. They feel that this 

government really does not have an overall crop insurance plan. 

They say that the premiums are too high and the pay-outs are 

too low. 

 

These are just a sample of the farmers’ major concerns, Mr. 

Speaker. Once again I remind the minister that the key to the 

democratic process is to listen to the concerns brought forward 

by those being governed. We would like to consult more with 

Saskatchewan farmers about the impact that Bill 60 will have 

on them. Therefore I move that this debate be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 38  An Act to 

amend The Power Corporation Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 

today to speak for a few moments on Bill 38, The Power 

Corporation Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess the first thing that this piece of legislation 

teaches us is never judge a government by the size of its 

legislation. Because, Mr. Speaker, at first glance, this looks like 

a fairly straightforward Bill, not too much to it. While it may 

appear that many of the changes proposed in this Bill are of the 

housekeeping variety, a second look tells us otherwise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this Bill oversteps the government’s 

bounds and allows it to completely circumvent the privacy of 

our citizens any time it sees fit. And though this particular Bill 

deals only with SaskPower, I think if passed in this form, it 

would set a dangerous precedent  a precedent that I don’t 

believe the citizens of Saskatchewan would want set. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that anybody in Saskatchewan 

would object to the clause which gives Saskatchewan Power 

officials clearance to enter private residence in the event of a 

serious emergency — situations in which property, life and limb 

are put at risk. On the contrary, I believe that most people 

would see this as a reasonable and responsible action; it’s 

common sense and I think the people would approve. 

 

However, there is much that is left to be desired in this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. Living in Saskatchewan, we all know there are times 

when certain boundaries have to be crossed in order to protect 

the good of ourselves or others. One could envision instances 

when SaskPower simply has to act in order to protect homes, 

businesses, even entire neighbourhoods, and this might entail 

entering a private home without permission to fix a problem or 

to cut off the power. 

 

And if this action is done only in emergencies and in very rare  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

circumstances, the people of Saskatchewan could and would 

understand and accept it. And, Mr. Speaker, in the explanatory 

notes that accompany this Bill, it states quite clearly that the 

reason for . . . the reason for this Bill. It says SaskPower 

employees needed some written assurance that it is all right to 

enter homes without permission in order to deal with a 

potentially hazardous situation. And that is fine. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill goes way, way beyond that 

circumstance. This Bill potentially gives SaskPower employees 

a ticket into any home in any town, anywhere in Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe and I think that most Saskatchewan 

residents would agree this is a prospect that is very troubling 

indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in a society where the government quite 

rightly has limits put on it. Our constitution allows us certain 

freedoms in the way of protection from the power of the 

government. Historical precedent also dictates that we in 

Canada, we in Saskatchewan, have the right to enjoy our 

freedoms free from outrageous government interference. 

 

Finally, plain, old-fashioned common decency states our elected 

officials simply cannot give themselves the power to blatantly 

infringe on citizens’ rights. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe this Bill goes a long away in 

infringing on my rights as a citizen of this province, and it 

infringes on the rights of everyone  everyone who is forced to 

deal with SaskPower, which of course is nearly every man, 

woman, and child in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower, we are told, is owned by the people of 

this province for the good of the people of this province. But 

when I read this piece of legislation, I have to wonder, who 

owns who? Because it appears to me it is SaskPower in charge 

of the people here, not the other way around. 

 

So why am I so alarmed by Bill 38? Because, Mr. Speaker, it 

gives too much power to the appointees who run SaskPower, 

and it gives way, way too much power to the provincial cabinet, 

out of the view of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Like I said, as long as the Bill dealt with an emergency 

situation, I was really just fine with that. But that was only a 

few lines in this Bill. From then on, it listed other circumstance 

when SaskPower could unilaterally enter our homes without our 

permission and with very little notice. 

 

This legislation gives its employees the right to enter into our 

homes under several circumstances outlined in the Bill. The 

first and foremost is to enter our private homes to cut off 

electrical service if payments are overdue. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

everyone in this House, is it so almighty important to cut off 

someone’s service that we’re willing to give them this 

extraordinary power to ignore our right to privacy? And to 

make it possible to do so if Bills are as little as 10 days overdue 

is absolutely unacceptable. 

 

There simply must be alternative means to getting payment than 

resorting to this extreme measure. I mean SaskPower does  

pretty well for itself year in and year out  $100 million profits 

every year. And they want the right to ignore locked doors of 

our homes because somebody is a couple of weeks late in 

paying their bill. I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, but that is just simply 

unbelievable. 

 

Is SaskPower so arrogant that they think that they deserve this 

kind of access to our homes? Are they so out of touch over 

there that they believe that people will stand for such an 

outrageous infringement of their rights? And what about this 

government opposite. Has their own special brand of immense 

arrogance grown even worse of late? Because I really didn’t 

think it could get much worse. 

 

Haven’t they already robbed our citizens of enough of their 

rights already? People in rural Saskatchewan no longer have the 

right to decent health care and they don’t have the right to drive 

on safe highways. 

 

Back in 1992, this government took away farmers’ rights to sue 

even though the government had flagrantly broken a legally 

binding contract. They retroactively disbanded an impartial 

panel set up to decided on judges’ salaries because the Justice 

minister didn’t get the results he was looking for. 

 

On and on it goes, Mr. Speaker. On and on we see a 

government in this province that thinks it should be in complete 

control of the people, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, it should be 

the people in charge of the government  first, last, and 

always. And if the members opposite took this rule seriously, 

they would never have dared to bring forth this arrogant piece 

of legislation that has so little regard for the rights of the 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

In this government’s hungry quest for absolute power, the rights 

of our citizens have again been swept away by overwhelming 

arrogance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s view of the people they govern 

is absolutely disgraceful. We see this every day with cabinet 

minister after cabinet minister standing in this House and 

treating the people with disdain. That attitude manifests itself 

most clearly in this ridiculous piece of legislation. 

 

And there’s still a lot more to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, than I’ve 

outlined so far, so let’s continue on. 

 

So as we’ve heard, Mr. Speaker, under this Bill, SaskPower will 

have the right to enter our homes if our power bill is more than 

10 days overdue. I personally find this quite appalling, but 

perhaps there are some out there who think it would be 

reasonable. That’s fine and it’s open to debate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that barely scratches the surface of the 

outrageous control this gives the Crown corporation. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, not only can employees of SaskPower enter our 

homes to cut off our service if we are delinquent or in an 

emergency situation, they can also come in at will simply to 

read our meter. 

 

I ask the government and SaskPower: is it really that vital to  



1380  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

read meters in such a quick fashion that you need the right to 

come in unannounced and uninvited when we’re not at home to 

let you in? Do you really think that SaskPower customers would 

find this acceptable? Surely you can’t believe that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t stop even there. SaskPower 

employees can come on in to inspect services or to remove 

meters and other equipment after, of course, they’ve entered on 

a previous occasion to cut off our service. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the real topper of this Bill comes in one 

of its final clauses. As is the case in so many of the Bills this 

government forces through this House, this flawed Bill gives 

the cabinet outrageous and unfettered control outside the 

watchful eye of the people’s elected Assembly. 

 

Section 50, subsection 3 states SaskPower can break into our 

houses unannounced. And I quote: 

 

In any other circumstances prescribed in the regulations, 

the corporation may, by its officers and employees, at any 

reasonable time, enter the premises of customers and cut 

off the supply of electrical energy or steam or discontinue 

any other service rendered. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, who decides what these regulations are? 

Again, I quote from section 59 (4): 

 

. . . the Lieutenant Governor in Council (in other words, 

the cabinet) may make regulations: 

 

(a) governing the entry of premises by the officers and 

employees of the corporation; 

 

(b) prescribing circumstances in which the officers and 

employees of the corporation may enter premises. 

 

A lot of fancy words, Mr. Speaker. But in the end they have a 

very simple meaning. These clauses in effect give the cabinet 

the right to give SaskPower the go-ahead to enter anyone’s 

private home, private property, in any circumstances they see 

fit. Never mind the previous clauses that spelled out when and 

where this could be done because this last clause is the big one. 

It gives the government absolutely unfettered permission to take 

an axe to our right of privacy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition caucus has had a lot of trouble 

accepting the need for regulations, at least to the extent this 

government uses them in legislation. So much of our legislation 

now is nothing more than a skeletal outline of what a Bill could 

end up meaning. 

 

This is one of those times, Mr. Speaker, when safeguards 

should have been included right in the Bill. Instead, there is 

absolutely nothing in this legislation that puts any breaks 

whatsoever on SaskPower or this government. And that’s just 

ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, and it’s unacceptable. 

 

(1500) 

 

Where does it stop, Mr. Speaker? Why would we believe for  

one minute that SaskPower would be the only Crown monopoly 

given this right? SaskTel and SaskEnergy would obviously 

want the same access to our lives, and so would the umpteen 

other Crown corporations that also control our lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the Leader of the Opposition would know 

more about this than I, I believe this Bill gives employees and 

officers of SaskPower, and ultimately the provincial cabinet, 

greater authority than the police in entering our homes. And that 

is simply wrong on so many levels. 

 

I don’t have the time to list them all, but let me just relate to the 

House one problem, one simple problem that I have. This world 

of ours is unfortunately growing evermore dangerous. This 

House has heard me talk many times about the children of this 

province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we as parents and grandparents work hard to 

keep our children safe. Unfortunately in today’s economy more 

and more of our children have to stay home alone more often 

than ever, than is otherwise acceptable, because of both parents 

working. I’m not talking of very young children, I’m talking of 

those children a little bit older that might be trusted to be home 

alone for an hour or two after school before mom and dad come 

back from work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to keep those kids safe, parents often, and most of 

the time, tell them to never talk to strangers and never, never let 

strangers into the house when mom and dad aren’t there. Now 

are parents supposed to teach their children never to let 

strangers into the house unless they’re wearing a SaskPower 

uniform? We need to think twice about the implications of this 

whole thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I first heard about this Bill when the 

legislature opened, I thought my colleagues were joking. Then I 

saw the printed Bill for the first time and was astounded. I 

thought at first I was overreacting, but in discussing the 

ramifications of Bill 38 with my colleagues, family, and friends, 

I truly feel that I am not overreacting. 

 

The word most often used by those whom I asked about this 

Bill, is the word scary. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. People think 

this kind of heavy-handed action by our elected government is 

simply scary. They’re scared because they’ve seen the 

government usurp so many of their rights over the years. 

Government has become ever more pervasive in our society and 

our system. To many, a Bill like this seems to be the ultimate 

step towards complete government control of our lives. 

 

People are concerned enough as it is, Mr. Speaker, that 

government, and in particular this government, has stopped 

listening to them. The government ministers talk at the people 

so much, they don’t have the chance to listen to the people. 

They’re always telling us what’s good for us instead of trying to 

understand what it is the people of Saskatchewan truly want. 

The ministers over there are so caught up in their own perceived 

importance, they don’t have the common sense to realize a 

piece of legislation like Bill 38 simply goes too far. 

 

For anyone who believes the state’s authority should be  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

restricted, this Bill goes too far. For anyone who believes our 

homes are our sanctuaries, this Bill goes too far. And for 

anyone who thinks a little authority for the government is too 

much, this Bill goes way too far. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other words I’ve heard tossed around when I’ve 

discussed this Bill with others are words such as police state. 

Yes, most of the time this term has been said with smiles. But 

let’s look back behind those smiles, Mr. Speaker. Behind that 

word is a small element of truth because, Mr. Speaker, while 

Saskatchewan is far from being a totalitarian state, this Bill 

smacks of just that. 

 

I mean would the government be willing to grant these unusual 

and extreme powers to a private company not owned by the 

government? Would the government think it’s all right for, let’s 

say the cable company, to come into our homes uninvited and 

unannounced, just because we’ve fallen a little behind on our 

cable television bills? Would the members opposite, all of 

whom were democratically elected by the people, believe this 

scenario would be all right? I truly doubt it. I truly doubt that 

they would be comfortable in giving a private company such as 

a cable company carte blanche to enter our private dwellings. 

 

So I ask the members opposite, what’s the difference, for 

goodness’ sake! Of course many of the members over there will 

be surprised to hear this, and I doubt that few, if any of them, 

actually read or understand the laws they are voting for in this 

House. They just stand when they are told to and they vote as 

they are told. 

 

I doubt if any of the members opposite have actually thought 

about the consequences of a Bill such as this one, just as they 

failed to think about the consequences of closing rural 

hospitals, tearing up GRIP contracts, or letting our highway 

system go to seed. Just as they had no input into those 

decisions, they probably have no input into this Bill either. And 

looking at the Bill, it appears perhaps that the cabinet didn’t get 

much of a look at it either. It looks to me like Mr. Messer’s 

lawyers concocted this Bill completely apart from the elected 

officials, and the elected officials have let it come before this 

House. 

 

Before I move to adjourn debate on Bill 38, I want to pose 

some questions to the ministers and members of the 

government side of this House, over and above those I’ve 

already asked this afternoon. 

 

I ask them if there is enough goodwill towards SaskPower in 

Saskatchewan today that people are willing to give up so many 

of their freedoms to make SaskPower employees’ jobs a little 

easier? Do they really think that kind of sentiment actually 

exists out there among the voters and residents of 

Saskatchewan? Do they honestly think that people have such 

trust in their government that they’re willing to let the cabinet 

decide, behind closed doors, when and where our rights can be 

violated? 

 

I can’t believe they’re willing to see such a situation occur in 

Saskatchewan; yet, Mr. Speaker, I fear if the members opposite 

let this pass without a peep, as happens too often in this House,  

we are giving the government more power than we should. By 

passing laws such as this one, we are saying to the people, 

never mind your rights  we’re the government and we know 

what’s best. Just sit there and take it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have to take a very serious and very 

close look at this Bill. We have to consider the ramifications of 

Bill 38 very carefully. More to the point, the government has to 

reconsider. Pass the provisions that talk about emergency or 

hazardous situations by all means. But I urge you to take a hard 

second look at the rest of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we still have many more stakeholders to consult. 

As well we have a number of legal opinions coming our way 

regarding this Bill. And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I move we 

adjourn debate at this time. Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No 44  An Act to 

amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to put 

it plainly, this Bill is an outright attack on public accountability. 

After speaking with many of my constituents and many people 

around the province, it has become quite clear that there are 

some deep concerns over how our family of Crown 

corporations are accountable to their shareholders, the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This Bill before us only further outlines what some of the 

problems are. 

 

Since being elected to this Assembly, I endeavoured to do the 

job assigned to me of holding this government accountable. 

From the very first day I began this process, Mr. Speaker, I 

found that there are far too many roadblocks which prevent the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan from really knowing what their 

government does with their investments. This Bill simply 

proposes one more roadblock, one more means of escaping 

accountability from the taxpayer. 

 

From a brief review of reports from the Provincial Auditor, any 

of the members of this House would soon discover that our 

budgetary process allows almost 40 per cent of government 

expenditure to escape public scrutiny. While these books are 

audited and the Provincial Auditor has access to them, he is 

constrained from telling us all that is going on because the Act 

which creates his office does not allow him to release 

information which is not already public. While the services of 

the auditor are valuable, he cannot serve the full watchdog role, 

which is the one that the public often believes he serves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us today is essentially flawed in 

that it attempts to give the Crown Investments Corporation 

additional powers. The Crown Investments Corporation gets 

more powers to handle its activities, but the public, and the  



1382  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

official opposition who must defend their interests, are not 

given any additional means of assuring that taxpayers’ money is 

being well used. And that is just not fair. It’s a far cry from 

what this government promised some five years ago when it 

rallied support for itself by offering to open the books. 

 

The essential flaw in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that it plans on 

allowing the Crown Investments Corporation to invest, to 

guarantee loans, and provide any other financial assistance that 

it wishes, to any corporation that it wants. This is a big change 

from the present legislation which prevented the government 

from investing or providing assistance through the Crown 

Investments Corporation to any corporation unless it already 

owned shares in that company. 

 

The minister and the members opposite can say, what is wrong 

with that? Basically, Mr. Speaker, the problem is that these 

corporations are already beyond the realm of the budgetary 

process which allows for some scrutiny. To free the Crown 

Investments Corporation up to invest almost as it wishes would 

be tantamount to letting the Crown Investments Corporation 

escape even further from public accountability. 

 

To let the Crown Investments Corporation invest, lend, or 

provide assistance to corporations beyond its control could 

allow for a whole host of unknown troubles. At the present 

moment we at least have some idea of which corporations the 

Crown Investments Corporation has an interest in. 

 

The labyrinth of corporations however grows ever wider. We 

have subsidiaries that create other subsidiaries. These then go 

on to joint partnerships with other companies. It’s bad enough 

to keep track of these now, so to allow the Crown Investments 

Corporation to do this would make matters even worse. The 

public would be poorly served by such an amendment to the 

present legislation. In fact it would be easy to argue we are 

poorly served by the legislation that we have now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last couple of weeks we’ve heard the 

government’s cuts to many services and programs that we 

value. In my constituency we’ve lost two highway depots, and 

every health district in Thunder Creek took a serious budget cut. 

For some districts with deficit problems, this will just make 

everything all that more unmanageable. 

 

To top it all off, we have the government telling many elderly in 

my constituency and in Moose Jaw, sorry, we don’t have any 

money to keep our promises on the geriatric unit at Providence 

Place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the government says money is scarce, it 

shouldn’t at the same time also try to tell everyone that they 

need less public scrutiny for how they spend our money in the 

Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan would agree 

with me when I say that every dollar spent or used by the 

government’s family of Crown corporations should get just as 

much scrutiny as any spent on our families. There should be no 

double standard. If anything, Mr. Speaker, this government 

should look at bolstering its system of public accountability for  

the Crown corporations. 

 

Sure we have a Crown Corporations Committee. This 

committee however, Mr. Speaker, is dominated by members 

from the government side. While there are many that are 

hard-working, the question we have to ask is whether they want 

to work hard in making this government accountable. The 

public believes the members opposite are more likely to work 

hard at getting into the cabinet and trying to stay there than they 

are at working to ensure public money is properly spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will give the members opposite an example of 

where their hearts are. A couple of weeks ago we were 

discussing an important suggestion from the Provincial Auditor 

in one of the Public Accounts Committee meetings. It was a 

suggestion which relates quite closely to improving public 

accountability and to matters raised in this Bill. The auditor 

suggests that the government should produce an annual report 

covering all of its activities. That is a good suggestion and it 

would improve accountability. Instead of calling on the 

government to do this, the members opposite, led by the 

member from Regina South who is against greater public 

accountability, voted against this proposal. Instead they just 

want the government to look at it a little bit further. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, somehow it’s okay for the government to go 

full throttle in demanding more powers to spend money. But 

when it comes to being accountable, the members opposite feel 

that we ought to keep the thing in park. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

again is a double standard. It shows quite clearly how these 

committees are not as effective as they should be at helping the 

opposition hold the government accountable. 

 

What it shows, Mr. Speaker, is that in lieu of having good, 

strong committees whose members act without regard for 

partisan loyalty, we need to have stronger laws that force the 

government to disclose more of its Crown activities. 

 

(1515) 

 

I know the members opposite will say that they have made great 

improvements over the Tories, but is that how they should 

compare themselves? Comparing yourself to someone who you 

bash every day for being irresponsible, for hiding financial 

activities from the public, is hardly comparing yourself to 

someone who could serve as a role . . . as a mentor. It’s more 

like a young, aspiring artist comparing themselves to a 

velvet-painting artist rather than a van Gogh. I’m sure artists 

don’t want to do something like that, so why should this 

government. 

 

If you want greater public accountability, compare themselves 

to ideals and benchmarks laid down by auditors serving 

governments in jurisdictions all across the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill gives greater powers to the Crown 

Investments Corporation, but these powers are constrained by 

the need for an order in council. That constraint is some 

comfort to the members opposite, but it shouldn’t be. I’d like to 

provide the members opposite with a small story of why these 

orders are no comfort that our money is being well used. 



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

In last fall’s mid-year financial report, it indicated that the 

government had some borrowing activities that were far in 

excess of what was expected. The bulk of this additional 

borrowing was a hundred million dollar loan procured by the 

Crown Investments Corporation in 1995. When I read this I was 

quite concerned. This government thinks nothing of borrowing 

another $100 million for Crown corporations unexpectedly, but 

it cries to no end about an expected cut in federal transfers of a 

much smaller amount. The sense in that sort of priorization is 

somewhat lost on most people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was curious about the extra borrowing so I had arranged a 

meeting to discuss this with the Minister of Finance. When we 

met in January, I asked what this borrowing was for. A hundred 

million dollars is a lot of money and I thought she would be 

able to provide some information to explain this situation. The 

explanation I was provided would be a shock to the taxpayers of 

this province. I was told this sort of thing happens all the time. 

We shouldn’t worry, I was told; it’s just borrowing for 

something they want to do but they’re possibly doing it a year 

earlier than they had expected. 

 

I left the minister’s office with her promise that she would 

provide us with a better explanation. I waited and I waited and 

gave up, and then I simply put in a request for freedom of 

information. What I received was a copy of the order in council 

signed by the appropriate officials. The order explained that 

they had authorized them to borrow another $100 million. 

Terribly absent from the order was any explanation of what 

these funds were for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the lesson here is simple. How can anyone in the 

public be assured that their tax dollar is well spent if they don’t 

know what the goals were for spending that money in the first 

place? If we don’t know what the government intends to 

accomplish for us by lending a company our tax dollars or 

allowing the Crown Investments Corporation to take on further 

debt which is ultimately backed by taxpayers, how can we know 

whether this government accomplished those goals? That is a 

glaring error. 

 

Given those concerns, I chose to pose the same question yet 

another time, and I asked a written question. And instead of 

providing an answer, this government converted it in order to 

avoid accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that my example should provide 

emphasis to the members opposite that the requirement to gain 

an order in council provides little, if any, constraint on the 

government. Until the government has to disclose the details 

involved with such things, including what protections there are 

for the taxpayer, there will be no comfort for the taxpayers of 

this province. That is a basic flaw in this Bill. 

 

The concerns expressed in my remarks are shared by the 

Provincial Auditor. The auditor recognizes that there will be no 

accountability unless the taxpayer and this Assembly first 

knows what the government is trying to accomplish with its 

Crowns. 

 

The auditor made several recommendations on how to improve 

accountability. His recommendations, made in a non-partisan 

fashion, would provide some important improvements. The Bill 

before us today, Mr. Speaker, will do just the opposite. 

 

Among the auditor’s suggestions are two very important ideas. 

Firstly, Mr. Speaker, he has suggested that the government 

should introduce a budget that covers its activities as a whole, 

not just its activities within the General Revenue Fund. 

 

This is important because it would force the government to tell 

us what it wants to do with the Crowns in at least some form or 

fashion. I understand that there may be some reason to protect 

commercial secrets like technology, but this should have its 

limits. This government should really question whether it 

should be involved in commitments where secrecies extend to 

financial details. This is because knowledge of these are key for 

maintaining public accountability. 

 

Basically put, I think the auditor sums this situation up quite 

nicely by saying why should we use public money for purposes 

that we cannot make public? The whole point behind the 

Provincial Auditor’s suggestion of a budget that covers all of 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to ensure that we all know 

what this government wants to accomplish with its Crowns. 

Once we all know, then we can hold the government 

accountable for its actions. 

 

The Provincial Auditor made a second suggestion, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, which is somewhat related. The auditor suggested last 

fall that the government produce a report which shows how its 

performance matched with its budgeted expectations. This is 

the linchpin to accountability. If the government tells us what it 

wants to do and whether it was able to fulfil those goals, we 

would know how our tax money is being used. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead of expending their efforts making 

it easier for the Crowns to spend our money, this government 

should focus its efforts on making the Crowns more 

accountable to us all. I urge the members opposite to seriously 

consider those suggestions from the auditor. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is another concern regarding the Bill 

before us. This Bill also offers more powers to the Crown 

Investments Corporation to engage in capital market activities. 

These activities include interest rate and commodity swaps. The 

explanatory notes in this Bill explain that this clause isn’t in 

here in order to provide for new legal constraints which were 

imposed by court decisions in the United Kingdom. 

 

Those comments in the explanatory notes raised too many 

questions. I would suggest that the minister try to come up with 

a far more detailed explanation of why this feature is in this 

Bill. Namely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like the minister to 

tell us what sort of capital market activities our Crown 

corporations have been involved in. I would also like to know 

more details especially with regard to the particulars of this 

court decision. The explanatory notes talk of a court case in the 

United Kingdom, and I think that given that these court 

documents are public, the minister should provide them to the 

opposition. I question the intent of this Bill, but an explanation  



1384  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

of this particular court case would at least go some distance to 

alleviating these concerns. It would at least show the members 

opposite are interested in remaining accountable. 

 

With regard to these capital market activities, a review of this 

Bill demonstrates that the government has left this whole thing 

very broad and open. I would really like to know why the 

minister feels these powers should be so loosely defined. 

Capital market activities could expose the government and the 

taxpayer to significant risk of losing some of the money we 

have invested. 

 

I think given the potential problems here, the government 

should be more upfront in defining what sort of capital market 

activities it intends to allow and under what circumstances. In 

our Crown corporations we do have certain Crowns that are 

brought under this Act but at the same time they are empowered 

by a separate piece of legislation. 

 

As an opposition we would like to know why, if the 

government insists on this power, why it could not provide 

certain activities to certain Crowns and more clearly lay them 

out. Maybe for example the Crown Investments Corporation 

and SaskTel might require something here that is different than 

say SaskPower or SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 

whose international activities might be more limited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to these capital market activities, not 

only am I concerned that this Bill does not lay them out clearly 

and in a constrained manner, but I am also concerned about the 

accountability system that will be attached to them. When the 

government engages in one of these activities through its 

Crowns, given that these are new activities, will the Legislative 

Assembly in turn be given some new means of scrutinizing 

these? Will each and every corporation be indicating to the 

Assembly when one of these takes place, what each transaction 

was for, whom it was with, and how much money is involved? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is only fair. If the government gets 

more powers to carry out more activities, it’s only fair that the 

Assembly receive some additional powers or some means to 

offset this and to hold the powerful executive arm of 

government in check for how it’s spending our money. I think 

this is reasonable and I know many other people in this 

province would share that same opinion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of fairness concerning this Bill, there 

is another matter to deal with. As I said before, the government 

is demanding full speed ahead when it comes to getting more 

powers to spend our money, but is putting on the brakes when it 

comes to improving accountability measures. 

 

This is a double standard and it compels one to make the 

following point. If the government wants more power so its 

Crown corporations can engage in more activities, then it 

should first show that it is committed to being more open and 

accountable. 

 

If the government gives the people of this province a sign that it 

is committed to this sort of activity, then it would be easier to 

possibly accept that it needs more powers. It would be easier  

because the government could show us that it is indeed 

committed to greater accountability. 

 

Before the government gets what it wants in this Bill it should 

make good on a number of suggestions for greater openness 

that would show that it’s committed to using any new powers 

responsibly. The Provincial Auditor, whom I referred to many 

times, made a number of suggestions that particularly relate to 

the Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

I mention the Crown Investments Corporation as an example 

because it or its subsidiaries are the most likely to be involved 

in the activities suggested in this Bill. The auditor says that 

there are a number of problems in the Crown Investments 

Corporation that could negatively impact on the taxpayer. He 

makes recommendations to fix them. 

 

It would be fair to suggest that before this government goes 

seeking more powers it should ensure that the ones it has are 

being properly used and that there are accountability and 

managerial controls in place to safeguard the public’s assets. 

 

There are a number of things the government could do, Mr. 

Speaker. The auditor notes in his fall ’95 report that there are 

some 19 Crown Investments Corporation’s subsidiary Crowns 

that do not table annual reports to the Assembly. And I just 

recall that the members opposite on the Public Accounts 

Committee thought that this was not a problem, in a recent 

Public Accounts Committee meeting as well. 

 

But these subsidiaries would likely be able to engage in more 

activities if this Bill is passed. And in the future they would be 

doing so while we're still not being provided in the House with 

an annual report. And that is unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, and I 

believe it’s one of the things that must be fixed. 

 

Another important observation made by the auditor relates to an 

earlier suggestion that I noted. Earlier I had noted that the 

auditor believes the government should be making a budget and 

a report to cover all of its activities. By doing so, the public and 

the Assembly would have the means of holding this government 

accountable. In his fall report, the auditor observed that the 

Crown Investments Corporation’s board of directors has not 

even been receiving these sorts of things from the management 

of the corporation. And that’s sort of scary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The auditor notes that the CIC’s (Crown Investments 

Corporation) board lacks essential planning, essential planning 

information, and it doesn’t receive a budget from the 

management of the corporation on a consolidated basis and it 

doesn’t receive a report showing how the results compared with 

the planned goals or targets. That is quite a scary proposition, 

especially when you consider that the very people who are 

asking for these powers are the board members of CIC. 

 

The CIC board is comprised of cabinet ministers. I find it 

irresponsible that these very people are asking for this House to 

give the Crowns extra powers when they do not demand this 

essential planning information from the management of these 

Crown corporations. I would say to the members opposite that  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

the honourable thing to do here is to remedy a problem like that 

before asking for any more powers. 

 

(1530) 

 

The lack of essential planning information, I understand, is 

actually a lot more widespread than this. The auditor in that 

same report has suggested that these same cabinet ministers on 

the board of CIC are not receiving copies of interim financial 

statements that deal with CIC or CIC Industrial Interests Inc. on 

a regular basis. 

 

These are important devices that a board of directors needs to 

control the activities of a Crown. If these members opposite 

cannot even use these management tools properly, why, Mr. 

Speaker, should they expect to be able to handle any more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many more examples. There’s also the 

concern that boards in the Crowns are not clear about their 

roles. These people must oversee the management of these 

Crowns and provide them with direction, but they are not 

certain of their roles. There is some misunderstanding among 

these people as to which sorts of legislation empower them to 

act. 

 

A number of statutes provide them with broad powers to carry 

out the authority entrusted to them while others provide more 

specific outlines as to what they are allowed to do. The 

government has failed to ensure that this information is even 

properly communicated. 

 

On the issue of communication, there’s also some concern 

about how member Crowns communicate to their parent 

Crowns. The auditor suggests there is a wide variation in the 

types and quality of information that is provided by boards of 

CIC Crowns to the board of the parent Crown itself. 

 

There is also an indication that the communication between 

Crowns is not as good as it should be. We have a parent Crown 

whose board does not use the tools it has, being properly 

acquired information needed to plot a strategy for the whole of 

all of the Crowns under its purview. 

 

We also see the auditor reporting that Crowns do not even 

report to one another and to their boards about changes in their 

key personnel. That’s not a good example, Mr. Speaker, of the 

responsible use of power. It concerns me that this is the record 

of the same people that are asking for more powers here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier that I’ve run into a number of 

roadblocks since I was elected as a member of this House. 

Those roadblocks prevented me from getting the information I 

believe was necessary to hold the government accountable. 

Before the members seek out more powers, they should 

consider dealing with these very issues. 

 

One of the roadblocks which I found the most disturbing 

involved some of the agreements signed by Crown 

corporations. And it’s funny that the explanatory notes of this 

Bill mentioned the United Kingdom. I say that because last year 

and this year I repeatedly asked for the agreement for sale of  

LCL Cable Communications Ltd. I also asked for an 

explanation of whether Don Ching and Garry Simons received 

any part of the $50,000 payment made by LCL to SaskTel to 

compensate for their services as directors. In these cases, what I 

ran into were confidentiality clauses between different partners. 

 

All too often the government cannot release information about 

one of its dealings because it has signed an agreement which 

has a confidentiality clause. Without permission from all 

partners, it cannot tell the taxpayer what it is doing with our 

money. While the reasoning is that these things are here to 

protect private partners, the reality is that private partners are 

now being used to protect the government from accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was not the only example where I ran into this 

situation. I would strongly suggest that before this government 

wastes any more effort getting extra powers to run the Crowns, 

it should deal with the problems that I’ve mentioned here today. 

 

Concerning the confidentiality clauses, I would suggest that the 

government consider inserting some acknowledgement of our 

freedom of information law so that its partners accept from the 

start that their activities with the government may from time to 

time become public. This may be a necessary means of 

protecting the taxpayer. After all, Mr. Speaker, it’s their money 

that’s at stake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, accountability is a serious issue and we would like 

more opportunity to review the ramifications of this Bill. And 

given this, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to more answers and I 

would move adjournment of debate on this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 58  An Act to 

amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential 

amendment be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

speak on what I feel could be an extremely controversial Bill. 

The government in the proposed amendments to The Land 

Titles Act is potentially opening a Pandora’s box of issues. 

 

There are so many implications from this Bill that could reach 

far beyond the floor of the legislature. People in my 

constituency, and for that matter in constituencies throughout 

the province, will be affected by the decisions we make in the 

House. If we were to allow the government to pass a 

controversial Bill without extensive discussion and 

consultation, we would be falling short in our responsibilities to 

the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, day after day my colleagues and I stand in this 

House to talk about Bills brought forward by the NDP 

government. And day after day, Bill after Bill, we bring forward 

concerns about this government’s lack of  



1386  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

accountability to the people of this province. It seems that so 

many of the changes they want to make to this Bill and to all of 

the Bills deal with an increase of power to the government. 

 

Every time we get a new Bill, the issue arises. The Bill gives the 

government more power. Over the course of time it has become 

painfully obvious that the NDP’s main objective is to take 

power from the people and put it in the hands of this 

government. 

 

Well as right leaning as this government appears to be at times, 

it is evident that some of the socialism is coming through. The 

Premier and his caucus of muted followers believe that they 

should control the lives of Saskatchewan people; that they alone 

can decide what is best for every individual. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal caucus is sick and tired of this 

patronizing attitude towards the people of this province. And if 

we’re tired of it already, think how fed up our constituents are. 

They have been forced to watch the government bulldoze its 

way through change after change, and while their protests are 

pointedly ignored. 

 

It is the wrong way to run a government, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

about time that the members opposite realized it. Look at what 

it’s done for us so far. Is our economy flourishing? Hardly. 

Rural Saskatchewan is being reduced to a shell of its former 

glory days, thanks to this government’s actions. 

 

And it’s not like urban Saskatchewan is faring much better. 

Every time I go through downtown Regina I’m shocked at how 

many office spaces and storefronts are empty; and even more 

shocked when I sit in this legislature day after day and listen to 

the Minister of Economic Development spout sunshine and 

roses about our economy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he’s stretching the truth. And the high office 

vacancy rate is proof positive that he’s trying to hide the facts 

from Saskatchewan people. In fact it seems like only part of the 

economy that is flourishing is grain, potash, oil, and uranium, 

and the government has nothing to do with any of these. 

 

Perhaps the members opposite should wake up and smell the 

roses. It’s a simple equation  government controls equals no 

jobs and a weak economy; lack of government controls equal 

plenty of jobs and a strong economy. Lets hope the NDP 

members learn to put two and two together before our economy 

is completely destroyed. 

 

The fact is that this government is not creating a positive 

business climate. And the fact is that the members opposite 

cannot make the right decisions for the people of this province. 

It is the people who must make the decisions. And I don’t think 

the NDP realize that when they were elected, this did not give 

them the unlimited authority over the lives of Saskatchewan 

people. I don’t think they realize how capable the people of this 

province really are  capable of making the right decisions in 

the best interest now and in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is exactly why we object to the government’s 

continued efforts to turn every piece of legislation in this  

province into a government-controlled game. I know that 

several of the members opposite have children and 

grandchildren. Is this the kind of legacy they want to leave our 

youth  a legacy of over-regulation and tight-fisted 

government control? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Who’s writing this stuff? 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  If I’m going too fast for the members 

opposite, I can slow down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill, not surprisingly, does try to take power 

from the people. For example, one amendment will eliminate 

the qualifications of staff working as a registrar in the Land 

Titles Office. Current legislation ensures that a registrar must be 

a lawyer or serve a minimum period of time in the system. The 

legislation would now be controlled by registration if this 

amendment passes. The system has worked as is for 91 years. 

What is the need of change now? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the change wreaks of political patronage. What 

would stop the Premier from selecting the new registrars or 

deputy registrars from his list of NDP hacks? All of a sudden 

the decision made at land titles could be distinctly NDP slant, 

and whenever that happens it spells trouble for Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although this may not seem likely, our fears about 

political patronage are not unfounded. What are we supposed to 

think when we see the Jack Messers, Carole Bryants, and 

Donald Chings, among others, strategically placed by the NDP. 

This government is so driven by a need for control, we believe 

they could slot their political cronies into all sorts of 

organizations. 

 

We want to be sure that this will not happen. I mean, look at the 

results. Problems run rampant at SaskTel and SaskPower. 

Workers are unhappy, and in the past months employees have 

taken strike action. The NDP government’s choice of leaders 

does not have a good track record. Obviously political 

patronage does not run companies well at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other issue I would like to touch on today has 

to do with the proposed changes which will permit Indian bands 

to own land in their own name instead of through a corporation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I should make it clear that we do not 

necessarily oppose this, but we do need better clarification on 

what this will mean to taxpayers of this province . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Again, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry I got going too 

fast; I’ll slow down. 

 

Is this change going to be revenue neutral to the taxpayers or 

will there be a reduction or increase? Currently Indian bands are 

allowed to own land but only if they established a private 

corporation for this. Taxes are paid through the company like 

all other land holdings. If the legislation changes, then bands 

will be allowed to own the company directly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the government’s own memorandum they state 

that registration of lands by bands does not give the land 

reserve status. Lands registered under The Land Titles Act will  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

be treated the same as other land holdings. Mr. Speaker, we 

would like this point further clarified. What exactly is the 

government proposing? If they aren’t giving the land reserve 

status, does this mean that the changes will indeed be revenue 

neutral? 

 

Mr. Speaker, RMs (rural municipality) and towns are very 

concerned about the tax loss over reserve status on newly 

purchased lands. Now this Bill may make the problem even 

more magnified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments outlined in Bill 58 seem vague at 

best, and we believe that Saskatchewan people deserve clear, 

easily interpreted laws. This may be difficult for a government 

that has made an art form out of eluding the real issue. The 

members opposite have learned to shroud unpopular decisions 

with half-truths; they continue to hide behind empty words and 

finger pointing and hope that Saskatchewan people will 

continue to believe them. 

 

But things are changing, Mr. Speaker. People are starting to see 

through their childish games of hide and seek. They want to 

hold the government accountable for these decisions, and this 

sentiment will continue to grow. They are getting tired of 

government that makes its decision behind closed doors when it 

thinks no one is looking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, have you ever considered why this government 

chooses to sit only in the spring? By avoiding a fall session, or 

starting earlier in the year, they are avoiding accountability. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Now the hon. 

member from Saltcoats seemed to have stimulated a great deal 

of interest. And I note that both sides of the House are eager to 

get into debate and there will be plenty of opportunity to do 

that. But in the meantime, I ask all members to give their 

attention to the hon. member from Saltcoats. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate all 

the attention I’m getting from the members opposite. They 

don’t want the Saskatchewan people to know what they’re up 

to, and they don’t want the opposition parties to question them 

about their poor choices. They are hoping that people will 

forget about all the broken promises they have broken 

throughout the rest of the year. 

 

And in choosing to have session sitting when spring seeding is 

on shows nothing but contempt for rural members. The 

government even has one member who is allowed to continue 

teaching, but when it comes to members who farm, the 

government turns their back on them. But, Mr. Speaker, rural 

Saskatchewan is becoming accustomed to this treatment. 

 

I’m sure the members opposite know that a fall sitting and a 

shorter spring session would cater to all parts of Saskatchewan. 

As a matter of fact, I’m sure several of those members would 

agree with me if they should be let say their piece. 

 

But the government in its contempt of the Saskatchewan people  

play the game so that they come out ahead. It’s a wily strategy, 

Mr. Speaker, but it’s not fair to Saskatchewan people. The NDP 

government may think it’s winning the game but it forgets that 

it has no opponent in that case. 

 

The people of this province are not supposed to be the 

government’s enemy. But with the policies this government has 

established and with its sly actions, it seems like this is a point 

they have long since forgotten. For five years now they have 

been in power. When did they stop respecting the people, and 

better yet, did they ever respect the people? From their flippant 

answers in question period and their disregard for public 

protest, I seriously wonder. How many times have we seen the 

government members blatantly thumb their nose at the public 

will? 

 

When people want to talk about utility rate increases, the 

minister responsible turns their back. When people want to talk 

about health, social, and education reforms, those ministers start 

pointing the finger anywhere but where it belongs  right back 

at themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are still waiting for wide-ranging opinions on 

the greater implications of this Bill. If we had faith in this 

government, we would trust their opinions that it will indeed be 

a positive change. But, Mr. Speaker, this government has given 

us no reason to believe they have the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people in mind when they make any decision. 

 

Maybe in this Bill they will have come up with a valid, decent 

amendment to The Land Titles Act, and maybe the changes are 

simply housekeeping ones and will have little effect on the 

people. But maybe they will have long-term, serious 

implications for the people of this province. And this is why 

I’m not willing to let this Bill pass along right now. In closing, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the members opposite for 

their complete attention. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I too am pleased to have the opportunity to 

speak on the subject of Bill No. 58. This Bill, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 1996 contains significant changes to the law 

concerning how caveats are legally removed from certificates of 

title to land, and I have serious concerns about this. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The Speaker has erred in 

recognizing the hon. member who is not seated in her desk and 

cannot be recognized when not seated in her own desk. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize. I believe 

that in the best interests of my constituents and of our 

constituency, I must address some of the concerns today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by introducing these changes, the government is 

signalling a major shift in philosophy. They are moving towards 

various ownership interests in land, stopping short of absolute 

ownership. 

 

Of course this shouldn’t surprise us. For some unknown and 

completely unacceptable reason, the government thinks it 

deserves ownership of everything in this province. It’s not a 

government of, by, or for the people, it’s a government that  



1388  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

rules in its own best interest, and of course absolute control is 

in your best interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the present rules for lapsing caveats are in section 

159 of The Land Titles Act. Under the present rules, the owner 

or person with an interest in the land must notify the person 

who registered the caveat, that the caveat will lapse after 30 

days have passed. 

 

The exception to this is when the caveator obtains and registers 

a judge’s order extending the life of a caveat beyond 30 days. 

The government proposes to change that basic principle. Instead 

of the landowner having responsibility to send notices, it will be 

a public servant. In effect it will be the register of land titles for 

that particular land titles district where the land is located. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this creates a lot more work for the staff of the 

Land Titles Office. Does the minister not know how long and 

inconvenient the registration of documents already is in land 

title offices? This provision will add a whole new set of duties 

to the list of duties for which land titles registrars are 

responsible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our detailed study of this has caused us to rethink 

the process and the result will almost surely be even longer 

delays in the registration of transfers and mortgages than is 

already the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how many of the government back-benchers 

receive complaints from constituents about the length of time it 

takes to register a house transfer and mortgage at the Land 

Titles Office? Maybe they can’t answer without fear of being 

muzzled by the Premier. But, Mr. Speaker, we receive those 

complaints and I’m sure those members opposite do as well. 

 

I’m really curious to know how many of these members have 

actually responded and what they respond. We’ve tried to 

respond to our constituents over the last few months by telling 

them that the government may be bringing in a progressive 

amendment to The Land Titles Act which would speed up the 

process. Well, Mr. Speaker, we are certainly disappointed. 

 

Like so many of the things this government does, this Bill is a 

poor choice for a solution. Instead of amendments which would 

speed up registration of documents, we see a whole new list of 

tasks and duties assigned to the registrar  duties which 

individual citizens used to accomplish quite efficiently in the 

past on their own. Those duties will now be taken over by the 

registrars and their staff. That means they will have less time to 

spend registering transfers and mortgages on homes, apartment 

buildings, and commercial buildings. And in turn this means 

that people will be waiting longer for services, even longer than 

they’re waiting now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should examine the shift in the duties and try 

to take a common sense approach and look for a better solution. 

I think this is a foreign concept to the NDP government. 

They’ve never actually considered looking for better solutions. 

Instead they get one idea in mind and stubbornly stick with it 

even if the people of this province do come up with a better  

idea. 

 

In case the members opposite were wondering, there’s a 

concept out there called consultation. This is when the 

government asks people for the answers and then actually 

listens to them. I know this concept escaped the government for 

the past five years. Still, it’s worth mentioning in case they start 

to look for valid solutions to the problems that have plagued 

our province under their administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the present rules of Bill No. 58, a 

landowner who wants to cause a caveat on his property to lapse 

must serve the required notice on the person who registered the 

caveat in one of two ways. The notice must be delivered 

personally or it may be sent by registered mail. If it is sent by 

registered mail then the notice must be mailed either to the 

address as shown on the caveat or the address shown on the last 

change of notice filed by the caveator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this all has to be changed. Instead of a simple 

system set out in the Act, such as I have described, the new 

system for notifying caveators will be set out in the regulations. 

The registrar, when he gets a request, will follow a new 

procedure. He will send out something called a notice in writing 

in the prescribed form, and he will arrange for it to be sent out 

in something called the prescribed method. Of course the word 

prescribed means prescribed in the regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that this comes across as a lot of mumbo 

jumbo legalese but the changes are there and it is our 

responsibility to make sure the government is making these 

changes for the people. Mr. Speaker, the personal service of 

notice to lapse a caveat is completely lost with this Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is contrary to the whole point of a caveat. 

A caveat is a statement by a person claiming an interest in a 

piece of land. For example, when a person buys a parcel of land 

over time, under an agreement for sale he may put down a large 

down payment and agree to pay monthly instalment payments 

or annual instalment payments over time until a balance of the 

purchase price is paid. That type of purchaser is not yet the full 

owner of the land. He or she is a purchaser under an agreement 

for sale. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what does he have on the title to prove his 

legal interest in this land? He certainly does not have his 

certificate of title in his own name. What he has is a caveat. He 

has a caveat which he can register on the title. It is an official 

endorsement on the back side of the certificate of title, warning 

everyone who might be interested in buying that piece of land 

that he or she is already in the process of buying it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the situations where one would want to erase that 

form of endorsement are few and far between. Why eliminate 

the requirement of personally serving the person who registered 

the caveat with a notice of intention to lapse the caveat? Why 

eliminate the certainty of either personal service or registered 

mail? Why replace that certainty with the uncertainty of a 

prescribed form sent out by a prescribed method. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is it that every time the government proposes  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

an amendment to a Bill we must wonder what the goals really 

are? This is, of course, assuming they have goals. Despite their 

actions I wouldn’t want to assume their main goal is to break 

promises. There has to be more to it than that. There must be a 

reason that they want to take away more responsibility and 

power from ordinary citizens and place it in the hands of 

bureaucratic officials. This is not the direction which our 

citizens want to take, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how many 

times the government has to hear this before they start to 

understand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our citizens want certainty in the law. They want 

to handle as many of their own affairs as is reasonable. They 

don’t want caveats which protect important ownership and 

other interests in land to be swept away by the sending of a 

prescribed notice sent in a prescribed method. 

 

They don’t want to find out that the prescribed method failed to 

reach the man or woman who has been paying money for the 

purchase of land and that the interest has been extinguished 

through an accident. Mr. Speaker, this is a bad provision of this 

Bill. It does nothing to protect people who may have put the 

better part of their life savings into the purchase of a piece of 

land. In fact it greatly lessens the protection for such people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are still so many questions we have about 

this Bill. And before we can even begin to support it, we need 

many more answers. We want to give the members opposite a 

chance to explain their choices in this Bill because, as I have 

just pointed out, the reasons are far from clear. We just believe 

that we need some answers to our questions and I would hope 

the members opposite take our concerns seriously. 

 

As members of this Legislative Assembly, we have the 

responsibility to make changes in legislation only if they are in 

the best interest of the people of this province. Period. It 

doesn’t matter what side of the House we are on, or what our 

personal opinions are  we are here as elected representatives 

to make changes that will be beneficial to the people of 

Saskatchewan not only now, but for years to come. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want 

to take a few minutes to share a few thoughts about Bill No. 58, 

An Act to amend The Land Titles Act. We’ve heard from the 

opposition that somehow the days that the session sits is related 

to The Land Titles Act; somehow or other we’re starting our 

session too late or something like that, or insulting some of my 

rural colleagues. And I failed at that time to see how it was 

connected to the Bill and I’m still failing to see how it is. 

 

But I do wish to point out that this Act to amend The Land 

Titles Act, what the government is simply trying to do, is to 

update the existing Land Titles Act, bring it into 1996. We are 

in the process of setting up to computerize the land titles 

transactions. 

 

I’ve listened to opposition members decrying the amount of 

time it takes to get properties properly registered, which is 

particularly a bone of contention at a time of sale, if property is  

changing ownership hands. All we’re trying to do is to get 

Saskatchewan Land Titles into the 1996 mode as opposed to 

something significantly previous to that. 

 

(1600) 

 

I wish to point out to all who care to know, that this 

administration has got a committee process, an internal 

committee process, in place that is second to absolutely none in 

the universe. Our process, which has all member, government 

member, involvement but certainly has a component of rural, a 

component of urban, and a real good, cross mix, reviews every 

single Bill in detail. And we must agree to it in our own 

committee process and then in the government caucus before it 

can ever even appear on the floor here. 

 

That’s part of why Bills like The Land Titles Act generally have 

so few government members speaking to it on the floor of the 

legislature. I had my opportunity to speak to it before it got 

here. I had the legitimate concerns that we had with it already 

taken care of. We know what it is that we hope to accomplish 

with this. 

 

There may in fact . . . I guess the best way I can put it is I would 

urge that we get on with passing this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that we 

get on with making it happen. But I do recognize that the 

opposition perhaps needs a bit more time to review it, and 

perhaps having heard some of my reasoned explanation, may 

feel more agreeable to passing it the next time around. 

 

I’ve made the substantial comments that I wish to make. The 

process is a very good one. We have listened and heard from all 

members on this side of the House right across the province. 

We’re simply updating the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, out of respect for the opposition and their need to 

do further research, I move the adjournment of this debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of 

Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 

 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 

for clarification here, I would like you to tell me, how do you 

plan to implement the changes that are required in this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  There are two aspects to the Bill, as the 

member I’m sure knows. The first one says that an ophthalmic 

dispenser  that is the person who gives out glasses and 

contact lenses, as opposed to the optometrist who makes the 

prescription, or ophthalmologist who might make a prescription 

 the first aspect says that the ophthalmic dispenser can take a 

prescription, once a prescription has been made by an 

optometrist or an ophthalmologist, and from that prescription  



1390  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

can fit the consumer with contact lenses. 

 

So that will just result from the passage of the Act, except that 

the by-laws of the optometrists’ association will be amended, I 

understand, by the optometrists themselves to say that 

optometrists should release to the consumer a prescription for 

contact lenses. Presently they release prescriptions for 

eyeglasses  they’re required to under their by-laws  but not 

contact lenses. 

 

So there will be the statutory change that will say that the 

ophthalmic dispenser can give somebody contact lenses based 

upon a prescription. And then there will be a by-law change by 

the optometrists that will say that they, as a matter of 

professional responsibility, are obligated to give the consumer a 

prescription for contact lenses, as they presently have to do for 

eyeglasses. So that’s the first aspect of the Bill. 

 

The second part is an amendment to The Optometry Act that 

says that optometrists will be allowed to prescribe certain 

topical agents for use by their patients who have certain eye 

problems. And in terms of the implementation of that, the Act 

itself does not really say what they would end up prescribing, or 

under what circumstances, or exactly what training they would 

have to have to do this. The Act simply says that the practice of 

optometry means the performance of services including 

prescribing and dispensing . . . prescribing and using 

pharmaceutical agents. And the agents they would be allowed 

to prescribe would be set out in by-laws. This appears as the 

last, almost the last, clause of the Bill where it says one of the 

types of by-laws that the optometrists’ association would come 

up with would be to: 

 

“(1) prescribing the qualifications necessary for a member 

to prescribe and use those pharmaceutical agents that are 

designated in the bylaws made pursuant to clause (k) and 

authorizing the issue of a certificate to a member who is 

authorized to prescribe and use those pharmaceutical 

agents”. 

 

So in other words the Act will say that, in certain 

circumstances, an optometrist could prescribe certain 

medications. The by-laws will say which optometrists can do 

that and which agents they would be allowed to prescribe. 

 

Ms. Draude:  The by-laws are going to come into effect at 

the same time that the Act is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. The by-laws would come into effect 

when they were written by the optometrists’ association itself. 

And that would be subsequent to passage of the Act. What 

would be contemplated is that we would pass the Act, but 

nothing would change the day after we pass the Act because 

you would then have to write the rules that would say what 

optometrists could prescribe and which ones could do the 

prescribing. 

 

And those rules would be set out in by-laws that would be 

written by the Saskatchewan Association of Optometrists and 

when those would come into effect would depend upon how 

long it would take them to write those by-laws. In that process,  

there would be a consultation between the Saskatchewan 

Association of Optometrists and the college of physicians and 

surgeons and the Saskatchewan Medical Association, and I 

suppose, the Department of Health. 

 

And we would try to come to some kind of understanding with 

all those groups as to what was reasonable, although you may 

not have unanimity of opinion, and when you fashion the 

by-laws, when they came into effect, then the situation would 

change and the optometrist would actually start  in some 

cases  giving people a prescription for certain medications for 

certain eye conditions. 

 

The Chair:  I see the minister has been joined by an official. 

I ask the minister to introduce that official, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chair. This is Mr. Drew Johnston 

who’s an officer of the Department of Health and works in this 

area. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Welcome, Mr. Johnston. I don’t want to be 

facetious but I’m just wondering, are you asking to have this 

Act passed and then you’ll make the rest of the rules after? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, that actually is common practice. That 

is true for The Medical Profession Act, The Legal Profession 

Act. There are many, many professional statutes that say, these 

are the basic rules, and the profession itself can come up with 

by-laws  they’re like regulations  and they’re approved by 

government and they change from time to time. 

 

So what the member says is correct. But this is nothing unusual. 

This is the common practice for this kind of legislation. 

 

Ms. Draude:  For clarification again then, who will be 

included when they’re making these regulations, or the by-laws. 

Will the ophthalmologists themselves be included in the 

discussions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The optometrists themselves would 

formulate the by-laws. So in one sense, you’re talking about the 

optometrists coming up with the by-laws. But for this type of 

by-law the approval of the minister is required; so that they can 

pass the by-law but then I have to approve the by-law. 

 

And because I have to approve the by-law, I would require as a 

matter of common sense that the optometrists had consulted 

with the college of physicians and surgeons; the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association; perhaps, you know, the pharmaceutical 

association; and that there was a general consensus but not 

necessarily a unanimity of opinion. 

 

The main factor would be the college of physicians and 

surgeons as the body that is mainly responsible for regulating 

matters as to who is competent to prescribe medication and so 

on. And so their approval would be almost a prerequisite. And 

you would want general agreement from a majority of other 

stakeholders. 

 

So it would be a two-stage process. The optometrists would 

come up with the by-laws. I would have to be satisfied that the  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

community at large, as represented by organizations that would 

be interested in this area, had been consulted and that there was 

at least majority support for the change that they wanted to 

make. And if that was not the case, then it would be unlikely 

that the by-law would be approved at the government level. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So the college of physicians and surgeons 

would have to have . . . you’d have to have their okay basically 

and then everybody else . . . If there’s disagreement in there, 

then you would be the one that would make the final say on 

what by-laws are going to be going ahead or passed then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct. And the law doesn’t require 

that the college of physicians and surgeons would have to agree 

with what I was doing, but as a matter of common sense, I 

would look to them for some advice and guidance because they 

have more expertise in the area than I would have. And in terms 

of the legislation itself, for example, one of the things that 

guides us in formulating the legislation is that the college of 

physicians and surgeons is in support of the legislation. 

 

If they were not in support of the legislation . . . I don’t want to 

say that I would never, you know, do something that they didn’t 

agree with because there might be some reason why you would, 

but generally speaking in an area like this their support or lack 

of support would be a very important indicator as to whether 

this was reasonable public policy. 

 

(1615) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Your area of expertise, Mr. Minister, is 

probably very broad but it’s not specifically to ophthalmology 

or optometry. And I’m sure that from the amount of 

correspondence that we’ve had to our caucus that there seems 

to some varying degrees of opinion on whether this is right or 

wrong. 

 

So I guess our main concern for the people in Saskatchewan is 

the final decision then lies in the hands of the minister who’s 

. . . Do you rely on your guidance then from the college of 

physician and surgeons? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, that’s correct. This is not unusual in 

the sense that throughout the health legislation  which would 

be dozens of pieces of legislation  there are many sections 

that say that the Minister of Health has to make a decision in 

matters that pertain to medical areas. And what is done 

normally is that I would consult with experts in the field and 

obtain advice as opposed to arriving at a decision all on my 

own. 

 

At the end of the day, I would be responsible for the decision; 

but in making the decision, I would get advice from experts. 

And in this area we’ve done so in terms of the legislation and 

we would also do so in terms of the by-laws. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I 

wanted to refer to the minister that spoke on this the other day 

when we were talking about it, however he’s not here. So I’ll 

try to refer it to the Minister of Health. 

 

When Ms. Draude . . . or I mean the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena asked the question, does that mean that 

there will be a requirement for additional training for some of 

these people, the member opposite said yes, in some cases 

that’s right. This answer indicates to me that in some cases 

optometrists will not have to be trained. So in which cases 

would you assess that additional training will not be necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  My understanding, and certainly what I 

contemplated, was that in fact all optometrists would have to be 

certified as having undergone extra training in order to be 

allowed to prescribe medications. But the amount of training 

might vary depending upon the optometrist. 

 

For example, an optometrist who has been away from training, 

formal training, for quite some time might have to take a 

different and more complete sort of training than a recent 

graduate who might have taken some of the courses that would 

be required to prescribe as part of their formal training. But all 

optometrists would be required to take some kind of training, 

and they would have to be certified after examination that they 

were competent to prescribe. 

 

So in other words, even after the Act is passed and the by-laws 

are passed, optometrists could not start prescribing. 

Optometrists would have to be certified under the by-laws as 

being competent to prescribe. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would just like to ask 

you who would be responsible for the certification, and would 

that in fact be certification that would come from the place of 

training  Waterloo, or where would the certification come 

from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the certification would be by the 

Saskatchewan Association of Optometrists, but the examination 

would be an examination of the Canadian Association of 

Optometrists. So there would be an examination at a national 

standard and once an optometrist had passed that examination, 

he or she would be certified by the provincial organization. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So would there be 

approval for certification by the Canadian body? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Not exactly, because the certification 

would be by the provincial body, but indirectly in the sense that 

the national body would be responsible for the examination and 

the applicant for certification would have to complete 

successfully an examination set by the national body before 

being certified by the provincial body. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does the national body 

have a criteria that is agreed upon by the optometrists and by 

the physicians and surgeons of Saskatchewan that would have 

to be passed in order for that certification to come into being? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The certification process would be set out 

in the by-laws that would be passed as a result of the passage of 

this legislation. But I’m advised that the examination would be 

administered by the national board of examiners in optometry. 

 



1392  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

And I can tell the member that my discussions with the college 

of physicians and surgeons are such that they are satisfied that 

there is an appropriate process in place for optometrists to be 

examined and certified under the proposed legislation. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the other 

day the Hon. House Leader on that side said that there is 

nothing specified in the by-laws, so how can we know what 

criteria are to be met if there is nothing specified in the 

by-laws? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the answer is that you don’t at this 

stage, in the sense that we’re passing the legislation. But we’re 

not passing the by-laws because they’re not passed in the 

legislature. And the by-laws can only be draft by-laws in fact 

until the legislation is passed because it would only be at that 

stage that there would be legal authority to pass by-laws in this 

area. 

 

But there is a set of draft by-laws that has . . . I think there’s 

actually been a couple of versions that have been circulated to 

the college of physicians and surgeons and the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association, and I think probably the pharmaceutical 

association. If the member would like, I’m sure that we could 

send over a copy of the draft by-laws for the member also. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, I’d appreciate that. 

 

Again I’d like to refer to the House Leader from the opposite 

side. I’m making the mention that primary authority in 

Saskatchewan is the college of physicians and surgeons, and he 

goes on to quote a part of a paragraph: 

 

Primary health care professionals provide first contact 

(with) health care. In respect to eye care citizens may 

consult either an optometrist or primary care physician. 

Both professions are well qualified to evaluate eye health 

status and detect eye disease. 

 

So (he says) in Saskatchewan our primary reliance is upon 

the college. The college has said they’re competent to do it. 

 

It does note . . . I do note that it says here both professions . . . 

The optometrists are well qualified to evaluate and detect eye 

disease but nowhere does it say to treat it. And this does not 

seem to be a part of the quote at all; it comes from the 

physicians and surgeons. So I’d like you to answer to that 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, I don’t have the letter in front of me, 

so whether the quote in Hansard and the letter are exactly the 

same I can’t say  although the House Leader assures me that 

he quoted it accurately  but I can tell the member that I have 

had discussions in person on more than one occasion with the 

registrar of the college of physicians and surgeons. And I have 

also corresponded with the registrar and he has advised me that 

the college is strongly supportive of this legislation and they 

believe that the prescription of topical medications by 

optometrists is well within the scope of expertise of 

optometrists. They have no objection whatsoever to the  

legislation. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would refer again to 

the House Leader mentioning the other day that: I’m not sure 

that the Saskatchewan Medical Association are entirely in 

agreement. 

 

And so I also notice that in this correspondence we have from 

the ophthalmological 

society of Alberta that it says the Saskatchewan section of 

ophthalmology has advised the government that this is not safe; 

ophthalmologists spend 12 years learning how to properly 

manage these eye diseases. 

 

How can in fact this be a safe procedure even, you know, when 

only a small time for training is given? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the member may know that the 

Alberta legislature has passed legislation similar to this. It is 

true that the college of physicians and surgeons supports this 

legislation. The optometrist association obviously supports it. 

The pharmacists support it. The Saskatchewan Medical 

Association has reservations about the legislation. Those 

reservations . . . And of course I’ve met with the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association and representatives of the 

ophthalmologists about the legislation. They understand that we 

will be consulting with them in the formulation of the by-laws. 

 

But the point I would make to the member, which the member 

may find of interest, is that there are very few ophthalmologists 

in Saskatchewan, or indeed anywhere in the country, in the 

sense of there being a lot of them. They’re highly trained 

specialists, as they themselves say. You don’t get 

ophthalmologists in rural Saskatchewan, for example. 

 

And I would argue that the valid comparison here in terms of 

the ability to serve consumers is not so much between 

optometrists and ophthalmologists as between optometrists and 

family physicians. Because although it is true, as the member 

just indicated, that the optometrists do not have the same 

training with respect to diseases of the eye that the 

ophthalmologist have, they do have equivalent and usually 

better training with respect to diseases of the eye and treatment 

than the average general practitioner. 

 

Not taking anything away from the general practitioner, but one 

of the objectives of the legislation is to say that if you live in an 

area of the province that does not have an ophthalmologist, 

which would be quite common, and indeed if there is a waiting 

list to see an ophthalmologist, which would be quite common in 

both Saskatchewan and anywhere else in the country, or indeed 

North America, then there may be situations where an 

optometrist could very usefully treat an eye condition for a 

person in a rural area where that person wouldn’t have access to 

an ophthalmologist. 

 

So the point would be, it’s fine to talk about ophthalmologists, 

but if a person is not going to be able to see an ophthalmologist, 

it’s an academic question. And what we’re trying to do, and this 

is supported by the college of physicians and surgeons, is to say 

that there may be instances where we can make better use of the  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

skills and abilities of optometrists, particularly in rural areas, 

who could very usefully help people with certain eye 

conditions. 

 

And in terms of defining exactly when and under what 

circumstances they could do so, we would want to consult with 

the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) and the 

ophthalmologists as well as the other groups that I’ve 

mentioned. 

 

(1630) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you could 

just let me know how many ophthalmologists we have in this 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m not sure, but I believe the number is 

about 21 and that they are centred only in large centres; I think 

perhaps Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and Lloydminster. But 

I met with the ophthalmologists, or representatives of them, and 

it seems to me that the number was something like 21. But if 

not 21, it would be close to that. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, could 

you advise me what the length is of the course that the 

optometrists will be required to take to receive the training 

they’ll need to prescribe the treatment that is now given by the 

ophthalmologist? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  That would vary, for the reasons I indicated 

earlier, in the sense that if somebody just graduated from 

Waterloo and had taken the training, they wouldn’t be required 

to take it again. 

 

But if they hadn’t taken any training, under the draft by-laws 

one requirement is that they would have successfully completed 

a course in the use of therapeutic pharmaceutical agents 

consisting of at least 60 hours of academic instruction and 40 

hours of clinical instruction delivered by a school or college of 

optometry approved by the board of examiners. 

 

So about a hundred hours of instruction, which of course would 

be over some, I would think, considerable period of time, in the 

sense that these are busy people. So that would be, generally 

speaking, what they have in mind for the by-laws. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The range of topical 

drugs that are to be distributed by the optometrists, is a list of 

them going to be made available to the public? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The list would be made in the process of 

coming up with the by-laws and also in consultation with the 

various groups I’ve mentioned, such as the college of 

physicians and surgeons, the SMA, and the pharmaceutical 

association. And I can’t say to the member exactly what the list 

would be, because that’s what would come out of the 

consultation process, or one of the things that would come out 

of it. And the list would be set out in the by-laws. It would also 

be set out in regulations under The Pharmacy Act. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Will pharmacists  

have the authority to refuse to fill a prescription from an 

optometrist if they feel that it’s not one that should be 

prescribed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think that generally speaking if a 

pharmacist received a prescription from a physician or an 

optometrist within an area that the physician or optometrist is 

qualified to prescribe, then I don’t think the pharmacist would, 

you know, question the authority of the physician or the 

optometrist unless there was some obvious error, in which case, 

I think the pharmacist would contact the optometrist, just as a 

pharmacist might contact a physician in that kind of 

circumstance, to clarify or confirm that what was written was 

actually meant. 

 

But generally speaking, I don’t think a pharmacist would be 

second-guessing either a physician or an optometrist, except in 

some cases where there was an indication that something was 

clearly wrong. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister. When do you 

anticipate that these changes will come into place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  We would expect changes to come into 

place during the latter part of this year. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Do you anticipate there will be economic 

growth in the field of contact lens dispensaries due to the 

changes in this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  It’s difficult to predict but the experience 

in Alberta, where a similar change was made with respect to 

prescription of the contact lenses, was that competition was 

increased for the consumer. So whether or not the overall level 

of business would increase, I don’t know. It is thought that 

pricing would be more competitive. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d just like to thank Mr. 

Drew Johnston for his assistance this afternoon. 

 

Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 

deputy minister Stuart Kramer; director of wildlife, Dennis 

Sherratt; and Doug Kosloski, legislative analyst for the policy 

and public involvement branch of the department. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would also, 

Mr. Minister, like to welcome your staff here today. The last 

time that we had committee we actually exhausted all our  



1394  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

questions that we had of your people or yourself, Mr. Minister, 

so I’ll turn it over to the third party. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous 

Statutes concerning Municipal Government 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. Seated to my 

right is Ron Davis, assistant deputy minister of Municipal 

Government. And behind Mr. Davis is Perry Erhardt, who is a 

policy analyst with the department as well. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to, Mr. 

Minister, welcome the officials here today. We don’t have a 

whole lot of questions, Mr. Minister, but we do have a few. The 

first one possibly being, could you explain the first amendment 

that would have been passed to us, An Act to amend or repeal 

Miscellaneous Statutes concerning Municipal Government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to read some comments 

which were prepared and I think will probably be more tightly 

woven than anything I might add. 

 

When we originally planned to amend this section of The 

Hospital Revenue Act, we anticipated only a name change. 

However more recently it was determined that another change 

to The Hospital Revenue Act is required. The proposed 

amendment is necessary to avoid a potential problem associated 

with equalized assessments, an area with which I’m sure none 

of us are very familiar. I’m sure that’s true, actually. 

 

Essentially, in years when SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) was not obligated by its legislation to 

generate equalized assessment figures, the total taxable 

assessment, usually the same number, will be used for the 

purposes of The Hospital Revenue Act. This will not result in 

higher taxes but will simply ensure that taxes may continue to 

be levied in years where no equalized assessment is calculated. 

 

(1645) 

 

A recent decision by SAMA changed their previous policy of 

generating equalized assessment figures in every year. Because 

they don’t have to prepare those numbers every year, they have 

chosen not to for 1995; ’95 assessment figures are relied upon 

for the 1996 levy. 

 

The amendment does not change our commitment to work over 

the coming year with municipalities in search of a practical way 

of removing this levy from the property tax base altogether. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Going 

further into the Bill, The House Building Assistance Act, can 

you tell us when the last time this Act was used and if so, what 

grants that were used to distribute? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The figure I’m given is 1983. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Can you . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, but 

there was a second part to that question. What grants were used 

to distribute at that time, in 1983? What were the last grants 

distributed through this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The grants distributed at that time 

were the Build-A-Home Saskatchewan program. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. The Local 

Improvements Act, 1993, can you explain the reasons for 

changes to that part of the Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This cures an administrative problem 

which had arisen. I think it will be clear when I finish this 

explanation. 

 

The amendment makes it clear that the assessor shall consider 

all petitions together — sometimes it’s one; there may be 

twenty filed — when he or she certifies the validity of the 

petitions and determines whether the required percentage of 

signatures have been attained, etc. So it considers them all 

together, and then the 21-day limit within which the assessors 

provide a decision begins running from the date of the most 

recently filed decision. So he or she may consider them 

together, then the 21-day period begins to run from the last one. 

Otherwise the 21-day period might begin to run from the first 

when you haven’t had an opportunity to consider the last one. 

So that’s the clarity. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The Wanuskewin 

Heritage Park Act  and I think this is straightforward; I just 

need some clarification on it. And I think we definitely agree 

with it. Is this retroactive? Like does this go back a number of 

years? Am I reading this right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, this is retroactive. It goes back 

to the period when the park opened in ’91. And I think the 

reasons for that are relatively obvious. It goes back retroactive 

’91. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  One of the other concerns I have, Mr. 

Minister, is The Assessment Management Agency Act. What is 

the purpose of this change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They’re exempting it from 

publication in the Saskatchewan Gazette. The cost would be 

quite staggering. The cost is $105 per page. This weighty tome 

. . . the Gettysburg Address is about 3 or 400 words in length; 

however, this one is 2,275 pages. Thus the cost of printing this 

in the Saskatchewan Gazette, never mind the cost of 

distributing the thing, would be $238,875. So rather then run all 

that up, the thing has just been exempted from publication in 

the Gazette. 

 



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, that makes sense 

to me. But the one concern that I have is how will we 

adequately get people accessed to this now? What procedure 

will be taken? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I should have explained that. The 

assessment manual will be available for public viewing. 

Members of the public can make copies of it all if they want, on 

payment of a fee. But they’re much more likely to make copies 

of a few pages. So the notice will be given when it’s available. 

It’ll be open for public inspection, and members of the public 

can make copies of the document. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a couple 

of questions. On one of the amendments that was just given to 

us, clause 16, subsection (b)(3), says that Act will come into 

force upon assent, but is retroactive. Can you explain to me the 

importance of making it retroactive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This relates to the equalized 

assessment. It’s retroactive to January 1 so that it applies to the 

whole year and not a part of a year. So it’s retroactive to 

January 1 so that the provision with respect to equalized 

assessment applies to the whole of the calendar year which is 

the year for purpose of assessment. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have one more 

question, section 6, I guess it is, clause 2(b). It says: 

 

The Grain Charges Limitation Act is repealed and the 

following substituted: 

 

“. . . charges securing payment of moneys to the 

Government of Canada, the Government of 

Saskatchewan or a . . . municipality”. 

 

Could you just explain that part to me, please? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  If you look at the explanatory notes, 

it might assist you. The section used to refer to local 

improvement districts. They’ve been disbanded for many years 

and thus this simply drops the reference to local improvement 

districts. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Really that 

brings to an end the questions we have, Mr. Minister, unless 

there’s something else within this Bill, the changes that you 

would like to bring to our attention. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, the rest are all truly 

miscellaneous. They’re simply references to nomenclature and 

so on. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 7 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It was just brought to 

my attention that the Tories had some questions referring to  

this, and I think it was on clause 4 or 5, I’m not quite sure, so 

we would maybe want to turn that over to them if they’re 

willing to speak on it. 

 

Clause 7 agreed to 

 

Clause 8 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There’s a House amendment to this 

thing. 

 

I don’t know if members of the opposition have copies of this. I 

don’t know whether it’s necessary to read this or not. If it isn’t, 

I’ll simply refer to the document you have. I move the 

amendment, a copy of which has been provided to the Table 

and a copy of which has been provided to the official 

opposition, and I move it. 

 

The Chair:  It has been moved by the Minister of 

Intergovernmental Affairs that: 

 

Clause 8 of the printed Bill 

1  Strike out clause 8 of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

8(1) The Hospital Revenue Act is amended in the manner 

set forth in this section. 

 

(2) Section 5 is amended by striking out “The Minister 

of Urban Affairs” and substituting “Subject to 

subsection 12(1) of The Assessment Management 

Agency Act, the Saskatchewan Assessment Management 

Agency”. 

 

(3) Section 6 is amended: 

 

(a) in subclause (a)(i) by adding “, if it has been 

prepared, or if no equalized assessment has been 

prepared, on the total taxable assessment of the 

municipality as confirmed by the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency for the next 

preceding year” after “preceding year”; and 

 

(b) in subclause (a)(ii) by adding “, if it has been 

prepared, or if no equalized assessment has been 

prepared, on the total taxable assessment of the 

municipality as confirmed by the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency in that portion of 

the municipality for the next preceding year” after 

“preceding year”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move clause 16 of the printed Bill 

be amended: 



1396  Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

2 Amend Clause 16 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) in subsection (1) by striking out “subsection (2)” and 

substituting “subsections (2) and (3)”; and 

 

(b) by adding the following subsection after subsection 

(2): 

 

“(3) Section 8 of this Act comes into force on assent, 

but is retroactive and is deemed to have been in force 

on and from January 1, 1996”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 as amended agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the Bill be reported with 

amendment. While I’m on my feet, in my capacity as House 

Leader, I’ll move this committee rise, report very considerable 

progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of 

Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous 

Statutes concerning Municipal Government 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the amendments be now read 

a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With leave, I move the Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1365 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1365 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1365 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1365 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1366 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 
Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1366 
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 
Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 
Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Mental Health Week in Saskatchewan  

Ward .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1367 
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

National Forest Week  
Johnson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

Farm Safety Colouring Book Available 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

Learning Grounds Project  
Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1368 

Lumsden and Craven Seniors’ Program  
Murray ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1368 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards  
Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1368 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  

Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1368 
Anguish ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1369 

Funding for Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital  
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1369 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1369 

Personal Care Home Regulations  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 

Funding for the Arts  
Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1371 
Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1371 

Seniors’ Eye Care Costs  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1371 
Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1371 

Surgical Waiting-lists  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1372 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1372 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
Bill No. 83  An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions Act  

Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1373 
 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1373 



Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1373 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 47  An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act  
Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1373 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1374 

Bill No. 48  An Act to amend The Animal Identification Act 
Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1375 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1376 

Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1377 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1377 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 38  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1378 

Bill No 44  An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993  
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1381 

Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1385 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1387 
Trew........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1389 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of Pharmaceutical Agents 

Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1389 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1389 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1391 

Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act  
Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1393 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1393 

Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous Statutes concerning Municipal Government 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1394 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1394 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1395 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1395 

THIRD READINGS 
Bill No. 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1396 
Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act  

Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1396 
Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous Statutes concerning Municipal Government  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1396 
 


