













































May 15, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1623 

 May 15, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 

behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures are from Regina, Moose Jaw, Esterhazy, 

Grayson, Atwater. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition are from such places as 

Katepwa Beach, Fort Qu’Appelle, Regina, Indian Head, 

Abernethy, Balcarres, and numerous other southern 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens from 

throughout Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Macoun, Lampman, and throughout the province. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions from Saskatchewan residents regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Moose Jaw, Estevan, and the largest number are from Regina. I 

so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Rouleau, 

Drinkwater, Wilcox, Midale, and Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, from 

Kipling, Vibank, Balgonie, Pilot Butte, White City, Grenfell, 

Moose Jaw — all over Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today as 

well to present petitions from concerned citizens in southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the concerned citizens of 

Bethune and community, as well as Chamberlain. Of course 

both those communities are on No. 11 Highway and in the 

constituency of Arm River. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names from Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

. . . actually they are all from the community of Radville in the 

constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from the city of Regina here. They’re also from Estevan. 

They’re from Benson; and they’re from all throughout  



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

Saskatchewan. And I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today to present petitions on behalf of the efforts in 

saving the Plains Health Centre here in Regina. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are all 

from the Esterhazy area. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 57 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Minister of Finance: (1) what was the total amount 

of revenue taken in by the province in fines under The 

Highway Traffic Act for the year ending March 31, 1996; 

(2) what percentage of this revenue is returned to 

municipal governments; (3) is the provincial share of this 

revenue targeted to any particular government program or 

does it all go to the general revenue; (4) what dollar 

amount in fines was outstanding as of March 31, 1996? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 57 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Highways and 

Transportation with regards to highway maintenance in the 

North: (1) how many kilometres of road exist in northern 

Saskatchewan; (2) what is the ratio of kilometres of roads 

to maintenance staff in the North as compared to the rest of 

the province; (3) what is the total budget for northern 

roads; (4) how much of this budget is being spent on 

administration and how much is being spent on actual 

maintenance; (5) what is the location of highway depots in 

northern Saskatchewan; (6) which of these are slated for 

closure; (7) how does your department determine which 

roads are a priority for maintenance and which roads are 

not; and finally (8) has the government considered 

contracting out road maintenance to communities or 

private companies? 

 

Thank you. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 

57 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Sask Water with regards to 

the Humboldt-Wakaw water pipeline: (1) where do the 

funds for this pipeline come from; (2) could you please 

provide a breakdown of the $201,000 that your department 

has quoted in a letter to the RM (rural municipality) of Fish 

Creek as the cost to install the additional 3-inch pipeline 

for treated water; (3) could you please provide a written 

explanation of why the cost per unit has been set at $15.22 

per thousand gallons of treated water for people in the RM 

of Fish Creek; and (4) why is this double the price that 

others pay for treated water from the same pipeline? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly, a group 

of 13 students from the Tisdale Unit Composite High School. 

These students are being accompanied by their teachers, Paula 

Fafard and Lillian Chunyk. I welcome them here and I would 

like very much to meet with them later, and ask the members to 

please give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 

pleasure for me to introduce a group of young people in our 

gallery and it’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you and 

through you to my colleagues in the legislature on behalf of my 

colleague, the member from Saskatoon Northwest, a group of 

65 grade 5 students seated in your west gallery. They are from 

Silverwood Heights School in Saskatoon. They are 

accompanied by their teachers, Barbara Gallo, Rick Smith, 

Wendy Nadane, and Jackie Semchuck. 

 

They will be spending some time in the Assembly here, and 

then going on to have a tour. And I’m looking forward to 

visiting with them later on. So please join me in extending to 

them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to 

you today and through you to the members of the legislature, 11 

students from Lakeview School who are sitting in the Speaker’s 

gallery and also down here on the main floor. 

 

They are accompanied by their teachers, Eleanor Desjardins and 

Karen Riche, and the chaperon Neil Brown. And I’m happy to 

welcome them here to the legislature and I look forward to 

meeting with them later. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if my 

seeing is right I think I recognize a young lady in your gallery, 

Vicki Lissel, who has been in the Assembly before. A lady that 

has brought a major concern regarding hepatitis C to this 

Assembly; we’ve had the privilege of raising on her behalf. And 

I’d like the members to join me in welcoming her to this 

Assembly this afternoon. 

 



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join the member from Melfort-Tisdale and welcome the grade 

12 social studies class from Tisdale. And I think with them also, 

Mr. Speaker, is Shelley McMartin. And Shelley is not in grade 

12 but actually in grade 4, so a special welcome to her and to 

teachers Paula Fafard and Lillian Chunyk. 

 

And I trust, Mr. Speaker, that all members on both sides of the 

House, especially on the other side of the House, will be of 

their best behaviour today. So I would like everyone to please 

welcome our visitors from Tisdale. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to 

introduce to all members today a very special young woman, 

Allison Illingsworth, who is seated, Mr. Speaker, in your 

gallery. Allison is a grade 11 student at Scott Collegiate here in 

Regina and she has been participating in the executive 

government mentoring program that her school is involved 

with. 

 

With Allison today is Brent Young. Brent has served as her 

mentor and for one afternoon a week for this whole last 

semester, Allison has been with Brent, understanding how 

government works, learning about the government workplace 

and future opportunities in that workplace, looking at how 

staffing is done through the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this represents the close of the program for 

Allison and so I would invite all members to congratulate her 

for what she has done and to welcome her here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Police Week 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night on the TV 

there was an episode of one of the very successful, new-wave 

cop shows, the kind that are called gritty, realistic, hard-nosed, 

and so on. 

 

This episode featured a shoot-out on the street. The police hero 

shot and killed two characters who deserved even more. In that 

single scene, the American TV police officer fired his gun 

almost as many times as did the combined police forces of 

Saskatchewan in 1994. Our number was nine, six of which 

were fired to dispatch wounded animals. 

 

I mention this, Mr. Speaker, because May 12 to 18 has been 

proclaimed Police Week, a week during which we might 

profitably reflect on the comparative peacefulness and civility 

of our society, a week during which we should take a moment 

to consider with gratitude that we have a police force which is 

more concerned with encouraging that civility than in violently 

enforcing it. 

 

We should recognize as well that when most of us encounter a 

police person, it is because we were going too fast, colliding too 

enthusiastically, or partying too loudly; not the best 

circumstances to meet a new friend, but circumstances where 

we need reminding of our responsibilities as good citizens. 

 

Finally, and most importantly, we should all acknowledge that 

the thousand or so police officers in Saskatchewan are human 

beings just like us except that, unlike us, they do a dangerous 

and usually thankless job with dedication and professionalism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of Craig Wright 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to extend condolences to the Wright family of Prince 

Albert. Last week Craig Wright passed away after a lengthy 

battle with hemophilia and AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome) complications. 

 

Mr. Wright made himself well known to many members of this 

Assembly during his campaign for compensation for 

hemophiliacs who had been infected by tainted blood products. 

Mr. Wright bared his personal struggles with his illness and 

watched close friends die while he fought for compensation on 

behalf of the 27 innocent victims in Saskatchewan. In the end, 

he lost his life to a disease that shows no mercy. 

 

Because of his perseverance, the survivors of those infected 

will be somewhat provided for. He maintained that infected 

hemophiliacs were innocent victims paying for a bureaucratic 

mistake with their lives. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in extending 

condolences to Craig Wright’s family and friends. He will be 

missed, but his courageous spirit will not be forgotten. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Technology Transfer 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 

salute the University of Saskatchewan’s first and best national 

fund-raising campaign. Several months ago, the University of 

Saskatchewan and the University of Regina jointly submitted an 

application to the National Sciences and Engineering Research 

Council for a grant to fund technology transfer. This initiative 

demonstrates some of the best of the Saskatchewan spirit of 

cooperation, enterprise, and good stewardship of financial 

resources. 

 

This application linked researchers with industry for the next 

three years with funding for $147,000. This in turn was then 

matched by the Royal Bank and the Canadian Imperial Bank of 

Commerce to provide almost a million dollars over three years 

for tech transfer in Saskatchewan. 

 

What does this mean on the ground in Saskatchewan? It means 

that modifications to bean harvesters done by the University of  



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

Saskatchewan agricultural engineering faculty will result in the 

reduction of crop loss from 45 per cent to 10 per cent. It’s 

projected that this alone will increase acreage devoted to the 

production of beans from 5,000 acres to 50,000 in 

Saskatchewan  just another example of how Saskatchewan is 

leading the way in science and technology. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Science Fair 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize two young scientists from Humboldt who are 

attending the National Science Fair in North Bay, Ontario. 

 

Darren Stroeder and Evan Jenkins had the best overall project at 

the Carlton Trail Regional Science Fair held in St. Brieux. Their 

project, “Lighting Up the World”, is based on nuclear energy. 

They compiled data on the pros and cons of nuclear energy, and 

they developed a computer program to teach the researched 

facts. The computer program also explains the uses of nuclear 

energy in producing electricity, nuclear weapons, and in 

medical research. 

 

Congratulations to Evan Jenkins and Darren Stroeder, and to 

their teacher, Peter Pavelich. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agriculture Sciences Month 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is Agriculture 

Sciences Month, and an appropriate time to pay tribute to a 

farmer from Mossbank who has received a special honour. 

 

John Noble has been awarded the Distinguished Diploma 

Graduate Award for graduates from the agriculture diploma 

program at the University of Saskatchewan. The university 

presents this award to persons who make a significant 

contribution to the agricultural industry and their local 

community. 

 

Mr. Noble has been a farmer since 1951 and active in 

Saskatchewan 4-H for more than 30 years. He promoted the 

motto “Learn to do by Doing”. 

 

John and his wife, Joyce, were inducted into the Saskatchewan 

4-H Hall of Fame in 1990. They were the first couple ever to be 

recognized with this honour. John has also worked in the 

Department of Agriculture and served as a councillor with the 

RM of Lake Johnston from 1969 to 1982. 

 

He was also agriculture councillor and was on the District Two 

Agriculture Board and involved with the Mitchellton Wheat 

Pool Committee for 25 years. I extend my congratulations to 

John Noble and his wife, Joyce. They are part of the fabric of 

what makes Saskatchewan the best place in the world in which 

to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Garson Lake 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I rise today to 

commend the resilience of the people of a small northern 

community in my constituency. 

 

About 120 people live in Garson Lake near the Alberta border. 

It is a Saskatchewan community. This community is managing 

to survive even though it still needs 12 kilometres of roads to be 

constructed before it’s connected to the rest of the province. 

 

Garson Lake mayor, Donald Laprise, says the isolation of his 

community is forcing some people to leave. It costs about $200 

for a one-way plane trip into the neighbouring community  

that’s about $400 for a round trip. Many people in Garson Lake 

just can’t afford that and are worried about being so far away 

from health care. 

 

Mayor Laprise says Garson Lake has survived despite the 

isolation, despite the lack of health services, and despite the fact 

that the village just got power hook-up three years ago. He 

hopes his community will realize its full potential for industries 

in tourism, natural gas, fishing, and forestry. 

 

In the meantime, the people of Garson Lake continue to lobby 

for all essential services many other people take for granted. 

 

I would like to commend the people of Garson Lake for 

continuing to pursue their dreams despite the many challenges 

that they face. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Battleford Business Awards 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like 

to congratulate seven businesses in my constituency that 

recently received awards of excellence from the Battleford’s 

Chamber of Commerce. The Business of the Year Award went 

to Canadian Seed Coaters, an outstanding business that has 

been part of our community for 15 years. 

 

Chris Odishaw, owner and manager of Battleford Furniture 

Limited, picked up the Young Entrepreneur Award. Milbanke 

Flowers Limited, a fourth generation business, received the 

Heritage Award for its longevity and success in the community. 

 

My Friends’ Place restaurant in Battleford received the 

Customer Service Award. Photography by Mark was named the 

top new business. The Property Appearance Award went to 

Anderson Pump House Limited of Battleford. And last but not 

least, G & C Asphalt was presented with the Community 

Involvement Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the third annual Battleford’s business 

awards  an event that recognizes the tremendous contribution 

made by business people to our community and to our 

economy. 

 

I would like to congratulate the winners and all those nominated 

for awards this year. I’d also like to thank the  



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

Battleford’s Chamber of Commerce for hosting the event, 

SaskTel for being its corporate patron, the city of North 

Battleford and the town of Battleford for being key sponsors, 

and the many other organizations that contributed to the 

ceremony. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Well-known Regina Entrepreneur Dies 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, change is inevitable. We 

all know that resisting it is futile. But at the same time, it is 

worth noting that what we get as the price of progress is not 

always better than what is replaced. As a case in point, I think 

all Reginans would agree that popcorn will never taste as good 

again as it has for the past 50 years or so. 

 

The reason is simple  Harry Alecxe, the popcorn man on 

Broad Street, was put to rest this week. Orville Redenbacher 

may have had the corporation; Harry had the product. Not only 

that, Harry Alecxe was a living embodiment of the kind of 

entrepreneurship that helped build this country and this 

province. With no grants, no partners, no shareholders, no 

market studies, he ran a business that was distinctive and 

successful. For years it was a landmark, although a shifting one, 

in downtown Regina. Let us hope that the qualities he 

embodied will live on and inspire young people today. 

 

Every now and then a death occurs which marks a real passage, 

the ending of an era, the changing of the guard  not 

necessarily in large public matters or affairs of state, but simply 

a change which reminds us that the world of our youth is 

turning. Such is the case with my constituent, Harry Alecxe, 

entrepreneur, citizen, family man, example. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Recovery of Government Funds 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The saga continues to 

unfold. The report of the Chief Electoral Officer has indicated 

that the new PCs (Progressive Conservative) have come across 

a $400,000 windfall that was secretly raised by the party during 

the Devine era. He further states that he was told the party lost 

track of the funds, and when they were located, the money was 

transferred to the party coffers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prior to the 1991 election, the Conservatives 

defrauded the people of this province of $1 million  much of 

which has never been recovered. Will the Minister of Justice 

explain what action he is prepared to take to find out if this is 

part of those monies? How much more money is there out there, 

hidden in credit unions or safety deposit boxes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d be pleased to answer that question on behalf of the  

Premier, who is responsible for The Election Act. I noted in the 

Star-Phoenix this morning the same story with respect to the 

$400,000. And I want to say that I think it raises some very 

serious questions that the Leader of the Third Party needs to 

answer and account for. 

 

I think some of those questions, Mr. Speaker, are how is it that 

the $400,000 that was raised between 1981 and ’89 under the 

Devine administration get misplaced? How do you lose 

$400,000? And why did that money first now show up in 1995? 

And where has that money been for the past six years? And 

who in fact was in control of it? 

 

I would ask the member from Kindersley if he expects the 

people of Saskatchewan to believe that his party had $400,000 

that he was unaware of, laying in a shoebox somewhere. 

Missing money, funds all of a sudden showing up, contingency 

funds that no one knew about  Mr. Speaker, this earmarks a 

party, a new PC Party, very much like the old one. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think there are 

probably about 1 million people in this province who would 

agree that these secret funds should not be going to the new 

PCs; rather they should be going to address the sins of the old 

PCs. And this, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what should take place. 

Instead of benefiting from this windfall, the PC Party should 

make restitution to Saskatchewan taxpayers  the only 

appropriate step to take. 

 

Will the Minister of Justice indicate whether his government is 

taking steps, all steps necessary, to recover what is rightfully the 

property of the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Minister, will you do your part to begin the healing process 

between the people of Saskatchewan and their elected 

representatives. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 

respect to the member’s question, I think that this is under The 

Election Act. And I think it should be and will be reviewed by 

the appropriate authorities. 

 

I think as well there may be some question with respect to the 

statute of limitations Act and my understanding is this is also 

being reviewed. 

 

The Chief Electoral Officer has an Act that he administers, and 

under the guidelines of The Election Act will do the appropriate 

thing and take the appropriate action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

was more than two years ago that this House was introduced to 

Vicki Lissel, a Saskatchewan woman who contracted hepatitis 

C as a result of contaminated blood. Ms. Lissel called on this 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government to come forward 

with a compensation plan that would allow her and others 

afflicted with hepatitis C to die knowing that their loved ones  



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

would be properly cared for. The former minister of Health, the 

current Minister of Social Services, stated in this House on May 

11, 1994: 

 

. . . that (and I quote) the condition of hepatitis is a very 

significant health care risk and a health care problem. And 

we are treating it in just that fashion. . . 

 

Things are being done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, things are not being done. It has been two years 

since the former minister of Health made this statement, and 

Ms. Lissel and others are waiting for an answer. Will the 

current Minister of Health explain when his government will 

quit hiding from this issue, take action that was promised? Or is 

this going to be yet one more promise that has failed by this 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member, 

as the member should know, that Saskatchewan was the only 

province that did not join in the challenge to the Krever 

Commission which is trying to get to the bottom of what 

happened with our blood supply in the 1980s. And I say to the 

member that the role that we have played as a province, in the 

last several months, is to try to get to the bottom of this issue. 

 

I’m not entirely clear what exactly the member is asking — 

whether he’s suggesting that there should be a compensation 

program with respect to hepatitis C victims or what, because it 

wasn’t entirely clear. But I want to say to the member that 

hepatitis C is a condition that can be transmitted through a 

number of risk factors. And the difficulty, Mr. Speaker, is that 

in many cases  even for people who have received blood 

products  it is not possible to determine the source of the 

infection, and other risk factors exist with respect to hepatitis C. 

And hepatitis C can be in your system for many, many years 

before it manifests itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, how can you let on you 

don’t know what the people affected with hepatitis C have been 

asking for? It’s a compensation package that your government 

has promised for a few years  deal with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Vicki Lissel and others who have hepatitis C don’t 

want to hear any more excuses like the minister just gave. They 

are waiting for this government to take a leadership role. And 

they’re not asking for an excessive windfall; they simply want 

to ensure that their families have one less worry. Isn’t it bad 

enough, Mr. Speaker, that they have to live each day not 

knowing how much longer they’ll be able to enjoy their 

families? 

 

Let me remind the minister of Vicki Lissel and others are 

infected with hepatitis C through no fault of their own. If in fact 

this government has any compassion left, will the minister 

please make a commitment to bring forward a compensation 

package for Vicki Lissel and others  not next week, not next 

month, and not next year  but start today, Mr. Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, let me advise the member and 

the House that people with symptoms of chronic infection 

hepatitis C today, could have been exposed to other risks as 

long ago as the early 1960s. The majority of hepatitis C carriers 

may have been infected years ago before reliable tests were 

available to screen blood for hepatitis C. 

 

The severity of the disease varies greatly among those who 

contract hepatitis C. Some experience no significant effect on 

health. Some show no symptoms for a number of years. Some 

may develop complications 10 to 30 years after infection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the difficulty is there are many reasons why 

people may have hepatitis C. There are various ways that they 

come into contact with hepatitis C, and that’s the difficulty we 

have with respect to coming up with the compensation package. 

The difficulty is proof as to the manner in which someone 

actually contracted hepatitis C. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been one month 

since I introduced a private members’ Bill that would require 

liquor outlets to post signs indicating that drinking alcohol 

could be harmful to the health of an unborn child. Mr. Speaker, 

this would be a small but positive step towards a treatment of 

the totally preventable problem of fetal alcohol syndrome. 

 

The Minister of Health indicated at the time that this was too 

simplistic and promised to bring forward a more complex piece 

of legislation before the end of this current session. Will the 

minister stand in the House today and explain when during this 

session he’ll be introducing such a Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

I need all the help I can get. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As I indicated to the member last time  

and I do thank the members for their applause  we have 

established a working group which consists of people across the 

province, people from the community, and they are developing 

recommendations with respect to fetal alcohol syndrome. Of 

course the challenge is prevention. To have prevention, we need 

education. 

 

I’ve explained to the member that I’ve asked the community for 

input. I have not yet received that. When I receive the 

recommendations of the community, then we’ll be coming 

forward with the response. But I am going to respect the 

community, Mr. Speaker. I’ve asked them for advice. I’m going 

to wait for their advice, and then we’ll proceed accordingly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

Indian Land Claims Tax Loss Compensation 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in recent 

days, we have received a number of letters from rural 

municipalities concerned about senior governments offloading 

responsibilities onto them. Interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, 

this government really isn’t the government they’re concerned 

with. It’s the federal government and its handling of specific 

Indian land claims. 

 

In 1991, the federal government agreed to pay municipalities 

22.5 times the previous year’s tax bill in lieu of future taxes that 

will be lost on land-claim land. The Liberal government has 

now reneged on that agreement and is offering to pay just 5 

times last year’s tax bill. Mr. Speaker, this is grossly unfair and 

inadequate and will result in local taxpayers paying much 

higher taxes to make up for the loss of tax base within the 

municipality. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Indian Affairs. Madam 

Minister, do you support the SARM’s (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) position that Ottawa 

should honour the 1991 agreement to pay twenty-two and a half 

times the previous year’s taxes, and if so, what steps have you 

taken to pressure the federal government to live up to its 

commitment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

just start by responding to the member that yes, we do support 

SARM’s position and have for a considerable length of time. 

We do believe that fair tax loss compensation should occur and 

we’ve communicated this position directly to the Minister of 

Indian and Metis Affairs, federally. 

 

As well we’ve met with SARM several times on this issue and 

made joint representation. The Minister of Municipal 

Government and myself has met with the federal Minister of 

Agriculture from Saskatchewan to urge him to deal with this 

with his colleagues in Ottawa. 

 

We feel that fair tax loss compensation is a critical issue for 

rural Saskatchewan. I share the member’s concern. There’s no 

doubt that in dealing with the historical problems that the land 

entitlements are our hope to resolve, that it’s really important to 

do this with everybody in support of the effort. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  A further question, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, as you know, this is a very real problem faced by 

many municipalities throughout the province. The RM of 

Golden West, for example, has lost over 10,000 acres of their 

tax base. This is a huge loss for the remaining ratepayers to pick 

up to provide services and maintain roads which provide access 

to both Indian and non-Indian bands, yet only the non-Indian 

landowners are expected to pay the whole bill, which isn’t fair. 

 

Madam Minister, this problem is only going to get bigger as 

more and more of these land claims are settled in the future. 

Madam Minister, we would like to send a strong message to 

Ottawa through a motion of this legislature calling on the  

federal government to honour their previous commitment. 

 

Madam Minister, we will be moving this motion immediately 

after question period. Will you support this motion? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Well of course we will wait to see the motion but certainly 

support the intent. One of the things I should mention is first 

nations are also with us on this issue because they understand 

the importance of municipalities having a sufficient tax base 

with which to operate because, as the member points out, they 

do share services in many instances and live within the same 

community. 

 

So I guess there would be many people that are concerned about 

this. And I think what we need to join together to help the 

federal government understand, is that we are united on this. 

We do care about it and we’d like to see a resolution to this 

issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Proposed Four-day School Week 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Education. School divisions are 

trying to deal with big cuts in funding. They’re coming up with 

viable, innovative solutions to meet their fiscal challenges while 

trying to maintain quality education for our youth. 

 

One such proposal came from Scenic Valley School Division, 

Madam Minister, where local ratepayers voted 93 per cent in 

favour of a four-day school week, and that’s an impressive 

percentage in favour. 

 

Madam Minister, last week, while announcing your big 

consultation process regarding school division amalgamations, 

you said you would listen to local people to find solutions to 

education challenges. Well, Madam Minister, here’s your 

chance; 93 per cent of the local ratepayers have voted in favour 

of a four-day week. They have outlined to you how this 

proposal will improve educational benefits and save up to 

$111,000, this coming week. 

 

Madam Minister, will you listen to those local people? Will you 

approve this proposal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I have received a proposal from Scenic Valley about the 

possibility of a four-day school week. The proposal came in 

after the end of April, after the mill rate had already been 

established by Scenic Valley. We have advised the school 

division of the requirements for consideration in a revised 

school year, school-day proposal. And we’ve indicated that in 

order to consider their proposal, we would now have to wait till 

the 1997-1998 school year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

that’s an amazingly weak excuse not to let a particular school 

board save some money and provide better educational 

opportunities for their kids. The Scenic Valley School Division 

had their school year approved on April 28, two days before the 

deadline under The Education Act. 

 

Madam Minister, immediately upon hearing how much you 

were going to cut back in funding, this school division went to 

work. They held public meetings in each of the towns affected, 

sent a package of information home with each of the school 

children, and sent further information to each ratepayer 

affected, as well as putting together a comprehensive proposal 

for you. That’s the best opportunity and example of 

consultation we’ll find in Saskatchewan. 

 

They are asking that you approve this proposal as a pilot 

project, just like you said you would do in front of the 

television cameras last week. Madam Minister, will you at least 

allow the division to test their proposal on a pilot project basis? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, in considering any 

changes for the school week, we always would have to consider 

the educational interests of students. What I will say to the 

member is that this proposal is a departure from our traditional 

school year, and this proposal does have legal, administrative, 

and other considerations that the department really does need to 

take into consideration. 

 

What I can tell the member is that we have struck a committee 

of our various educational partners to engage in a collaborative 

process so that we can develop a framework from which we 

will develop educational policy for the school year of the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Funding 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions are also for the Minister of Education. Mr. Speaker, 

communities throughout the province are starting to come to the 

horrifying realization of what government cuts to school boards 

mean. Look at the Northern Lakes School Division for example 

 2 mill increase to ratepayers; complete elimination of all six 

vice-principal positions; elimination of bus routes; major cuts to 

supplies, textbooks, maintenance, and equipment; severe cuts to 

funding for extracurricular activities and special programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is set on a path to destroy 

education in this province. But the minister refused to admit it 

and insists boards will be receiving more funding. This is 

incredibly frustrating for the people who are forced to deal with 

the government cuts. 

 

Will the minister explain why school boards are making these 

drastic cuts if she has been telling the truth about the funding 

allocations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, all the member has 

to do is look in the budget book that was delivered in this 

legislature when the Minister of Finance delivered her speech. 

And what we will see is a $2 million increase. Educational 

funding in this province increased from $353.154 million to 

$355.154 million. That represents a $2 million increase. 

 

Now I know that this member doesn’t like that fact. I know that 

this member wants the public to believe that this government 

cut funding to education. I can tell the member that the 

Newfoundland government, Liberal government, cut funding to 

education. The Nova Scotia government, Liberal government, 

cut funding to education, as did the Nova Scotia government 

cut funding. 

 

I could also tell the member that we back-filled every single 

dollar cut from the federal Liberals in Ottawa. And these, Mr. 

Speaker, are the facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam 

Minister, either you do not understand the equalization factor, 

or you don’t know why boards have been asked to contribute 

$14 million more. The fact is school boards in this province get 

their directives from the provincial government. 

 

Madam Minister, Northern Lights was just one example of 

what’s going on. Timberline School Division will see 2.5 jobs 

lost. Kamsack is losing 3.5 teaching positions. Shamrock will 

see 3.5 positions cut. Nipawin will lose 2.5. Wadena will cut 

1.3 positions. And Northern Lights will cut 7.5 positions. The 

story is the same across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, it is your government that is forcing boards to 

make these cuts. This is the same government that promised to 

create 30,000 new jobs by the year 2000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Madam Minister, will you please stand up in this House and 

give some degree of hope to teachers throughout the province 

who are losing their jobs because of your government’s 

actions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind the 

member  and he will know this because he is the former 

president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association  

that the funding formula in this province is, for the most part, 

based upon enrolment. And that member will also know that we 

saw a decline in enrolment in certain parts of rural 

Saskatchewan, and obviously that has an impact upon the grant. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say to that member that this 

government recognizes that it costs more to deliver a rural 

education in this province, and we recognize it in the funding 

formula. And if you are a student in rural Saskatchewan, you 

receive a 25 per cent differential for that school board than if 

you were a student in urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

Banks’ Proposed Entry into Auto Leasing 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

official opposition has received a large number of calls in 

recent weeks from car and truck dealers who fear that banks 

will be allowed to enter into the automobile leasing business. 

Given the fact that leasing now makes up about a third of the 

business for new-car retailers in the province, their fears are 

understandable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are about 150 dealerships in Saskatchewan. 

They employ almost 4,000 people and the annual sales exceed 

$1.2 billion. Will the minister in charge of Economic 

Development tell this House what his government is doing to 

ensure that these businesses are not placed at risk? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, as minister involved 

with consumer protection and also working closely with the 

Saskatchewan Motor Dealers’ Association, I would strongly 

encourage the members opposite to contact their federal 

counterparts because this issue is actually under great 

discussion within the federal Liberal caucus, and I think it 

would be very appropriate for any concerns that you have to be 

directed that way. 

 

We are in consultation with the Saskatchewan Motor Dealers’ 

Association through officials in the Department of Justice. This 

is one issue that we have been discussing, but I think all of the 

issues surrounding the Bank Act are clearly under federal 

jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to take action. 

We intend to take a resolution to the next Liberal convention in 

Ottawa opposing such action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  We understand that the economic benefits 

that these dealerships bring . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order! Order. I’ll ask the members of the 

government side . . . Order . . . and from the official opposition. 

All members will come to order. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  We understand that the economic benefits 

that these dealerships bring to our communities will be 

threatened should banks become their direct competition in the 

retail leasing business. 

 

We have expressed our concerns in a letter to the federal 

Finance minister, which I’ll share, and we are prepared . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  We are prepared to work with this NDP 

government. Will the minister and his government work with us 

to protect the interest of these Saskatchewan businesses? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to thank 

the members opposite for their agreement to work with us on an  

issue like this. I think if I had the time, which I don’t, I would 

list all the other issues they should be working with us on. But 

today I’m very pleased that they are going to work with us on 

this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Housing 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

once again to the Minister of Northern Affairs. The minister 

knows very well of some of the atrocious conditions of housing 

for many elders and many people in northern Saskatchewan and 

throughout the province. A call for a complete inspection of 

some of the houses and a need for housing for seniors must be 

undertaken. There is no doubt that this inspection will show 

major, major problems in housing many elders in northern 

Saskatchewan and the rest of the province. 

 

Will the minister commit to doing this study and develop a 

made-in-Saskatchewan housing strategy and program to help 

seniors live in decent housing, especially in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, what we don’t need is 

another study. We know the devastating effects of Liberal 

policy in northern Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  We know the over $100 million cuts in 

education, social services, and health. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

also know that in social housing, they’ve completely gone 

away. We’ve built the last 15 houses, I mentioned yesterday. 

 

Also in regards to off-reserve Indian people, they have 

completely neglected their treaty obligations and have no 

housing, you know, off reserve. So when you look at the policy 

of the federal government, it is indeed devastating in regards to 

the North for the children and the elders. 

 

And I would like to get the member to write a letter and send a 

letter to Chrétien and the other people and the MP (Member of 

Parliament), and quit the jigging and do some action in regards 

to housing in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure of 

Information related to Individuals who Pose a Significant 

Risk of Serious Harm to Other Persons 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

the Public Disclosure of Information related to Individuals who 

Pose a Significant Risk of Serious Harm to Other Persons be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave to move a motion 

pursuant to rule 46. 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member has requested leave to 

introduce a motion under rule 46. I’ll ask the hon. member from 

Moosomin to very briefly describe  order  to very briefly 

describe to the House the reason why he believes it should be 

considered in a priority way and also to advise the House of the 

motion that he wishes to introduce. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Indian Land Claims Tax Loss Compensation 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I stated 

a few moments ago in question period, SARM and many 

individual rural municipalities are becoming increasingly 

concerned about specific land claims. 

 

And the fact that Ottawa has reneged on its commitment to 

provide municipalities with twenty-two and a half times the 

previous year’s taxes for any land purchased through specific 

land claims. 

 

Therefore I would move, seconded by the member from 

Rosthern, that: 

 

This Assembly join with SARM in calling on the federal 

government to honour its 1991 commitment to treat 

specific land claims in an equivalent manner to treaty land 

claims and to provide 22.5 times the previous year’s taxes 

on any land purchased under specific land claims. 

 

And further, that this Assembly transmit transcripts of the 

debate on this motion to Prime Minister Chrétien and 

federal Indian Affairs minister, Ron Irwin, for their 

consideration. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member from Moosomin has 

advised the House of a motion he wishes to move under rule 

46. Leave is required. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will 

make my remarks brief today so that other concerned members 

can add their voice to mine. It was certainly a pleasure the other 

evening to stand in this Assembly and enter into debate with the 

Minister of Indian and Native Affairs in this province regarding 

the issue, and seeking guidance of the province at that time, and 

assuring the minister that our caucus was more than prepared to 

work with this government in pursuing this matter with the 

federal government because of the fact that it creates such a 

major concern to the people of this province. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, being a rural member  and many of the 

colleagues in this Assembly come from rural Saskatchewan  

we’re members, ratepayers, in rural municipalities. And as more 

and more land is eaten up to honour specific land claims and 

treaty land entitlement claims, Mr. Speaker, more and more of 

this land falls out of the jurisdiction of rural municipalities and 

the ability to levy taxes against that land — that land on which 

taxes were raised for a number of years. 

 

And these taxes were put towards services that were offered by 

rural municipalities to their residents, such as providing a road 

service or providing health or even educational services. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we hear SARM, the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities, and many local 

municipalities  especially those who are being seriously and 

significantly affected by this lack of inaction by the federal 

government at this time  it becomes a major concern. 

 

Because what happens at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, is 

those individual ratepayers left remaining or living in a 

municipality are  and fewer and fewer acres  are then left 

to pay a bigger and bigger or a larger portion of the tax, carry 

the tax burden in those municipalities. 

 

So I believe it’s very important that this Assembly, in view of 

the fact that so much of this land settlement claim is involved in 

Saskatchewan, that a lot of the land treaty . . . treaty land 

entitlement lands are involved in this province, affect rural 

municipalities. And in that case, Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge 

that the federal government have agreed to a compensation 

package. 

 

But the specific land claims is the issue that is really coming to 

the forefront as more and more land is being picked up by 

Indians on reserves in order to settle specific land claims. And 

there has been no agreement thus far that would acknowledge 

the seriousness of the reduction from twenty-two and a half 

times the last tax assessment to five times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any RM, any rural administrator  and the rural 

administrators were meeting in the city just this past week  

will tell you that when you’re reduced from twenty-two and a 

half times to five, that that dollar becomes a pittance in regards 

to the cost to providing the services. 

 

And I would like to just read a bit of a portion of a letter that we 

received from one RM. And this is what the letter says: 

 

It is not up to the local taxpayers to pay the debts owed to 

Indian people by the Government of Canada. This is in fact 

what will occur if sufficient compensation is not made to 

municipalities for the loss of assessment. 

 

Services still have to be provided to the lands given reserve 

status as the land is being purchased on a checkerboard 

basis, which results in small parcels here and there. The 

municipality still has to provide roads to the lands. 

 

The amount of compensation that is currently being  



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

offered to municipalities by the federal government is an 

insult. Five times the previous year’s municipal tax will 

run out in a very short time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is just one of many letters that we have 

received in our office. And I’m sure that the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs and certainly the Minister of Indian and 

Native Affairs in this province has also received copies of these 

letters that have been sent by rural municipalities to the federal 

minister bringing this problem to their attention. 

 

And so we want this Assembly, and we’ve asked the 

government to. . . and indicated to the government and to the 

members involved that we’re more than willing. I think it’s time 

that this Assembly show the municipalities in this province that 

we are more than willing to get behind them and to back them 

in their lobby to the federal government to meet this need. 

Because as I said earlier, while it becomes a problem to the 

ratepayers of the province, it also becomes the problem to 

taxpayers in general in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on many occasions I have written  myself 

personally  to the federal minister, Mr. Ron Irwin, and, Mr. 

Speaker, so far the responses coming back have been anything 

but positive. In fact they haven’t been very supportive 

whatsoever. And I am sure that even as the minister 

acknowledged today, at meetings that they have had with the 

federal minister, I’m sure they’re beginning to feel a little 

somewhat discouraged at the inaction and the way the minister 

has been dealing with this problem. It’s almost as if: well 

you’re from Saskatchewan; you’re so far out west. 

Saskatchewan really isn’t a very big player on the federal scene; 

it really doesn’t matter to us. That’s your problem down the 

road. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the problem is not ours. The 

problem is the federal government’s for not having honoured 

years and years ago these treaty land entitlements and making 

sure that all of those entitlements were agreed to. That problem 

is going to become a provincial problem when it should not be, 

ought not to be. 

 

(1430) 

 

And that’s why it is very important that the members of this 

Assembly stand in their places today and move that everyone 

agree, and we move this motion indicating that we are in 

support of our local governments, our local ratepayers, the 

taxpayers across this province, telling the federal government 

that they have a responsibility and it's time they lived up to that 

responsibility. And it certainly would be fair, Mr. Speaker, for 

them to honour the Swain agreement which was calculated at 

22.5 times the previous year’s municipal taxes. 

 

What’s worse, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal government has 

threatened to unilaterally declare reserve status even though an 

agreement has not been reached. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 

completely unacceptable. The federal government has paid 

tax-loss compensation to rural municipalities for treaty land 

entitlement which amounts to twenty-two and a half times the 

previous year’s taxes. Why not on specific land claims? 

Mr. Speaker, the tax loss is the same for municipalities in both 

cases. So why isn’t the compensation the same? 

 

One way or another, Mr. Speaker, rural roads must be kept up, 

services must be provided on or off specific land-claims land. 

Twenty-two and a half is the minimum required to adequately 

compensate municipalities for the tax-loss revenue that is 

necessary to continue to provide the services that are demanded 

from municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the federal government does not live up to its 

agreement, what will be the result? Local taxpayers will be left 

to make up for the shortfall lost through specific land claims, 

and they shouldn’t be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) in this Assembly to stand up for Saskatchewan 

municipalities and support the following motion, seconded by 

my colleague from Rosthern: 

 

That this Assembly join with the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities in calling on the 

federal government to honour its 1991 commitment to treat 

specific land claims in an equivalent manner to treaty land 

claims, and to provide 22.5 times the previous year’s taxes 

on any land purchased under specific land claims. 

 

And further, that this Assembly transmit copies or 

transcripts of the debate on this motion to Prime Minister 

Chrétien and federal Indian Affairs minister, Ron Irwin, 

for their consideration. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is an issue of 

great concern to municipalities across the province. Difficulties 

that municipalities are experiencing just seem to mount on a 

daily basis, and it’s important to note that our debate here has 

nothing to do . . . or does not discourage specific land claims, of 

process in general. It doesn’t address that issue and was not 

intended to address that issue. 

 

These are long-outstanding injustices to our native people, and 

these claims are fair and just compensation to them. However, 

when resolving disputes in a civil society, we must try to reach 

a balance. Two wrongs do not make a right. In making our best 

efforts to be fair to native people, we should not be committing 

another injustice on another group in society, and that is what is 

happening with these two different rates of adjustment. 

 

Yet this is clearly what the federal Liberal government is doing. 

It is not the Indian bands who are undermining the 

municipalities. It is the federal government that is doing so 

through its heavy-handed, duplicitous, and unfair approach to 

negotiating with municipalities. 

 

We’ve heard a lot in the House over the years about the critical 

need to restore the public’s faith in government. The federal 

Liberals haven’t apparently received that particular message. 

Time and again the Liberals have shown their willingness to 

mislead the public. On a larger, national level we have seen  



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

them break their word to voters over their solemn vow to 

eliminate the GST (goods and services tax) and this is just 

another thing that’s been added to that. 

 

It is significant to remember the words of Sheila Copps when 

she was pressed over her promise to resign. She said, I can’t be 

held responsible for some loose-lipped promise during an 

election. Well it seems here is another loose-lipped promise and 

I think someone needs to be held responsible for this one as 

well. 

 

This is a depressing commentary on the contempt with which 

the federal Liberals hold voters  promise them anything 

during the election and don’t worry about actually keeping your 

word. This attitude has reared its ugly head here again with the 

specific land claims issue. The Swain agreement of 1991 bound 

the government to pay municipalities 22.5 times the assessment 

on lands sold through specific land claims. 

 

But the federal attitude is that this is just some broken promise 

 promises can be broken and loose lips will continue to wag. 

The federal Liberals have the gall to call the new formula fair 

and reasonable. It is simply impossible to understand how they 

can make this assertion, and call this fair and reasonable when 

it’s okay to go ahead and pay back 22.5 per cent on one area of 

land claims and not on this one. If it’s fair on one, it’s fair on 

both. 

 

If it is fair under TLE (treaty land entitlements), why isn’t it fair 

under specific land claims? Even a minor variation could 

perhaps be understandable, if for example the federal 

government had reduced the rate to 20 times the assessment or 

something in that vicinity. 

 

The new rate of 5 times assessment is just bizarre. It is nowhere 

even in the ballpark. If what this money is supposed to do is be 

part of a fund from which municipalities can draw to make up 

the losses of revenue, there is no way that 5 times the 

assessment makes up any kind of a fund that becomes 

anywheres near addressing the problems and the shortfalls that 

are there. 

 

If anything, the needs of municipalities under specific land 

claims are even more important than those affected by treaty 

land entitlements. Specific land claims are not being purchased 

in large blocks of land, but rather comprise a parcel here and a 

parcel there. And this creates a situation in which the problems 

that RMs have to face as they’re operating their systems are 

much greater than they were before. 

 

Specific land claims are not being purchased in large blocks. 

Under TLE many roads and infrastructure systems would be 

transferred directly to the control of the bands, thus taking 

financial pressure off of the affected RMs. Under specific land 

claims, the RMs will still be on the hook for roads connecting 

the scattered parcels. 

 

But this is not just an issue of convenience or administration for 

the municipalities. It is fundamentally a taxpayer issue and an 

issue of tax fairness. Through the upcoming reassessment 

process and through the offloading being endured by municipal  

governments, local taxpayers are already going to see their 

property taxes rise dramatically over the next few years. So the 

SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) 

situation creates a problem for the RMs. 

 

Along come the situation with the Crow rate being gone, 

increased use of roadways, the highways, so the RMs have a 

problem there of keeping up the roads. When we add to this 

another situation, and that is that the funding that they receive 

has been decreased, the situation that RMs find themselves in 

becomes totally impossible. This move by the federal Liberals 

will dramatically worsen this already grave situation. The RMs 

will be forced to turn to non-native population to pick up the 

burden caused by this unfair settlement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tax burden that this will cause will make some 

areas virtually unliveable. We have in this province reached a 

point where businesses and individuals have become so 

overtaxed that many have concluded it just doesn’t make any 

sense to continue to live and operate a business here. And when 

we’re concerned about opportunities in Saskatchewan, we’re 

concerned about rural Saskatchewan and its population. This is 

just a number of more nails in the coffin, not just one. Now 

many rural residents will find their land taxes so outrageous that 

it will be uneconomical to operate even the most prosperous 

farms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this move by the federal Liberals will lead to 

further devastation and depopulation of our rural areas. For 

those residents left in the affected RMs, it will mean 

substandard municipal services and an overall decline in the 

quality of life, which has always been one of the main drawing 

cards of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, although this is a relatively touchy 

subject, it should also be noted that this will also lead to ethnic 

tensions in our rural areas, as residents see their taxes go 

through the roof in order to subsidize native land claims which, 

in this case, the problem belongs totally to the federal 

government. 

 

The serious implications of this situation cannot be overstated. I 

would urge all members to send a powerful message to the 

federal Liberal government by supporting this motion. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would also join the third party. In being a past reeve, I know 

how difficult this is with the land that is being purchased by 

Indian bands and then taken out of, removed from, the 

assessment that would be taxable and the people left within 

these RMs are left to pick up the tab. Ratepayers left in the RMs 

will have to pick up the whole cost of services such as building 

roads, maintaining roads, fire protection, and it just goes on and 

on. The more land that the Indian bands buy up, the bigger the 

problem is created for the people that are left. So in that respect 

we join with the third party and the members opposite, if they 

see fit to join also. 

 

It is hard for me to understand, as a past reeve, and when I was 

the reeve that . . . how the federal government could in the first  



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

wisdom commit twenty-two and a half times the assessment and 

feel that that was needed to adequately cover the replacement 

for taxation that was lost for the treaty land entitlement, and 

now the second time around, they’re offering 5.5 times and 

considering this was fair. 

 

Being involved in council, there was no rhyme or reason for 

this at all. When 22.5 times is invested by SARM, as it is in this 

case, it is adequate to replace the lost taxes. But, Mr. Speaker, 

5.5 times doesn’t even come close to covering what we would 

need and RMs would need to go on from there. 

 

So all I really have to say, Mr. Speaker, is that we would join 

any initiative of the third party and the members opposite, if 

they see so fit to join, and put pressure on the federal 

government to compensate all Indian land purchases at the first 

22.5 times, including both specific land claims and the treaty 

land entitlement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

note this rare moment in the House when we’re all in unity on 

this particular issue. And that, I guess, illustrates what an 

important issue it is for all of us in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The matter of the specific claims — I just want to make sure for 

any members who might not totally understand the difference 

between specific claims and treaty land entitlements. 

 

Specific claims are just between the federal government and 

first nations. They arise in situations where the federal 

government wrongly took reserve land from a first nation, 

which is different from the treaty land entitlement, in which the 

province is obliged to provide Crown land to the federal 

government to help them meet their obligations to first nations, 

promised through the treaties. So the significance of this issue 

crossing partisan boundaries suggests that people are very 

concerned about this issue being resolved. 

 

We had a memorandum of understanding on specific claims 

that established a steering committee consisting of the secretary 

of Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat, the regional director of 

Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, to address provincial and 

municipal issues arising from the creation of new reserves 

through specific claims. However as was suggested, this is an 

issue that has moved off of what we felt to be the original 

agreement. 

 

Despite the best efforts, senior officials from the Saskatchewan 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat, myself, the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, SARM, have been unable to get any 

movement on this issue from the federal government. Now we 

understand the kind of problem it creates for them because of 

course Saskatchewan is not the only place where these 

problems exist. And there would probably be some possibility 

of being some kind of an equivalent solution as opposed to 

being very hard-nosed about it being an identical solution to the 

treaty land entitlement issue, because of course our final 

objective is to help get sufficient infrastructure support to the 

municipalities to address the kinds of issues that the former two 

speakers have raised. 

 

So I do think it’s good that the members of this House will send 

a united message. Perhaps all the voices in unison will be able 

to be heard. And I just want to end today by indicating my 

support for the motion. And perhaps we would have to sit down 

subsequently and talk about whether there is further efforts we 

might make in unity on this issue. So thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 

comments on the motion that is presented today in the 

Assembly. I think the key thing when we stand up and speak on 

this issue, every effort of helping Saskatchewan communities 

must be made. And this effort of course is no different. We feel 

that if there is a legitimate claim to a certain agreement, then we 

must make sure we follow through with it with those type of 

resolutions. 

 

I think the key thing that was raised in one of the points here 

was the issue of ethnic tensions. And I think from the 

perspective of being an aboriginal person, I think it’s very 

important that we realize the first thing we must do is you must 

consult with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations) on matters of this nature, just to make them aware that 

this is not an anti-Indian move. 

 

And we must also consult with them and to advise them that we 

understand fiduciary and of course the treaty land entitlement 

obligations that the senior federal government owes to the first 

nations. And of course the history is there and there’s many 

legal documentation that certainly justifies their position that 

they were owed land and that the land should go to them. 

 

And I don’t believe that this particular issue deals with that. I 

think this issue  as long as we understand that nothing in this 

motion or nothing in the effort of the Conservative Party to 

promote ethnic tensions is being undertaken in this Bill  then 

certainly it would be in our interest to support that effort. 

 

Again I talk about obligations; I talk about helping out 

Saskatchewan communities; I talk about understanding and 

respecting each other; and I think every first nation member 

across this province certainly wishes to do that. 

 

The real issue here  and I want to make it clear from the 

perspective that I understand  is that there has been some 

disagreement on the compensation of tax loss, from 22 times to 

5 times, the federal government’s making back to the RMs. And 

if that’s the case then certainly we have to make every effort to 

support that particular argument. 

 

I urge all people involved, the Liberal Party, the Conservative 

Party, and the NDP Party, to make every effort to stay on top of 

this issue, deal with the FSIN, consult with them, and make 

them fully aware of the impact and the potential for this Bill to 

help all Saskatchewan residents out. If this Bill  or this 

motion  does not in any way, shape, or form hamper the 

efforts of the first nations; if this Bill does not in any way,  



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

shape, or form penalize the first nations as a result of their 

settlement and of their obligations owed to them; if this motion 

does in no way, shape, or form threaten the integrity and the 

right to self-govern among the first nations, then certainly 

myself as an aboriginal member of this House will support that. 

 

I think the RMs certainly have a case here. They have a 

tremendous amount of responsibility to fulfil. We heard the 

member from Saltcoats indicate the incredible amount of work 

that they do for their people and for their area. 

 

And the key thing here is again, I cannot stress the degree of 

cooperation and consultation that must be undertaken. And I 

can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that many people in the first 

nations community would probably end up supporting this  

saying that yes, if there is ways and means that we can bridge 

the gap of misunderstanding between all of our peoples, then 

certainly every effort must be undertaken to assure the province 

of Saskatchewan of that. 

 

So again, in reference to this particular motion, I see nothing 

significantly wrong with it and certainly I support it as well. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t really 

anticipating getting into this debate today, but it seems 

appropriate that we should because there’s so much at stake for 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to first of all thank the member from Athabasca for 

straightening out some of the misunderstandings that certainly 

could have gone with this particular kind of an effort, because 

obviously our intent here is to discuss the obligations for treaty 

settlements, not in terms of what those obligations are but as a 

result of what is going to happen after the fact. 

 

We do not want to enter into a discussion at this point about 

those obligations. Realistically though, when those obligations 

are fulfilled, as they have been, there are always repercussions 

on the next parties involved. Things sort of run downhill like 

water out on the prairies these days. 

 

I want to say that it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, because, as 

I’ve spent some time recently out in the country talking to 

farmers and ranchers who have gone through one of the 

toughest and longest winters that they’ve had in a long time, 

and now a very tough and wet spring, the analogy comes to 

mind that it’s a lot like a farmer carrying a logging chain over 

his two shoulders as he plods through the mud to his tractor to 

try to pull out a rig that’s stuck in the mud. That chain probably 

weighs about 75 or 100 pounds, and now you’ve added another 

50 pounds of mud to that chain, and it becomes even that much 

harder to drag along. 

 

And this is the situation that our municipalities are finding 

themselves in. They’re being downloaded upon by every 

segment of our society, and as they struggle to try to survive 

and to continue to provide the services and the goods that 

they’ve provided in the past, this chain becomes ever more 

loaded with more mud and becomes heavier around their neck 

and drags them down even further. 

And this is yet another pound of mud added to that load, as we 

watch the federal government attempt to manipulate and to 

contrive different ways of wiggling out of their share of the 

responsibilities that they had promised to take forward in their 

alluding to these problems in past days when the elections, of 

course, were closer at hand and it seemed more important to 

appear to be generous than it does now, after the fact. The 

elections soon are over and the promises are soon forgotten. 

And it’s too bad, but it certainly is seeming to be more and 

more that way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so we would say to the federal government that wiggling 

and manipulating and contriving methods of downloading your 

responsibilities from 22 per cent to 5 per cent is unacceptable, 

and we in this province have recognized that’s exactly what 

you’re doing, and we’re saying so. And we’re saying so loud 

and clear. We know it. We understand it. 

 

And we’re pointing our finger this time at Ottawa, and we’re 

saying get your act in . . . get yourselves shaped up. Get back 

into reality here. Don’t try to pull the wool over our eyes any 

longer. We want what is fair and what is right and what is 

proper. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, just very briefly, that when this kind 

of a downloading attack comes on rural Saskatchewan once 

again, there are all kinds of implications that have to be dealt 

with and have to be considered.  

 

We’ve just recently heard that the municipalities are going to be 

downloaded on with 25 per cent cuts in a lot of their transfer 

payments for next year from federal to provincial. 

 

We find our municipalities plagued by other problems  the 

rail line abandonments are definitely now a reality. We’re 

within five or six years of some very significant problems that 

are going to happen out in rural Saskatchewan as a result of the 

changes to our infrastructure and the loads that are being 

transported. 

 

We’re seeing SAMA as a major, major contributor to the 

problems that municipalities are suffering. This major 

contribution of problems is going to come in part through the 

changes that we’re listening to and hearing about. Those 

changes such as the corporate windfalls that our oil and gas 

industries are going to experience as a result of the changes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are all things that add to that pile on 

the camel’s back. The straw that breaks the camel’s back has to 

be coming very close. And what is it really all about? What are 

all these cuts to the RMs really all about? What are they going 

to result in? 

 

Is it going to result in the forced amalgamation of 

municipalities because there are no more people left? Will it be 

a forced amalgamation of municipalities because they will no 

longer be able to sustain the load of responsibilities and no 

longer will have the money to work with? Will it cause 

amalgamation simply because there’s no other way that you can 

handle all of the red tape and bookwork of manipulating all of 

these problems except to have master computers in the big city  



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

handling and pumping out all of the information that needs to 

be assembled? Do we have million-dollar computers sitting in 

Regina ready to take over all of the rural infrastructure? 

 

These questions all come back to mind, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve 

heard them all before. But yet again we find ourselves in a 

situation where rural municipalities are being unloaded on from 

atop and from afar now, as well as from nearby. And even 

though the problem comes from further away, it is no less 

important. And it is no less important that our provincial 

government also listen to the lesson that is being discussed here 

today. 

 

Because as surely as they have alluded to the fact that they will 

join us in this effort, as surely as they would do that, they must 

understand that their own downloading is causing exactly the 

same effects on rural people and on rural municipalities. Now it 

is no greater a sin from Ottawa to download on rural people in 

Saskatchewan than it is for our own provincial government to 

do the very same thing through another context, through 

another variation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we have to look at this as a very 

important issue that needs to be dealt with in itself, and will be, 

and we are glad to hear that the other two parties are going to 

support this initiative. But we would also extend the olive 

branch one step further in the hope that the provincial 

government will now accept the challenge of recognizing the 

needs and the concerns of rural Saskatchewan and also cut back 

on some of their cut-backs that they are passing on to rural 

municipalities as well. 

 

And so we thank them for their support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The division bells rang from 2:57 p.m. until 3:05 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  41 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell MacKinnon 

Lingenfelter Shillington Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Goulet 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Calvert Pringle Koenker 

Trew Bradley Lorje 

Teichrob Nilson Stanger 

Hamilton Murray Langford 

Wall Ward Sonntag 

Flavel Thomson Osika 

Aldridge McLane Draude 

McPherson Bjornerud Julé 

Krawetz Gantefoer Toth 

Heppner Goohsen  

 

Nays  nil 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that the 

records show that this vote was nemine contradicente. 

The Speaker:  Nemine contradicente. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We will convert question no. 94. 

 

The Speaker:  The question no. 94 is converted to motions 

for returns (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We table the answer to question no. 

95. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question no. 95 is tabled. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

The Speaker:  The motion for return is converted to motions 

for returns (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 

for me to speak today, and at the end of my remarks I will be 

moving second reading of The Election Act, 1996. 

 

Canadians all realize how privileged they are to live in one of 

the world’s great democracies. And we are all conscious of the 

fact that the price of democracy is vigilance to ensure that our 

democracy remains in good working order and that any 

circumstances which impede the operation  the smooth 

operation  of the democracy are addressed and resolved. 

 

If you reflect on the nature of democracy, Mr. Speaker, you are 

able to easily identify a large number of principles. You’re able 

to identify basic values. And you’re able to identify institutions 

that, taken together, form the heart and soul, the bone, the 

muscle of our democracy. And at the root of it all  at the root 

of it all  is the right of the people to go to the ballot box and 

vote for a representative of their own choosing to represent 

them in an Assembly such as this. 

 

That is a fundamental right upon which all of the institutions 

and all of the principles that I referred to earlier are based. The 

right of the people to vote is a fundamental principle and it is 

given expression in The Election Act of this province, this 

country, and all of the jurisdictions in this country. 

 

We have not revisited our election law since 1971. We have 

amended it on two occasions in material respects, but we have 

not done a revision of the Act in a comprehensive way since 

1971. So, Mr. Speaker, it is high time we did. 

 

And this Bill that I speak to today, all 172 pages of it, 

represents the product of over a year’s work by various officials 

and by various members of this Assembly in order to bring our  



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

election law up to date and to ensure that our citizens’ basic 

democratic right to vote for their representatives is made as 

accessible and meaningful and true and honest as it is possible 

to do. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill represents the result of 

an intensive process of consultation with my colleagues in the 

official opposition, with my colleagues in the third party, with 

the independent member, and of course with colleagues on this 

side of the House. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in my 10 

years of experience in this House, the level of consultation here 

is unprecedented, and the cooperative spirit with which these 

various issues were faced and were resolved is also 

unprecedented. And I want to express publicly my gratitude, the 

gratitude of the government, for the approach that the two 

opposition parties took to the consultation process that have 

resulted in the tabling of this Bill. 

 

I want to just go beyond that and mention a few of the members 

who went above and beyond their normal responsibilities in 

order to produce this piece of legislation. From the government 

caucus, the member for Saskatoon Northwest, Chair of the 

caucus committee, spent so many hours on this, Mr. Speaker, 

that it is mind-boggling. I might also mention, as stalwart 

workers on the project, my seat-mate from Regina Victoria, the 

member for Regina Coronation Park, the member for Meadow 

Lake, and the member for Regina Wascana Plains. Now as 

usual when you’re singling people out, you probably 

overlooked somebody, but those are the names that occur to me 

as I stand here. 

 

And from the official opposition, the Leader of the Opposition, 

the member from Melville; and the House Leader, the member 

for Wood River, were very cooperative, came to lengthy 

meetings and participated in very constructive discussions about 

this Act. 

 

While I’m talking about the official opposition, I might mention 

their Liberal provincial party and Emmet Reidy and his staff 

who also contributed to the discussion and debate. 

 

From the third party, the member from Moosomin was the main 

contact, as well as the Leader of the Third Party, the member 

from Kindersley; and the staff of the provincial Conservative 

Party, Tom Lukiwski and his staff. All of these people worked 

together, Mr. Speaker, in a collaborative, cooperative way in 

order to produce the Bill that is before the House today. 

 

Now having said all that, we do not have perfect unanimity on 

all the provisions. Each of the two opposition parties have a 

major reservation about the Bill. And they will, in due course, 

no doubt be bringing that to your attention, Mr. Speaker. But 

apart from the one issue in the case of each of the parties, we 

were able to obtain a consensus with respect to the . . . we were 

able to obtain agreement with respect to the provisions of the 

Act. 

 

What we have tried to do in this Act, Mr. Speaker, is to draw on 

the collective experience of all of us working under the old 

legislation. Many of the people in this Chamber have had a 

great deal of experience in elections and have encountered  

problems with the Act. These were identified and we set about 

trying to rectify them, trying to make the system work better. 

 

(1515) 

 

We also were acutely conscious of the fact that the old Act was 

not user-friendly in any sense of the term. You could take 

almost any kind of a simple question and find yourself referring 

to two or three or four sections of the Act contained in different 

parts of the Act. And it was confusing, far from clear, and 

difficult to work with. We have in this Bill attempted to remedy 

that problem. We’ve attempted to produce a piece of legislation 

that is user-friendly. 

 

We think we have here a piece of legislation which, in answer 

to a question that a campaign worker may have, will produce an 

immediate answer by referring them to a section number or a 

page number and the answer ought to be right there. No longer 

will it be necessary for people to work their way through the 

Act to try and ensure that they’ve found all of the sections 

which may be relevant to a particular problem that they have 

encountered. 

 

The themes of the Act that we all discussed and tried to keep in 

mind as this went along were, first of all, democratic reform — 

which is the thrust of my remarks so far — to ensure that the 

Act promotes the fundamental principles of democracy, ensures 

that the right to vote is a right that is accessible, that can be 

exercised, where circumstances don’t accidentally deprive 

someone of their right to vote. And I think we’ve gone great 

lengths in achieving substantial improvement in the 

accessibility of the right to vote for the people of our province 

no matter what their circumstances. 

 

I intend to just refer to a number of those principles a little later 

on in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, but at this point I just want to 

say that that was one of the guiding principles that was on all of 

our minds as we approached this question. 

 

The second theme was the question of accountability, and it 

was the intention of all of us to ensure that there was increased 

accountability for all of the people in the system, all the way 

from the Chief Electoral Officer, through the candidates, to the 

business managers of the various campaigns, to the provincial 

parties, and so on. And I think we have made substantial 

improvements to the Act in that respect. 

 

The third theme that we gave expression to were to enunciate 

clearer rules respecting expenditures  the expenditures that 

would be included in calculating the amount of money spent in 

individual campaigns and clearer rules respecting the 

entitlement to rebate for election expenses. We have tried as 

much as is possible to remove discretionary elements from the 

Act and ensure that the Act itself, without the benefit of 

anyone’s interpretation, will define whether or not an expense is 

or is not rebatable, is or is not to be included in the maximum 

expenditure limits. 

 

Those were the three themes, Mr. Speaker. I now want to turn 

to some of the principles that have been addressed in the Act. 

And I will briefly refer to some of the most important ones. 



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

In the election of 1995, members will recall that there were 

forest fires across northern Saskatchewan, and a large number 

of people were involved in fighting those forest fires. And it 

turned out that for many of them they found themselves going 

into the fire before any advance poll opened, not to return to 

their homes until after the election was over. And the system 

was powerless to give them a right to vote. Now that was 

unacceptable to all parties in this legislature and there are 

provisions in the Bill that address that problem and ensure that, 

through mobile polls, the Chief Electoral Officer will be able to 

ensure that people in those circumstances have a right to vote. 

 

We have expanded the concept of absentee ballots from what 

has been in the Act for some years, with respect, for example, to 

people in hospitals, to cover all manner of circumstances where 

people find themselves away from home on election day. 

 

I think as I say that of the people in Sandy Bay in 1995 who, 

because of a forest fire threat to their community, were 

evacuated and were in Saskatoon on election day. Under the 

provisions of the old law there was no way in which those 

people could cast a ballot that could be counted in that election; 

they were disenfranchised. They were done so through 

circumstances entirely beyond their control. This Act, through 

the technique of an absentee ballot, will remedy that situation. 

 

We have, all of us, encountered situations where a disabled 

person in a wheelchair is unable to get into a polling station 

because, no matter how hard we try, there are some polling 

stations in this province in each election which are not 

wheelchair accessible. We have resolved that problem by 

provisions that will allow the ballot box to be taken out to the 

individual voter who is in a wheelchair. 

 

I want to mention one other thing, Mr. Speaker, that is a 

substantial departure in principle from what previously has been 

the law of this province, and that is the preparation of voters’ 

lists. All of us have experienced the enumeration that goes on 

after an election writ is dropped and I’ll briefly describe it; 

although as I do so, I know that we’re all aware of it. 

 

A lot of people hit the street enumerating. And for about two 

weeks there is a frenetic  a frenetic level of activity in all the 

constituencies of this province as they attempt to cobble 

together a voters’ list. The political parties in the meantime are 

waiting impatiently for this list because so much of the election 

campaign activity depends upon the presence of a voters’ list. 

And so that’s usually not available until the campaign is about 

half over. 

 

And the system doesn’t work to the satisfaction of everyone. 

We wind up with lists that are unsatisfactory and incomplete. 

It’s not through the fault of anybody; it’s just the pressure of 

time produces that result. 

 

And at the same time we, in our campaigns, are hobbled, are 

disadvantaged by the fact that we don’t have information 

available to us which is necessary for us to properly conduct our 

campaign. 

 

The principle that we have embedded in this Act, Mr. Speaker, 

is that the Chief Electoral Officer, in consultation with all 

parties in the legislature, may conduct an enumeration outside 

the period of the writ. And it is our thought that that would be 

done in advance of an election period so that, say, if an election 

is foreseen to be in June of ’99 or thereafter, theoretically an 

enumeration could be conducted in March of ’99. 

 

And that could be conducted at a more leisurely pace, in a more 

thorough way, with a more complete briefing of enumerators, 

and produce a voters’ list that is of higher quality than the one 

we now get; with time to conduct the revisions and the reviews 

that are necessary in order to have a good voters’ list available 

to the political parties at the time that the writ is dropped. 

 

We also look forward to the day, Mr. Speaker, when voters’ 

lists will be generated in a different way. Not to say that 

enumeration won’t take place, but enumeration can be 

supplemented by all sorts of other data which lies in databases 

throughout this province, throughout this country. And 

wherever possible, I believe we will see access to those 

databases in order to confirm and supplement and ensure the 

correctness and the thoroughness of the voters’ lists on the basis 

of which an election is held. 

 

There are many other provisions in the Bill, Mr. Speaker, and it 

wouldn’t be appropriate for me to go into detail during the 

second reading speech, but we may have an opportunity to 

discuss some of those in committee. 

 

I want to say one thing, however, and it is that there is in this 

Bill a provision for tax credit for political contributions. These 

provisions are exactly the same as the existing provisions which 

now exist on the national level. They are not to be proclaimed, 

Mr. Speaker, and I want to say this on the record: they are not 

 those provisions are not  to be proclaimed unless and until 

the federal government repeals the federal provisions. 

 

And if that happens, we think there is a great value to the tax 

credit system for political contributions, and we want to have 

legislation ready for proclamation at the provincial level in the 

event that the federal provisions are repealed. But I want to say 

again that we do not intend to implement or to proclaim those 

sections so long as the federal law continues in effect. 

 

So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in closing, that I believe we offer 

to this Assembly a piece of legislation which does the job that 

is required of it. I believe that in consequence our democracy in 

this province is strengthened because the right to vote has been 

safeguarded and indeed promoted in the way that I have 

described, and because the rules are stated in a more clear, more 

precise manner, not subject to interpretation but spelled out in 

such a way that everybody will be able to understand what the 

rules are. 

 

I want to say again, Mr. Speaker, how grateful I and my 

colleagues are for the level of collaboration and cooperation 

that we received from the official opposition and from the third 

party as work on this Bill progressed. 

 

It is my honour, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of The  



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

Election Act, 1996. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, obviously 

Bill No. 92 is a very long and detailed piece of legislation, so 

after some brief remarks today I’ll be asking for adjournment so 

that we can have more time to study the Bill in its entirety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Election Act has not been updated in a 

quarter of a century and so we believe it is time to make some 

much-needed changes in the Act. Most of the changes 

contained in Bill 92 we are in full support of. Obviously the 

right to cast a ballot in a general election is the cornerstone of 

our democracy and anything we can do to make the act of 

voting more convenient for people should be applauded. 

 

The notion of absentee ballots and mobile polls I believe is a 

good one since it will give more people a greater opportunity to 

have their say as we elect our government. And, Mr. Speaker, as 

the member from Saskatoon Fairview pointed out, allowing the 

establishment of polls in emergency situations such as we have 

seen last year with the fire-fighters up North who were unable 

to vote, or the residents of communities threatened by the fire, 

and who were also unable to vote, is a move in the right 

direction. 

 

Any changes that prevent such situations from occurring should 

be roundly applauded, Mr. Speaker. As well, I like the fact that 

there is some modernization of the Act. The new Act gives a 

nod to the advent of computerized technologies that simply did 

not exist in the early 1970s. It simply did not make sense not to 

allow these technologies to be used. 

 

As well, we like the idea of enumeration outside of the writ 

period and the movements towards the establishment of a 

permanent voters’ list. This will not only ensure the accuracy of 

the voters’ list, it will also, I believe, save money in the long 

run. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the official opposition does have some concerns 

with The Election Act however. One of our gravest concerns 

comes from the clause that allows Crown corporations to 

advertise during election campaigns. While the Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education’s reasoning behind the move makes 

sense, I believe the clause leaves this or future governments 

open to abuse the Act. I think this portion has to be tightened 

up. 

 

Yes, we realize our Crowns are in a competitive world, but we 

must also ensure our electoral process remains absolutely fair. 

As we’ve seen with past governments in this province, when 

you give some politicians an inch they sometimes try to take a 

mile. So I don’t want to see that that . . . I want to see that that 

doesn’t happen. So we’ll vigorously debate against that clause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill also tries to clear up some of the 

confusion related to election-related expenses. I don’t think any 

of the members of the House would disagree that the provisions 

in the current Act are confusing and are hard to follow. This has 

led to some great delays in election refunds to some candidates.  

I think clearing up these provisions will be a big help. 

 

We were however disappointed to see the government did not 

take our suggestion to allow election-related expenses incurred 

outside of the writ period to be eligible for the refund. This 

would not cost the taxpayers any more money since the 

allowable limit would remain the same, but it would remove 

some of the imbalance that currently exists in our system. We 

believe the current system, that allows only those expenses 

incurred during the election period, to favour sitting members 

of the legislature. Therefore, it favours the governing party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like I said, this is a long and very detailed Bill. 

The remarks I have offered today only touch on a few aspects of 

the Bill. We’ll have more to say at a later date once we have a 

chance to study the Bill closer. And now, Mr. Speaker, I move 

we adjourn debate on Bill 92. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 38  An Act to 

amend The Power Corporation Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I’m 

sure you are aware, we have already spoken at length on this 

Bill. In our previous speeches, we have addressed many of the 

issues that will have a significant impact on the people of this 

province. After further consultations, we have not changed our 

stand. 

 

This Bill includes provisions which are quite simply bad for the 

people of Saskatchewan. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the more 

Bills that this government brings forward, the more we are 

concerned that they are making a calculated grab for control. 

From the municipal Acts, which put more power in the hands of 

the minister, to this Bill which gives SaskPower employees 

more power, this government seems bent on taking control. 

 

I guess this is one instance where the socialist roots still run 

deep, Mr. Speaker. They certainly don’t exist in most of the 

NDP government’s policies. They certainly aren’t evident when 

this government shuts hospitals, cuts back on funding to school 

boards, and continue to watch thousands of children forced to 

live in poverty. 

 

Compassion is a foreign concept to this government. It’s a word 

they pretend to understand, but their actions show indifference 

at best. According to the members opposite, the sick, the 

elderly, and the children of this province can be casually tossed 

aside, all in the names of fiscal restraint. 

 



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess you’d have to call these New 

Democrats selectively socialist. They only revert back to the 

left-wing views when they see a chance to grasp power, and 

Bill 38 is one of those chances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we have previously pointed out, this Bill gives 

SaskPower employees virtually unlimited access to 

Saskatchewan households  unlimited, unlimited access. I 

wonder if the members opposite have even considered what this 

will mean. Think about it. How would they feel if they came 

home one night and discovered that a SaskPower employee had 

been in their house without permission? I think I can answer 

that  violated. That’s how they would feel. And that’s how 

the people of this province will feel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s time that this government started to think about people. It’s 

time for them to extend their limited vision to encompass 

people. It’s time they saw the consequences of every 

short-sighted decision they make. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s time they realized that being elected 

government is not the same thing as being elected God. As we 

know, that position is already filled and I’m sure it’s not filled 

by someone of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m always curious about the relationship between 

Jack Messer and this NDP government. There seems to be a 

whole separate set of rules for SaskPower and I wonder if that’s 

because Mr. Messer pulls the strings behind the scenes. Is this 

Bill something the NDP brought forward because Mr. Messer 

decided things needed to change? Because, Mr. Speaker, I can 

honestly say that I can’t see any other way that members 

opposite would have agreed to bring this piece of legislation 

into this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government can stand up and say that the 

provisions in this Bill that allow SaskPower employees to enter 

residences without permission would only be used in 

emergency situations. And I would like to think that that is 

probably true. Still, the Bill lists a whole number of 

circumstances that would also let SaskPower employees enter 

our houses without permission. 

 

This is where this Bill gets particularly scary. Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite should think about this for awhile. Our 

police don’t even have that right. And our police are likely 

faced with far more circumstances that would warrant this 

power. But the people want a right to privacy and the police and 

our criminal law respects this. Is this government so arrogant 

that it thinks it can vote in legislation that infringes on the right 

to privacy? 

 

And the other thing I find particularly ironic is the provision in 

this Bill that allows SaskPower to cut off electrical services if a 

bill is even 10 days overdue. This from a government who is 

still struggling to get out from under a $14 billion debt. Mr. 

Speaker, 10 days is a ridiculous time limit. What about people 

who have gone on a two-week vacation and are unlucky enough 

to have had the bill arrive while they were away? Is it fair for 

them to come back to a house without power? 

 

It looks like we’re back to the compassionate issue again, Mr. 

Speaker. Once again the government has chosen to treat people 

like they are nothing more than a set amount of money. While 

people in this province are desperately searching for job 

security and full-time, decent-paying jobs, this government has 

decided to concern itself with power bills. I think it’s a sad 

reflection of this government’s priorities. 

 

Instead of looking for ways to create meaningful employment 

and to live up to the promises made in their Speech from the 

Throne they choose to pump up their control in provincial 

legislation. Instead of looking for a better way to maintain 

health care and education they are voting in changes to make 

Jack Messer happy. I ask the members opposite, where are your 

priorities? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just SaskPower employees who are given 

extra authority. The cabinet gets to play God too. If the 

members opposite agree to ram this Bill through, the cabinet 

will have the right to enter anyone’s property or to give this 

authority to any SaskPower employee. What a scary thought. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government’s job, whether they admit it or 

not, is to represent the people, not to repress them. 

Saskatchewan people are not puppets. They do not expect nor 

deserve a government that pulls the strings and talks for them. 

People want to be heard. 

 

When will this government figure that out? Isn’t it enough that 

they heard people throughout this province protest unilateral 

rate hikes last fall? Isn’t it enough that people continue to 

criticize their expensive, regressive Crown tendering policies? 

Isn’t it enough that over 100,000 people have signed petitions 

to protest the closure of the Plains Health Centre? 

 

For any other government the answer would be yes. But this 

government is different. For some unfathomable reason they 

believe that they don’t have to listen to the people. Do they 

think they are smarter? Do they think that people can’t make 

intelligent, well-informed decisions? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, they’re dead wrong. I’ve a lot 

more faith in the people of Saskatchewan. I think they will 

make compassionate, fiscally responsible choices that will 

benefit the province now and into the future. So this 

government doesn’t need to use an iron fist. The people don’t 

want or need a dictator-based government. What the people of 

this province do need is a government that puts people first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot emphasize enough how disturbed we are 

by this Bill and I know that in the constituencies of the 

members opposite people would throw their full support behind 

us on this Bill. Somebody has to stand up for what is right. And 

once again, the members opposite are unable to for fear of 

crossing their party lines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s frustrating. No matter how adamantly we 

protest against some of the measures in this Bill, the 

government will stubbornly stick to its decision. Even if the 

members opposite believe our point of view is valid, they turn 

their backs because it is the political way. 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, we probably can’t prevent the passage of Bill No. 

38. But we will have a number of serious questions about this 

Bill in Committee of the Whole and we will continue to plague 

the government with questions until they think they can justify 

these amendments. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 87  An Act 

to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I regret 

to say we have another example of this government’s misplaced 

efforts. Earlier this session the government introduced Bill 44, a 

Bill to amend The Crown Corporations Act. The purpose of this 

other Bill is to give Crown corporations more powers. In that 

case, the government wants to give the Crowns more freedom 

to invest in whatever companies they want, while also allowing 

them free rein to engage in capital market activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Bill 87, An Act to amend The Power 

Corporation Act (No. 2) we see much the same thing. The 

government decided to pass it off quite nicely in the press as 

just a matter of bringing SaskPower in line with other Crown 

corporations. That, Mr. Speaker, is a complete waste of effort. 

It’s a waste of effort because we have a government focusing 

on gaining more powers for its Crowns instead of dealing with 

the general crisis in the accountability system for those Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Crowns are in a state of limbo, if not a state of 

crisis. We have a government finally suggesting they will start a 

review of the Crowns. While I’m concerned about the cost of 

the review and just how open it will be, the fact the government 

is undertaking it brings attention to this government’s lack of a 

clear, concise strategy for the role it wants its Crowns to play. 

 

Crowns should be there to serve some beneficial purpose to all 

taxpayers. But yet this government has no idea of what purpose 

they should serve at all. Devising one will be an important first 

step. 

 

(1545) 

 

Unfortunately devising a coherent vision and a set of objectives 

for the Crowns is only one half of the story. If we want the 

Crowns to achieve goals, we need to make sure there’s a good 

system of accountability in place to ensure that those goals are 

achieved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this system of accountability that’s in place is far 

too inadequate for the current mixed-enterprise nature of the 

Crowns or even of SaskPower itself. Our Crown sector was  

once a small group of monopoly utilities joined by a host of 

export-oriented resource companies. The government owned 

these companies, and few if any competed with other 

Saskatchewan firms for business in our province. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, things are vastly different. We still own a 

small number of utilities, but now those companies like 

SaskPower are involved in a much wider array of activities and 

are faced with more competition. Often those activities bring 

the company into projects across the globe. Inherent in this 

widening range of activities is a greater risk. Mr. Speaker, what 

the members opposite have to remember is that we are not 

simply talking about greater risk for SaskPower. We are talking 

about greater risk for the owners of the company, and those are 

the taxpayers of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, things changed so drastically that not only is there 

more risk, but the whole web of Crown corporation activity is 

much more complex. Crown corporations like SaskPower have 

subsidiaries and are continuing to create more of them. In 

addition to this, many Crowns take on private partners in joint 

ventures. While this all seems like modernization of sorts . . . 

it’s fine to have modernization, but with such changes come 

new sorts of problems and increased chances of abuse. This is 

not a good situation for the taxpayer, and it should concern all 

members of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while Crown corporations like SaskPower 

changed and restructured, the system of accountability set up to 

allow this House and the public a chance to ensure the company 

is acting properly and achieving the goals we lay out for it, that 

system has not been modernized. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is a dangerous thing. If this government 

sincerely wants to ensure that SaskPower changes with the 

times and serves a useful purpose and meets its objectives, it 

must be willing to give the opposition and the public the tools 

we need to ensure we can hold this Crown and the politicians 

who run it accountable. 

 

Therein lies the wasted effort. Instead of serving a useful 

purpose for the people of Saskatchewan, this government is 

trying to make life better for its Crowns. I say to the members 

opposite: you’re not here to serve your family of Crown 

corporations; you’re not here to make life better for those 

Crowns; you’re supposed to be here to make life better for the 

average Saskatchewan family. 

 

This government made that mistake back in 1982, of believing 

that people actually cared about our family of Crowns more 

than they did our own families. The NDP found in a very 

punishing way exactly what people really think. If they continue 

down this road, much the same fate awaits them. That fate 

could however not end up in some resurgence; it could end up 

in insignificance, much like that being suffered by their federal 

cousins in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of asking for more powers for its Crowns, 

it’s about time that this NDP government began working 

towards making some badly needed repairs to the accountability 

system. This measure is key to ensuring that  



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

Crowns like SaskPower serve the public good. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t be surprised that this government is 

here asking for more powers for SaskPower today. They can 

argue that modernization is needed here. I say, no more powers 

unless those who are given the job of holding the government 

and SaskPower accountable are also given more powers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t be surprised, as I said, that they’re 

asking for this because their record speaks for itself. Their 

record with respect to SaskPower shows that these members 

opposite are not very interested in our families. It shows they 

are not really interested in ensuring the corporation serves a 

useful purpose to benefit our families. 

 

I’d like to give the members opposite a few examples of just 

how misplaced their efforts are. Mr. Speaker, I say that the 

members opposite put SaskPower ahead of our families. They 

are doing it in this Bill today by offering SaskPower free reign 

to make any deal involving personal or chattel property, 

whereas before they were at least limited by having to get an 

order in council for any deal over a million dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these members put a higher priority on giving 

SaskPower these powers, but there is something else involving 

SaskPower that they put well ahead of our families. Mr. 

Speaker, this government puts its own political well-being 

ahead of our families. 

 

SaskPower provides a perfect example of this, Mr. Speaker. 

Earlier this year, they used SaskPower to once again hike our 

taxes. They raised most power rates in the province for the 

average family residence and family farm. They also gave us a 

new tax in the reconstruction charge. They tell us that this has 

all occurred because they must end cross-subsidization so 

SaskPower can keep its industrial customers and handle a $2 

billion debt. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, some of my constituents are sceptical. 

They’ve told me a couple of things like, how did SaskPower get 

$2 billion in debt in the first place? They also thought they 

helped pay to reconstruct the lines each and every time they 

paid for their power. 

 

Well lastly, Mr. Speaker, while they don’t want to see 

SaskPower lose industrial customers, they also wondered how 

much of a break to these folks will translate into jobs. So many 

large companies are now posting big profits while laying 

thousands of people off. And this is a concern to many of my 

constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, raising power rates was just a more palatable way 

of raising taxes for this government. When this government 

should have been clearly defining a purpose for SaskPower and 

improving accountability, it was busy hiking taxes and devising 

this Bill to give the company more powers. 

 

That misplaced priority is joined by other examples. Recently 

we heard that both Jack Messer and Carole Bryant, two NDP 

faithful who received jobs at SaskPower, got some shameful 

wage increases. Instead of trying to roll these back and make  

this corporation more accountable to the public, we find the 

government letting Mr. Messer head to the auto dealerships to 

pick himself out a snazzy, little car. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mistaken priorities in the Bill before us today 

should come not as a surprise, given this government’s recent 

record. This Bill is short in length, but its significance to our 

ability to hold SaskPower and this government accountable is 

immense. It’s time this government quit asking for more and 

start offering the people a chance to ensure there is 

accountability, and that SaskPower is serving some useful 

public purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us today asks that SaskPower be 

given free rein to engage in deals involving the purchase and 

sale of personal property. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s ask ourselves what this involves. If this 

Bill is passed, SaskPower may be brought on par with SaskTel 

and others, but that isn’t the point. Bringing SaskTel on par 

with those corporations is kind of like asking Greg Norman to 

have a bad golf score. It certainly isn’t aiming for much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government gets what it wants in this Bill, 

SaskPower will be able to invest in shares, sell subsidiaries, 

make partnerships, and do almost whatever it likes without so 

much as the approval of an order in council. And that is very 

worrisome. 

 

Here we have a company which has a broadening range of 

activities around the world and the government wants to give it 

free rein to do whatever it wants. The only limitation it will now 

face will involve real property or anything attached to it. 

 

The company cannot therefore buy land or sell buildings 

without approval. That however is not much of a control, Mr. 

Speaker. SaskPower could make arrangements where it could 

get involved in a project by partnership or shares, lease 

buildings and space, and make all sorts of deals without so 

much as an order in council. 

 

An order in council is not a very strong document but it’s 

certainly better than what is being proposed here. The 

government could be letting SaskPower get involved in almost 

any deal and risk an undisclosed sum of our money without any 

prior approval. And that is a shameful way to treat the taxpayers 

of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only could this government be subjecting the 

taxpayers to all sorts of risk, but they could also be letting the 

company get involved in projects which are of no material 

benefit to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

For example, we now have SaskPower Commercial, which is 

the international arm of SaskPower. This is a subsidiary which 

doesn’t even present a financial statement to this House. By not 

doing so, this company doesn’t even give us or the taxpayer the 

bare minimum of tools to hold it accountable for its activities. 

SaskPower Commercial, under this Bill, could get us involved 

in risky projects overseas  projects I might add that could 

provide no real benefit to Saskatchewan residents. 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

Sure it’s fine for SaskPower to get international experience. I 

would say however that the number one priority should be 

providing jobs to people back here at home. Before focusing 

efforts overseas, SaskPower should be providing buried, safe 

power to farmers. It should focus on providing power at the 

lowest possible cost. It should be focused on reducing 

SaskPower’s unacceptably high CO2 (carbon dioxide) emissions 

and, I dare say, its $2 billion debt. Mr. Speaker, by passing this 

Bill, the members opposite will just be creating all sorts of 

opportunities to increase the exposure faced by taxpayers. 

 

It may be acceptable that the corporation evolves, but the tools 

to hold them accountable should evolve with such changes, and 

they haven’t. Basically, Mr. Speaker, short of a few esoteric 

changes to the Crown Corporations Committee, nothing has 

changed. It’s beyond me how the members opposite can ask for 

more powers for this company without first ensuring it’s held 

accountable. 

 

I mentioned a few moments ago that SaskPower doesn’t 

provide an annual report or a financial statement for SaskPower 

Commercial. This is not the only corporate subsidiary under 

SaskPower that is letting the taxpayers of this province down 

through this sort of behaviour. There are at least four others 

cited by the Provincial Auditor. Before the members opposite 

and the minister ask for these powers, I would suggest they 

hurry up and table these statements and commit to tabling them 

each and every year that these SaskPower subsidiaries are in 

operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other major problem with giving SaskPower 

any more powers at this time is that there is a lack of public 

debate. About 40 per cent of all government activity is in the 

Crown sector, and that includes SaskPower. That activity in the 

Crown sector unfortunately is beyond the realm of the 

budgetary process, and that is worrisome. 

 

It’s bad because it denies an opportunity for public debate over 

the activities of our Crown corporations on a regular basis. For 

example, SaskPower cut the wind and co-generation projects 

and created an international arm in SaskPower Commercial. 

These are significant policy decisions, but because these are 

beyond the budgetary process, there is no chance for the public 

and this House to debate them before the Crown commits or 

withdraws money from them. 

 

There is a solution to this, Mr. Speaker. The Gass Commission 

suggested that all dividends which are now paid to the Crown 

Investments Corporation, which acts as a holding company for 

SaskPower and other Crowns, should be paid into the General 

Revenue Fund. 

 

It also suggested that policies should be devised by the 

government that define how much surplus, if any, SaskPower 

and other Crowns should be able to retain on an annual basis. 

 

The commission also recommended a similar policy be 

developed to determine the extent to which SaskPower and 

other Crowns could be allowed to finance current operations 

and projects against future earnings. The net effect of these  

recommendations would be to return SaskPower spending to 

the purview of legislative control where the public, through 

members of this House, could hold them to account. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Speaker, by doing this, people of the province could have 

their say. Before SaskPower dividends could be returned to 

SaskPower for any project, the House could at least hear what 

their intentions were for our money. Well some people say this 

would be too restrictive because it would reveal corporate 

secrets. I would say that problem could be dealt with. More 

importantly as taxpayers, we should question why government 

is using public money for projects that it can’t make public. 

That’s no way to treat your shareholders who are the average 

taxpayer in this province. 

 

Aside from this, before trying to pass this Bill, the members 

opposite should consider quickly adopting another 

recommendation of the Gass Commission. The commission 

suggested that a clearly defined policy should be released or 

legislated which outlines how much government money can be 

committed to a project without prior approval of the legislature. 

 

In this Bill before us today, Mr. Speaker, we see the 

government asking us to give SaskPower free rein to enter into 

any deal involving personal property without limit. There 

should be a limit, Mr. Speaker. If it’s not in this Act, then at 

least it should be in the sort of policy recommended by the Gass 

Commission. That, by far, might be the most serious flaw of 

this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should not be surprised at their complete 

disregard for this important suggestion laid out by the Gass 

Commission as it relates to this Bill. I shouldn’t be surprised 

because just a couple of weeks ago in the Public Accounts 

Committee, the member from Regina South was pretty weak in 

his support of having the government produce a report to say 

how it stands on the Gass Commission’s recommendations. 

 

Many of these were not implemented, and the member from 

Regina South didn’t appear too keen on the auditor’s 

recommendation that this government explain why it wasn’t 

going to implement some of those proposals. This sort of 

half-hearted or phoney support for accountability is a fine 

example of why this Bill should not be passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill deserves no support. It simply makes 

matters worse. It gives SaskPower more powers to risk our 

money, but it does nothing to fix an already tattered system of 

accountability. 

 

Until that system is fixed, giving SaskPower or any Crowns 

more powers is simply a gross sign of disrespect to the 

taxpayers of this province. In closing, Mr. Speaker, we will 

have more to say, but for now I move adjournment of debate. 

Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

 



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 73  An Act to amend 

The Planning and Development Act, 1983 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

official, please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

With me today is Paul Raths from the staff of Municipal 

Government. 

 

The Chair:  In consideration, the committee has considered 

this Bill earlier and has agreed to the first six clauses, so we 

start on clause 7. 

 

Clauses 7 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 16 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Chairman, at this point I’d like to: 

 

Amend clause 16 of the Printed Bill by striking out the 

words “or on the minister’s own initiative” where they 

occur in subsection 187(3) as being enacted in clause (b) 

thereof and substituting the words “the minister shall”. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the proposed wording 

in the amendment which it says: “or on the request of the 

municipality” and then “or on the minister’s own initiative,” the 

minister’s own initiative is meant to be used in cases . . . the 

buffer strip cases where there is no municipality, it relates to the 

North. So we could not agree, Mr. Chairman, to the 

amendment. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:10 p.m. until 4:17 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  11 

 

Osika Aldridge Draude 

Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 

Gantefoer D’Autremont Toth 

Heppner Goohsen  

 

Nays  22 

 

Van Mulligen MacKinnon Shillington 

Atkinson Tchorzewski Johnson 

Goulet Lautermilch Kowalsky 

Crofford Pringle Koenker 

Trew Lorje Teichrob 

Nilson Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Langford Sonntag 

Thomson   

 

Clause 16 agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, with leave, to 

introduce guests. 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I see that we’ve been 

joined in the Speaker’s gallery by some of the executive 

members and the director of PARCS  being the Provincial 

Association of Resort Communities of Saskatchewan. And we 

had a meeting this morning. I’d like to welcome them to Regina 

and ask you to join me. 

 

I’ll just ask them to stand. The chairman is Ted James. The 

director is Lester Hunt, and John Panio, and John Cameron. 

Welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, to also 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 

to join the minister in welcoming our guests to the Assembly. 

The bells rudely interrupted our meeting that we were having, 

but I’m glad to see them join us in the Assembly. And I would 

again ask everyone to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Julé:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I too would like to 

welcome you here on behalf of the official opposition. We’re 

very pleased to have you with us today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Chairman, I’d ask leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much. I want to say a special 

hi to Les Hunt. Les, of course, is a former constituent, and he 

also was the principal of Alvin Buckwold School in Saskatoon 

Eastview where our sons went. 

 

And given that this is Child Care Week, I just want to highlight 

that Les as a principal was very supportive to the child care 

centre, the day care centre in the school, the out-of-school 

program, which was a very important program in the school . . . 

I think the second one in Saskatchewan for single parents and  



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

others who had no way of looking after the children when they 

were at work and school was out. 

 

So Les was a pioneer and very innovative and supportive of that 

program, and I just want to acknowledge that, given that you’re 

here and it’s provincial Child Care Week. So I’d ask that we 

join again in welcoming him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  With leave, as well, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I want to recognize a guest, but 

specifically Mr. Panio. He’s a teacher in the Montmartre area. 

He has the distinction of being the chairman of the zone one 

regional games and of the meeting in Montmartre when the 

lights went out when we had our official opening, and it was 

some consternation we got them going. Welcome, Mr. Panio 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 73 

(continued) 

 

Clauses 17 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 24 agreed to on division. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, 

Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 

911 System and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 

is Mr. Ron Davis, the assistant deputy minister of the 

Department of Municipal Government. Directly behind me is 

Diana Milenkovic, from SaskTel. And on her left is Jim 

Brickwell, senior policy analyst in the Department of Municipal 

Government. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I’d like to also welcome your officials here today. 

 

Madam Minister, you talked about your definition of enhanced 

911 system in the last Committee of the Whole. Would you 

please just give us a brief recap of your definition just to refresh 

our memories and get things rolling today. 

 

The Chair:  Before the minister speaks, I guess I erred. It’s 

the Act . . . It might be cited The Emergency 911 System Act. I  

introduced it wrongly. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, for clarification, I’m 

not sure of the question they’re asking. I think they used the 

word “enhanced.” Is that right? 

 

Well as you know, in the current scheme the only enhanced 911 

systems are in the major cities. These are the systems where 

when a caller dials 911, the location of the origin of the call 

comes onto the screen in the call centre. So if the person is 

unable to speak or hangs up, the location is still known, and a 

response can be delivered. 

 

In those systems that are not enhanced, someone will answer, 

and usually there is a response plan, but it’s not  and 

hopefully it’s integrated  but there’s no locator. So if the 

caller hangs up, having not given a location, there is that 

problem. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The wording 

of this Bill in our opinion does not allow for the flexibility to 

move towards an enhanced system, yet you’ve stated that you 

will move towards a system fully enhanced. Could you please 

tell us how this Bill allows you to do that when it does not 

describe a fully enhanced 911 system? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, as we outlined 

some days ago in our previous exchange, we said that our plans 

are for a fully enhanced system, which is the reason that the 

money was dedicated to the geographic information system or 

the mapping work that has to be done in order to provide that 

information. The proposal now is that the province-wide 911 

would provide a single-button transfer to the appropriate 

emergency response agency  fire, police, or a health 

emergency. So it’s quite clear that the intent is to have that 

enhancement available throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Still on 

clause 2, Madam Minister, what department do you have in 

mind in (a)? I think what we’re looking for here is what 

department are you talking about. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  The interpretation here would be the 

department over which the minister responsible for the 911 

system presides, which at the current time is the Department of 

Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. What groups 

do you have in mind that you’ve included in clause 2(vi), but 

not in clause 2(i) and clause 2(v)? I think what we’re saying is 

here, who do you mean by this? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, my interpretation of 

this would be that (vi) would be an enabling clause. It names 

the standard . . . The police service  this would be a local: 

 

(i) police service or regional police service as defined in 

The Police Act . . . 

 



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

(ii) the Royal Canadian Mounted Police; 

 

(iii) a fire department as defined in The Fire Prevention 

Act . . . 

 

(iv) an ambulance service; 

 

Then the department, Crown, or agency. 

 

Then the sixth one is a catch-all clause, if you like, where it 

says, “any person, organization or agency . . . ” It could be first 

responders. It could be some kind of a community organization 

that’s been organized at the community level to provide the 

integrated emergency response. It’s just meant to be inclusive in 

case there is a definition that has been . . . a specific definition 

that isn’t included in the first five, but someone who would be 

an emergency service provider. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Is, in your 

opinion, the district health board an emergency service provider 

within the meaning of (d)? Would you class the health board as 

an emergency provider? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  This, Mr. Chairman, is the 

interpretation of the Act for definition. And the district health 

board has already been defined in The Health Districts Act. So I 

assume that, depending on the role that an individual health 

board plays in their particular region, that that interpretation 

could be made, that they would be defined as such, but not 

necessarily. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Clause 4, 

Madam Minister. What other ministers’ departments or 

agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan are being referred 

to in this section? For example, is the Department of Municipal 

Government responsible for any aspect of this law? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we’re in the 

interpretation section of the Act. And a department, agency, or 

Crown corporation of the Government of Saskatchewan could 

for example be air ambulance, but without naming the Sask air 

ambulance service. So again it’s a catch-all clause to make sure 

that if there is any department, agency, or Crown that is 

providing emergency services, that they’re covered under the 

definition of emergency service provider. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Would the 

Minister of Health be responsible for any part of this then? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, not as the legislation is written 

because where it refers to department, the interpretation section 

2 of the Act says: 

 

(the) “department” means the department over which the 

minister presides; 

 

So if, say for instance at some time in the future, the minister 

responsible for 911  after some reorganization or whatever  

was the Minister of Health, then we wouldn’t have to amend 

the legislation to accommodate that. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d also like to 

welcome your officials, Madam Minister. 

 

On clause 5, under the powers of the minister, it says: 

 

The minister may: 

 

(a) enter into agreements with emergency service providers 

. . . 

 

Is it correct to say that sub-clause (a) of this clause gives the 

minister the right to enter into agreements with service 

providers and the municipalities but does not impose upon her 

any obligations to do so? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  That’s a correct interpretation, and the 

agreements would be entered into based on advice of the 

advisory group that will be set up and the technical working 

group that will be set up. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is it then correct that under sub-clause (b) it’ll 

be the minister in consultation with cabinet who will have the 

ultimate say over which territories will be covered by which 

public safety answering points? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, essentially that’s 

correct, and the recommendation would be made after 

consultations and based upon the advice of the advisory groups 

that I mentioned. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess my question would have to be then, 

why would the minister, why should the minister, be given this 

power? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in terms of developing 

a comprehensive plan and in terms of taking care of the liability 

aspects and so forth in emergency service, there would have to 

be someone  and this Act presumes that it would be upon the 

recommendation of the minister, after consultation and advice 

 would recommend to the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

the location. 

 

So as the system is developed and expands, areas that are ready 

and areas where the technology is available would then become 

part of the prescribed district where this legislation would 

apply. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, my colleagues and I feel that 

 and I’m hoping that you would agree  that maybe it would 

better to delegate this power to a non-political body, with 

efficiency and service as their foremost goal. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, in a sense we 

would be doing that by taking the advice of an advisory council 

that will be set up pursuant to this legislation. And it does say, 

the minister may; it doesn’t say, the minister shall. 

 

And certainly I think that in terms of the liability, the other 

features of this as it unfolds, such as the cost-sharing 

arrangements and so on, that it’s not inappropriate for the 

government, based on the advice of advisory committees, to  



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

recommend to the Lieutenant Governor in Council who would 

prescribe these boundaries. 

 

And I think the input of the technical working group and the 

advisory committee would provide the feature that you’re 

suggesting, is as input from the community and input into the 

design of the system from the users. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Then clause 5, 

saying the minister may, instead of shall, either gives you the 

authority or the advisory committee. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No. It was . . . the minister would 

obviously rely on the advice of the advisory committee. The 

advisory committee would not give advice to the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. I mean that’s just not the way the system 

works. The Lieutenant Governor in Council takes direction 

from cabinet. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So basically you will be relying on the 

advisory committee and you have the right to, or the minister 

would have the right to, agree with the advisory committee and 

take it to the Lieutenant Governor then? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well there has to be, in designing and 

operating a system, there has to be somebody who is ultimately 

responsible, somebody’s desk at whom, you know, where the 

buck stops and who is ultimately responsible. In this case, this 

legislation is making the minister responsible. 

 

And we’re saying, in other parts of the legislation, that that 

advice . . . or the discretion that the minister would use would 

be influenced by the advisory boards in the system that will be 

appointed. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Does the province-wide answering system 

envisioned by sub-clause (c) have any safeguards for the 

confidentiality of addresses and telephone numbers? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the same as in the 

systems that exist today. And of course technology is improving 

all the time, even as we speak, but there is confidentiality. And 

yes, confidentiality would be guaranteed under the computer 

system that will be used. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess then that my question would be, if we 

have to be concerned, or the minister has to be concerned, about 

confidentiality and at the same time, safety — so we have to be 

able to know where this person is calling from and yet maybe 

they don’t want their name and phone number given out — 

what kind of circumstances do you envision that can overcome 

these problems? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it doesn’t display the 

name of the caller, simply the address, the location. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Sometimes the addresses and phone numbers 

have to be kept confidential. For example, abusive ex-spouses 

who have threatened violence. Has this been taken into 

consideration? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in the 911 system for it 

to work you must be able to identify a location and that can’t be 

blocked out in the 911 system. If I was having a heart attack I’d 

want somebody to know where I was. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Who will have access to the addressing system 

as set out in sub-clause (c)? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the addresses would be 

entered into the computer software that is specific to this 

program and it would be secure there, and it would only be 

displayed if a call was originated from that location. So there is 

security there. It’s a database that’s used for only this purpose, 

so the integrity of the database and the confidentiality is 

assured. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, under clause 5 subsection 

(d), you talk about establishing one or more committees to 

advise the minister. Is there any idea yet of how many 

committees will be required? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are two planned. 

There may be from time to time others, but the ones we 

contemplate are the advisory committee that would be 

composed of users of the system, if you like, like health service 

providers, fire chiefs, people like that. And then there would be 

. . . well there are two committees. The advisory . . . a lay 

advisory committee and then a technical committee. 

 

Ms. Draude:  What would be the purpose of these 

committees in practical terms? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the purpose of 

the advisory committees would be to . . . the technical one 

would be to advise on, you know, what is possible. Because the 

advisory committee could meet and decide that they wanted to 

extend the service into a certain area and that there was 

addressing going on there and so on. But they might not be 

aware of how the system works technically, and they might 

advise something that’s not physically possible. So that’s why 

we need the two committees: the one which would advise on 

concepts and service delivery and the expectations of the users; 

and then a technical committee to work out or advise on 

whether the wishes of the advisory committee are technically 

possible. 

 

(1645) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Who will 

actually be appointing the members of these committees? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the minister 

responsible will be appointing the committees. And of course 

we’ve had advisory committees  the Emergency Services 

Advisory Committee that met until last fall  and other 

committees. People have been consulted in the course of 

designing this legislation and the beginning, the initiation, of 

the system. 

 

And the advisory committee is expected to be composed of 

elected officials representing local governments  SUMA  



May 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), SARM, 

SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), 

FSIN, and representatives from the existing enhanced 911 areas 

from Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and the south-west 

region. There would also be senior department officials from 

Municipal Government, Health, SaskTel, and Justice. And we 

expect to appoint this committee as soon as the legislation is 

passed. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Chairman, to the minister, if these 

appointments are ready to be undertaken as soon as this 

legislation is passed, then it would mean that you probably have 

people already in mind for the positions. If so, can you give us 

the names of these people? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it’s premature to talk 

about the names of the people, and this hasn’t yet been 

determined, but what the practice sometimes is to ask for 

nominations from the associations, and then we usually in those 

cases appoint the people whose names are put forward by the 

associations. 

 

So I wouldn’t know today because we haven’t sought, we 

wouldn’t seek, nominations from those organizations until after 

the legislation is passed. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Has the minister considered or your 

department considered combining committees and just having 

the technical advice available? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there’s more advice 

needed than simply technical advice. If we didn’t want more 

advice and more user input into the design of the system, you 

know, SaskTel could simply implement it. SaskTel has the 

technology and they could do it. 

 

That’s not the way we see it happening. It’s not the way the 

development has been to date. We’ve wanted to include in the 

consultations leading up to this legislation, and we’ll certainly 

will want to follow through after that with constant dialogue 

with the users of the system, with the people who will help 

design it, and the people who will help pay for it. 

 

And there are many, many implications. That’s why we see this 

in a three- to five-year time frame, because there certainly are 

expenses involved for rural municipalities, for example, in 

signing major roads and that kind of thing. 

 

So we’ll require the cooperation of all these groups. And there 

certainly will be some financial implications for people that are 

represented on the advisory committee. And we have to take all 

these concerns into account as we move forward so that it not 

only works well and gives the proper response, but is 

affordable. 

 

Ms. Draude:  If the advisory committee doesn’t agree with 

your vision or you have some differences of opinion on the 911 

system — I’m concerned about the location of the call centres 

 who will end up winning out if there is a discrepancy of 

opinions? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, that is yet to be 

determined. There are several options that are being considered 

and will be put to the advisory committee when it is formed, for 

their advice. 

 

There are several options  one that we’ve spoken about 

previously is the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 

option. There are other options. There’s a possibility that the 

communities that now have an investment in the enhanced 911 

could simply expand theirs to cover the province. 

 

There’s the possibility that some other centres who are 

interested, some of the smaller cities, have mentioned that they 

would like to become a calling centre. This is the kind of issue 

that we will take advice on from the advisory committee. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I’d like to touch on the call centres for a few minutes. 

 

You stated in the past that this legislation will not do away with 

the three call centres already existing. Can you point out 

anywhere in this Bill where these call centres will be protected? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, Mr. Chairman. It is seen that this 

system will evolve based on the advice of the advisory 

committee. I’m sure that it will evolve in the most practical and 

cost-effective way possible. And we will listen carefully to the 

advice of the advisory committee with respect to these matters. 

 

And when you’re planning on a three- to five-year time frame 

for a system that’s going to build on the base there is now, and 

to cover the whole province being the intent, you wouldn’t put 

these features in the legislation. You would rely on the 

legislation to establish the advisory committee and the other 

parameters for the work to be done, and then you would want to 

have the maximum flexibility to develop the whole system. And 

so you wouldn’t put that in legislation. I think that would be 

undesirable. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. If we could 

deal for a moment with the idea of one provincial call centre. 

You said that you are concerned with the response time. Could 

you please explain your concerns a little more fully? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I don’t, Mr. Chairman, really recall 

saying that I had concerns with response time; we didn’t discuss 

that today. If the member could elaborate . . . I’m not sure what 

his reference is based on. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  I think possibly, Madam Minister, it’s . . . if 

I could just read your answer here the other day, and we were 

kind of questioning this after, but it says: 

 

Well I think, Mr. Chairman, we’re saying exactly the same 

thing. (And) I’m saying (that) that’s possible, with the 

technology, to have one call centre for the whole province. 

However, we’re recognizing that we already have three 

centres that (are) . . . fully enhanced and some that are, you 

know, the basic 911, and we’re not proposing by this 

legislation to do away with those. We hope that at some 

point we’ll . . . be part of (the) . . . system. 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 1996 

Then it goes on down here: 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would assume (that) there’d be a couple 

of levels of this. The members of the advisory committee 

. . . would include I would think, service providers . . . 

 

I guess I don’t have, Madam Minister, the exact quote that you 

had said that day. But going back, like I know you had . . . that 

we had asked the question about having just one main call 

centre, and you had said that you had concerns with that. Can 

you explain your concerns then? Maybe it wasn’t response time. 

 

What problem do you have with one centre instead of a number 

of centres throughout? In my understanding it, or the way I look 

at it, it may be a lot simpler to have one big call centre. And 

with the technology there is today, I can’t see where the 

response time or anything else would be a detriment to this 

plan. In fact I think it would be more efficient if we were going 

to end up with an enhanced plan where trained people were 

going to be on the end of the line. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m really glad that the 

member opposite couldn’t find that reference because I couldn’t 

remember saying it, and I thought maybe I was losing my 

memory. 

 

We recognize that there’s been considerable investment made 

already in designing of the existing enhanced systems. And I 

guess we hope to build on that or around that, and certainly not 

duplicate any efforts that anyone else has made. Although in 

time perhaps the technology that even is in those . . . being used 

in those centres may become outdated, and there may be a 

consolidation of call centres in the future. You know, who 

knows? 

 

But I think the only concern we would have is that there be 

training on the ground for emergency service providers, and this 

has to go hand in hand with the development and extension of 

the ability to dial 911 and have someone that is trained on the 

other end. Any delays certainly wouldn’t be in the telephone 

system because the connection is made instantaneously. The 

concern has to be, as we unfold the system, that the people . . . 

the emergency service providers are ready and integrated to 

respond to the calls that are received. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to 

now ask some questions regarding the effectiveness of the 

system. Madam Minister, would you not have a professional 

assessment done after the system is in place to determine if the 

system is functioning correctly and meeting the needs of the 

people in emergency situations? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, of course that 

would be reviewed on an ongoing basis. And this is the reason 

why we would rely on the advisory committees. The technical 

committee would do their monitoring throughout the 

development of the system and, obviously upon its completion, 

continue to monitor it. 

 

And the advisory committee, as I mentioned to you before, the  

proposed organizations that the membership of the advisory 

committee would be drawn from have that sort of expertise. For 

example, if you have the fire chiefs or police chiefs on the 

advisory committee who already have long-time experience in 

running an enhanced call centre in their own city, then they’re 

certainly in a position to make those assessments at their level. 

 

So already there is a system there established pursuant to this 

legislation to have that kind of a review on both levels 

constantly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report progress, and 

ask for leave to sit again. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 73  An Act to amend 

The Planning and Development Act, 1983 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 

now a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 43. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1623 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1624 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1624 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1624 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1624 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1624 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1624 

  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1624 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1624 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1624 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1625 

  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1625 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1645 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1645 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1645 

  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................1645 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1646 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Police Week 

  Lorje .........................................................................................................................................................................................1625 

 Passing of Craig Wright 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1625 

 Technology Transfer 

  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1625 

 National Science Fair 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1626 

 Agriculture Sciences Month 

  Bradley .....................................................................................................................................................................................1626 

 Garson Lake 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1626 

 Battleford Business Awards 

  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1626 

 Well-known Regina Entrepreneur Dies 

  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1627 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Recovery of Government Funds 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1627 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1627 

 Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1627 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1628 

 Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1628 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1628 

 Indian Land Claims Tax Loss Compensation 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1629 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1629 

 Proposed Four-day School Week 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1629 



 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1629 

 Education Funding 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1630 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1630 

 Banks’ Proposed Entry into Auto Leasing 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1631 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1631 

 Northern Housing 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1631 

  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1631 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure of Information related to Individuals who Pose a Significant Risk of 

Serious Harm to Other Persons 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1631 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 Indian Land Claims Tax Loss Compensation 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1632 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1633 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1634 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1635 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1635 

  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1636 

 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1637 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1637 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

  Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................................1637 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1637 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1640 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 38  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1640 

 Bill No. 87  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1642 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 73  An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1645 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1645 

 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1645 

 Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 911 System and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1646 

  Bjornerud ......................................................................................................................................................................1646, 1649 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1647 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 73  An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1650 

 

 


