
























































May 23, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1793 
 May 23, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 88 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 88  An Act to 
amend The Queen’s Bench Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thought it 
only appropriate that I join in this debate on Bill 88 since my 
constituency is one that will be greatly affected by this piece of 
legislation. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I first heard rumours 
about this government’s intention to begin shutting down 
court-houses outside our major cities, I began to wonder, what’s 
next. What’s the next vital service this government plans to rip 
away from our smaller cities, our towns, and our villages. 
 
What’s next on this government’s rural Saskatchewan chopping 
block, because since taking power in 1991, the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) has not stopped thumbing its nose at our 
rural residents. Since taking power in 1991, the NDP has treated 
people outside of our larger cities with ever-growing contempt. 
Since taking power in 1991 the NDP has done everything in its 
power to treat residents from smaller communities like 
second-class citizens and it doesn’t seem it’s going to stop any 
time soon. 
 
This latest move to close court-houses is only the latest slap in 
the face for these people. Some of the more cynical in our 
province might even suggest the court-houses in Melville and 
Kerrobert are the first on the chopping block because those 
areas had the unmitigated gall to elect MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) that were not NDP. How dare they. In 
fact many are suggesting that very thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
That kind of sentiment is just a taste of the cynicism that exists 
in many areas of our province  cynicism not bred out of the 
misdeeds of past governments. No, this is a brand-new form of 
cynicism, cynicism that has come about only in recent times as 
this government’s game plan has become more and more 
obvious. 
 
There is no more hiding for the members across the floor. For 
cynical, political purposes they have written off much of rural 
Saskatchewan because they see most of it as useless for their 
political needs. They can hoot and holler all they want from 
over there but the people can now see right through them. They 
can see through the charade portrayed by this cynical crew 
opposite. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people out there have 
become numb. The terrible part about all this is that they’ve 
come to expect this kind of treatment from this government. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the May 15 edition of the Melville 
Advance really bears this out. In an article on the closure of the 
Melville court-house, Mayor Mike Fisher is quoted as saying, 
and I quote: 
 

What you’ve got is people saying, we can’t do anything 
one way or the other. The government has made up its 
mind and you aren’t going to get anywhere arguing. People 
will reach a point that they’re sick of the government. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, statements like Mayor Fisher’s make us 
wonder why we’re here at all. Because you know what? I can’t 
argue with Mayor Fisher’s point. The government opposite isn’t 
willing to listen. They aren’t going to change their minds. Their 
arrogance simply will not allow them to do that. 
 
Yes, arrogance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That arrogance is no 
better portrayed than in Melville’s treatment at the hands of this 
government, in particular how the whole closure came about. 
And I’m sure that the people in Kerrobert experienced much the 
same treatment. We’ll find out when the member from 
Kindersley speaks to this Bill, as I’m sure he wants to very 
badly. But I’ve seen firsthand this government’s treatment of 
the city of Melville. 
 
Again I quote from Mayor Mike Fisher in the letter he wrote to 
the Minister of Justice seven weeks ago  a letter that, as of a 
few days ago, had not received a response. In that letter, Mayor 
Fisher says: 
 

Your cold, faxed letter of March 28 is indicative of your 
style of government. You wrote us March 8 saying no final 
decision had been made with respect to Melville. Clearly 
that was intentionally misleading or naively so. 
 

And Mayor Fisher goes on to state in his letter to the minister: 
 
I reject the lack of consultation, this cold-blooded 
approach, and pure disregard for our community. This 
community, for no reason, is being battered by your 
government. 

 
Cold-blooded approach and pure disregard for our community, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think Mayor Fisher’s words strike right 
at the heart of the matter, because this government has little 
regard for the people outside of its political bastions of Regina 
and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this decision to close the Melville 
court-house was made without even the courtesy of talking to 
those affected by such a move. No one from this government 
had the courtesy to consult with the local community, not even 
with Mayor Fisher, who also happens to be the president of the 
local bar association, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But is that really surprising? I would suggest, no. It’s something 
we’ve come to expect. Sadly this is what we’ve come to expect 
from this government. Act now, talk later. Like I said, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, no one from this government had the courtesy  



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

to meet with Melville leaders. For seven weeks Mayor Fisher’s 
letter went unanswered. When the mayor finally did receive a 
response, the government offered to set up a meeting with the 
NDP member from Yorkton  the Minister of SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). I really 
don’t know what they thought that this would accomplish, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, unless they wanted to figure out what to do 
with the abandoned court-house in Melville. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Yorkton of course 
represents an area that will benefit from the court-house closure 
in Melville. I’m really sure he’s going to see Mayor Fisher’s 
point real soon. 
 
It’s ludicrous, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government treats the 
people with such contempt. This is just the latest charade they 
pull  trying to appear like they give a darn about what people 
in Melville think. 
 
They don’t give a darn in their first term when Melville actually 
had an NDP member, and they certainly don’t give a darn now 
that the member has been turfed by the electorate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s not kid ourselves. These court-house 
closures are only the beginning. Nobody honestly believes that 
it’s going to stop there. But I’m curious to see what’ll happen if 
the government goes after a court-house in an NDP-held riding. 
It’s possible I suppose, but not probable. It’s possible. 
 
But if it ever does happen, I’m willing to predict what the NDP 
member from that area will do. Nothing. Like we’ve seen over 
and over again. The back-benchers opposite are content to sit 
there and try to look important. They’re willing to cash their pay 
cheques. They’re willing to applaud and cheer on command; 
but are they willing to stand up for their communities? 
 
Are you kidding me? As we’ve seen, this is the last thing that 
they are willing to do. I hate to do this, but I’m going to use just 
one such example. The member from Swift Current has seen 
dozens of jobs ripped out of his community. He has now seen 
the closure of a very vital nursing home in his community and 
all we get from him in this House is continued silence. 
 
He doesn’t even have the courtesy to attend meetings in his 
own riding to discuss these very urgent matters. Does that 
member really believe he’s serving his constituents well with 
his continued silence? Is that what his constituents want and 
expect of him? For him to sit there like a trained seal unable to 
find his own voice, unwilling to speak in this House on 
anything that’s not prepared and vetted by the NDP caucus 
staff, is that what he thinks being an MLA is all about? 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s unfair for me to pick on this 
specific member because he’s certainly not alone. Day after day 
we see the members on the back bench sit there. Except for the 
odd member’s statement they are told to read, we hear nothing 
but silence. 
 
It’s truly sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I suppose it’s not 
surprising. 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  A point of order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my point of order is the language that’s being used by 
the speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, in referring to one of 
the other members of the House in animal terms. I find this 
objectionable and I think it’s objectionable to all members of 
the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  I would caution the member from 
Melville and the Leader of the Opposition not to use terms that 
are derogatory to people, person’s names. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I do 
apologize. But under these kind of circumstances it’s difficult 
to control oneself when it is in fact the truth about things not 
being said on behalf of constituents, when disasters are 
occurring. And I hate to repeat myself in this House but it really 
is not very hard not to, when we see such a pattern developing, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is a government that’s contemptuous of rural 
Saskatchewan and it doesn’t want to hear from the people that 
they are cutting loose. Again, I quote Mayor Fisher since that 
seems to be the only way his words  that seems to be the only 
way that his particular words  will reach this cabinet. Mayor 
Fisher says, and I quote: “Why would you mislead us. Why 
would you not have the courtesy to meet with us to hear our 
proposals.” And Mayor Fisher adds, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “I 
have lost respect for your government.” 
 
I have lost respect for your government. Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 
only these were words isolated to Melville. But they aren’t, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. People throughout this province are quickly 
losing respect for this government  a government that puts 
politics first and people second at every turn. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I fear these two court-house closures are 
only the beginning. This piece of legislation paves the way for 
many more closures down the line. I urge the minister to think 
long and hard about these moves because they are at the end of 
a very long chain of lost services in many, many of our small 
rural communities. I urge the minister to meet with citizens in 
all affected communities in the long run as these closures move 
closer. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I urge the minister to meet 
with the people in Melville. 
 
I know he’s taken a trip to Kerrobert. I’ve had some indication 
the minister is at least now considering going to Melville, 
though obviously that will remain to be seen. I want him to 
continue thinking about going to meet the people affected by 
this legislation, and in the short term I do urge him to take that 
trip to Melville. 
 
And I want to give him time to think about that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, before we pass this Bill on. So at this time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I move we adjourn debate on Bill 88. Thank 
you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1795 

(1915) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 90  An Act to amend 
The Provincial Mediation Board Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m pleased to have with me Madeleine 
Robertson to deal with the Provincial Mediation Board. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
welcome your assistant. Thank you for coming to discuss some 
of these aspects with us. I just have a few questions on this 
particular Bill. Clause 3 of the Bill sets out a new subsection 
6(3) of The Provincial Mediation Board Act. And the key text 
here reads: 
 

. . . the board may request the creditor to pay to the board a 
fee in the amount prescribed in the regulations made 
pursuant to section 6.1. 
 

Mr. Minister, do you interpret this as creating a legal obligation 
on the part of the creditors to pay such fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The way the legislation is worded allows 
the creditor to enter into an arrangement with the debtor who 
has . . . the debtor works with the Provincial Mediation Board 
and then signs a contract saying that he would . . . he or she will 
pay, you know, $200 a month to the Provincial Mediation 
Board and then that money would be paid out to the creditors. 
In that contract it would be set up so that the creditor would 
agree that a portion of whatever is paid goes to the Provincial 
Mediation Board to help pay for their fees. 
 
I think, as I explained in the speech that I gave before, the 
purpose of this is to have it mirror the quarterly payment of 
debts arrangement that comes under the federal bankruptcy law. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I apologize if I’m 
reiterating or repeating or being repetitive on some of these. 
The words you use is “may request.” I just wondered why you 
used that rather than “shall require” if in fact that’s what is 
meant or the intent is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think there are some practical reasons 
for this. One of them is that if we’re in a situation where there 
are 10 creditors and one of them refuses to participate in the 
whole orderly payment of debts arrangement because they don’t 
want to pay a fee, this will allow the person who’s running this 
whole program to, in his or her discretion, agree that one person 
maybe wouldn’t pay the fee. So it’s basically to allow it to be a 
discretionary power as opposed to a required power. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, clause 4 of that Bill 
creates a new section 6.1 of the Act. That new section of the 
Act will give your provincial cabinet the power to set the 
amount of fees . . . or the amounts, pardon me, of fees that are 
collected from creditors by regulation. When you mentioned in 
your speech about this Bill at second reading, Mr. Minister, you  

said that it was your intention to make the regulations so that 
they provide for a 10 per cent levy. 
 
This question I have is, why not put that clearly in the Act? 
Why not come right out and say that what you want all the 
creditors to do is participate in the program, to pay that levy of 
10 per cent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s the present legislative policy to try to 
have all fees in regulations so that if it is necessary to change 
them we don’t have to go through the whole legislative process 
to adjust the fees. And that’s true, I think, in all legislation that 
has been passed in recent years because it makes more sense to 
have the ability to make adjustments on fees outside of the 
process of the whole legislative session. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you again. Clause 5 of the Bill provides 
that the Provincial Mediation Board now file and table both an 
annual report and a financial statement. Again referring back to 
your speech on second reading, you pointed out that the board 
is already doing these things even though it is not under a 
legislated mandate to do so. My question, sir, is: what 
guarantees can you give us that these new legislative 
requirements will be achieved at little or no cost to the 
taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There is no additional costs because we’re 
already doing it. This is, I think, following the advice of the 
Provincial Auditor to actually have some requirement that these 
reports be filed. So it’s part of the overall attempt by the 
government to be accountable in all ways and have it set out 
clearly how the accountability flows. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I very much appreciate 
your responding to the short questions that I had. I have nothing 
further. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 83  An Act to amend 
The Limitation of Actions Act 

 
The Chair:  Would the minister introduce officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. I am pleased to introduce Susan 
Amrud, one of the solicitors in the department and somebody 
that you’ve met before. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome again. 
 
I have a few questions dealing with this particular Bill. Mr. 
Minister, we’ll start with clause 3 which would change the 
definition of owner in section 2(1)(p) of The Land Titles Act so 
that an Indian band can become the registered owner. I’m sorry 
. . . 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

May I send my sincere apologies. I wish to retract my preamble 
but I still would like to stand by my warm welcome, Mr. 
Minister, to your official. 
 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we appreciate very much the fact 
that now the women who have suffered in an unfortunate 
situation will now have their day in court or will be eligible or 
allowed to with this type of legislation. And we have nothing 
further to inquire about that legislation. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure 
of Information related to Individuals who Pose a 

Significant Risk of Serious Harm to Other Persons 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister first to introduce the 
new officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to introduce Laura 
Bourassa, the Crown solicitor who will assist, along with Susan 
Amrud, on this legislation. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, could 
you perhaps give us just a capsule, a recap, of the Bill, the 
intent of it again, just an overview for our benefit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think practically this legislation is set up 
in a way that will allow us to work with the police and the 
community to deal with the situation where it may be necessary 
to notify the public about a dangerous offender within the 
community. This legislation has been developed with 
consultation with people in the community, with the police, 
with suggestions from your side of the House and from the third 
party. 
 
And with all of these types of information, as well as carefully 
reviewing the rights of the community over and against the 
rights of the offender, we’ve come up with a piece of legislation 
which we think will assist the police in deciding if and when 
it’s appropriate to release the names of dangerous offenders in 
the community. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And as I said 
previously, that we were very pleased to see this type of 
legislation being introduced and I commend you and your 
officials with the consultation process and the manner in which 
the Bill was put together. 
 
Just one or two, perhaps, questions from our side of the House. 
One that I had with respect to the committees  how will they 
be selected? You may have outlined that. I don’t recall. But 
how will the committees be selected and will those committees 

be from the public at large on a voluntary basis or will they in 
fact be identified as perhaps even similar to paid board 
members that may be called on from time to time and receive 
remuneration for that type of responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The committee . . . we haven’t set out all 
of the regulations and policies surrounding this legislation but 
we’re in the process of working on it. But practically the 
committee will include people who are within government 
employ so that they would not receive remuneration. But there 
would also be community members and they will receive pay 
that would be commensurate with this type of an advisory 
board. 
 
And so they would fall within the range of many of the other 
advisory boards that work within our department. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It would then be for 
expenses that they would incur to act as committee members 
rather than an actual stipend for fee. Or has that not yet been 
decided? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would suspect that they would get a per 
diem like a hospital board member, maybe probably not as 
much, but for the work that they do, and then if they do have 
any expenses those would be reimbursed. 
 
But clearly the idea is not that this would be a full-time job or 
that it would fund anything. The idea is to have money paid in a 
way that acknowledges that they are performing a valuable 
public service. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I guess the reason I’m asking that is 
because, if I recall correctly, parole board members do receive 
some type of a salary or they receive a considerable stipend for 
their responsibilities and role. Is this then, I guess . . . I would 
suspect that there are probably a lot of people out there who are 
concerned about what we’ve been discussing that would be 
willing to come forward, and say as a member of the 
community, not unlike Block Parents or that like . . . 
 
Forgive me if I’m thinking of dollars and cents here, and I don’t 
want to impose any hardship on any individual who agrees to 
help the community. However, if perhaps that might be a 
consideration, you’d likely get all kinds of volunteers, Mr. 
Minister, I would suggest, to say I will help you with that. And 
they’d be credible people from the communities that would 
offer that kind of service. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that’s clearly the intention, that 
they would be volunteers, and it’s basically a token amount that 
they receive for this work. It’s not any kind of remuneration 
such as the parole board people get, which basically is a 
full-time job for parole board people. And there’s some concern 
about the amount that those people get paid, but that’s more in 
the . . . well it’s clearly in the federal government’s 
responsibility. We have nothing to do with that on a provincial 
basis. 
 
But, practically, the idea here would be that we would take 
people who are willing to participate and provide their expertise  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

and their knowledge and their concern for the community, and 
they’re not going to be paid what they might be paid on a 
contract basis if they were doing contract work. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m sure that the 
communities and the public will be pleased that lay people and 
not necessarily folks that are appointed to these kinds of 
committees, but people  and perhaps not the same ones all 
the time  would there be then the opportunity for individuals 
other than those, or would it be someone on a long-term basis 
that would be . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think in this particular area we will need 
people who have expertise and have knowledge about the area 
as well as the community involvement, as well as some people 
who would be in the category of lay people. But we’re going to 
need ones that understand the system so that they can make the 
decisions and the assessments that we need. 
 
So I’m assuming there’d be a police officer as a police 
representative. There’s going to be some people that would 
represent our department; probably some people that are mental 
health professionals; people out of the correctional service; 
medical people. So it’s that kind of a mix, but clearly with the 
sense of the community. But we clearly want people that will 
have the respect of the community as well. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, this 
Bill, once it goes into effect  and I suppose that it would have 
been noted; I didn’t notice  will there be any retroactivity as 
far as those people that are now released in the communities? 
Or will this only go into effect once the legislation is passed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think that’s really an issue because 
it’ll relate to people who might be a problem at the time the 
legislation comes into effect, and so I don’t think that’s 
necessarily an issue. 
 
I mean obviously for the Act to work in the most effective 
manner, there would be identification of people while they’re 
still within the system. But it also includes people who are later 
identified to be in the community who may have been released 
earlier. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to pose a question in relation to this Bill being brought 
forward. I understand the Bill has been brought forward 
because of the concerns with, initially with, pedophiles and so 
on. As you well know, I have had some major concern about 
people that in fact have been doing a great deal of harm to our 
young children on the streets of our cities in this province. 
 
I’m wondering whether or not this Act, this Bill, in fact will 
serve to be able to deal with people who have posed a 
significant risk to child prostitutes or prostitutes with sexual 
assault or anything of that nature, because in fact they are doing 
serious harm to other persons. And I want to know whether or 
not this Act will in fact be looking to deal with that problem in 
our society and whether or not it can be effective in that way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think there are two answers to your 

question. One is that if a person like you describe has been 
convicted of an offence against children and therefore meets 
this definition of high risk to re-offend, then that person would 
be covered by this after they were coming out of their 
correctional time. So that’s one answer. 
 
But I think the more effective answer to your question, and 
actually Chief Maguire talked about this when we were in 
Saskatoon at the press conference, and that’s the amendments 
that Mr. Rock is proposing, and I think will come fairly quickly, 
to section 810.1 of the Criminal Code that relates to the abuse 
of, I guess . . . But anyway, they’re basically peace bonds 
whereby people have conditions placed on their release into the 
community that would keep these people away from young 
children. 
 
So I guess there’s two parts: if a person was convicted of an 
offence that was prescribed in the regulations, which would 
include the offences you’re concerned about  sexual assault 
of anybody, but a sexual assault of children for sure  then 
they could be caught by this legislation. 
 
Also the police have another part which says that if this person 
is identified by them as a possibility of being a danger to the 
community, they could go on their own initiative and apply to 
the court for a peace bond, which then sets conditions on that 
person's presence within the community. And some of the 
conditions could relate to keeping them completely away from 
certain areas of town, completely away from certain types of 
people, completely away from the whole area that you’re 
concerned about. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I need 
some advice from you and clarification on what the law is right 
now and what kind of punishment is in effect now for people 
that solicit a child prostitute. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that there are offences . . . I don’t 
have all of my documentation or Criminal Code with me right 
here, but I think I have some information that would answer 
your question. It’s a little bit off the topic of this particular 
legislation, but that’s fine. 
 
There are some concerns and some initiatives that would look at 
a much clearer use of the Criminal Code to deal with child . . . 
basically saying that pimping is child sexual abuse, if I can put 
it that way. And I actually have some notes, if you want to just 
hold on a second. 
 
I think what you’re maybe wondering about is Bill C-119, was 
tabled in December of ’95 by the federal Minister of Justice, 
and it’s an amendment to the Criminal Code. And it would 
impose a mandatory, minimum jail sentence of five years for a 
new aggravated offence of living off the avails of a prostitute 
under age 18 where they aid or counsel prostitution or use 
threats of force to coerce into prostitution. 
 
Then the current subsection (2) of that particular part of the 
code would leave the sentence, maximum sentences, of up to 14 
years. But it also extends the offence for obtaining the services 
of a child prostitute to those who appear under 18, as well as  



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

those who are under 18. And this will facilitate law 
enforcement. A defence that has been used a couple of times is, 
well I thought they were over 18. This would make it clear that 
that’s not a defence to this charge. 
 
(1945) 
 
It also amends the out-of-court testimony screen and videotape 
provisions of the Criminal Code which would make it easier for 
children to testify in proceedings. In other words, they don’t 
have to have the person, the accused, sitting there and looking 
at them when they testify. They can be screened from the 
presence of the accused. 
 
So there are some things that are being done within the 
Criminal Code amendment area to deal with some of the 
concerns that you have. We are also working on other areas 
within Social Services and Health and Education and our 
department to get at some of these questions. 
 
The legislation that we’re talking about tonight may be of some 
use in preventing further abuse if a person has been convicted, 
and then is coming out and is still identified as a high-risk 
offender. And there should be some publication about that 
person in the community. I think this legislation maybe have 
use in that area. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. As I hear you speaking, 
I hear you talking about the pimps involved in this kind of a 
situation. My concern, and my question, is whether johns that 
have been using child prostitutes would be considered as posing 
a significant risk to other persons, and whether in fact then 
publication of their names and faces under this Bill or because 
of this Bill could in fact be done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer is that in certain 
situations, yes, because people like that are being charged with 
sexual offences against children. And those can be very serious 
charges; well they are very serious charges, and often will end 
up with sentences and then assessments of these people which 
then would be . . . the information would be inserted back into 
this process to warn other young people about problem 
customers, I guess, if you could put it that way. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One last question. When 
we speak of public disclosure of, you know, regarding names 
and faces, to what extent does this public disclosure go? I mean 
how widespread would be public disclosure? I know that it’s 
not enough that police forces have got the names and faces of 
these people within their police precincts. 
 
I think that public disclosure means that we must disclose this 
information to inform the public in a much broader sense in 
order to really protect people and make them aware of who’s 
out there that in fact can be a danger to our children. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  What we’ve tried to set up in this 
legislation, and I think we have set it up, and will be set out in 
more detail within the policy as the committee develops, is that 
we have a range from very minimal disclosure  very specific 
disclosure  perhaps to two or three people, or one person, that  

this person would be a serious risk, to all the way to maximum 
exposure, which is front page of the paper, on television, so that 
everybody knows. And that there’s a range. 
 
And part of what the whole purpose of the legislation is that the 
police were stuck with that decision alone without any advice 
and also with concern about liability on their part for making 
the wrong decision on how much disclosure there should be. 
 
The whole purpose of the legislation is to provide an advisory 
board and a sounding board and then the protection as the 
disclosure is done. There will be clear recommendations from 
the committee about how the disclosure should be done. And 
this would be done in consultation with the police force 
involved. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the 
questions that we’ve been asking . . . and as you’re aware, 
we’ve been anxious to see this kind of legislation. And we want 
the assurance that you have given us that  you will diligently 
ensure that the legislation includes all the avenues and all the 
help that our police agencies need to keep our communities 
safe, to keep our communities informed of potential dangers in 
their midst, and as I believe, I’ve said that before. 
 
I applaud you, Mr. Minister, for taking the incentive to proceed 
with this kind of legislation and I have no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
and to make a consequential amendment 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me tonight 
Brent Prenevost, Crown solicitor, and Kathy Hillman-Weir, 
who’s the Master of Titles, and Bev Bradshaw, who is the 
executive director of the property registration branch. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I wish 
to extend a welcome to your officials and give you my 
assurance that on this occasion I will be on the right Bill. 
 
Clause 3 of this particular Bill would change the definition of 
owner in section 2(1)(p) of The Land Titles Act so that an 
Indian band can become the registered owner of a piece of land 
or pieces of land throughout the province. As I understand it 
now, bands have not been allowed to become the registered 
owners of land and so in practice they have incorporated shell 
companies which own the land. Mr. Minister, it seems like a 
good idea to remove that particular requirement of the shell 
corporation and enable the bands to own the land in their own 
names directly. My only concern, Mr. Minister, is how the 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

change will affect the property taxation policies or the base, 
pardon me, of the municipality. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It’s very much the clear intent of this 
legislation that it would be tax neutral, that it wouldn’t have any 
effect on taxation. That’s the intent of the legislation. However, 
we do know that there are some concerns in some quarters 
about whether this will have any effect on taxation. It’s not our 
intent that it would. We are in a position where we are planning 
to proceed with the legislation, but we are in consultation with 
municipalities, with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, some of the bands, and we’re wanting to make sure 
that there aren’t any tax consequences, and that people aren’t 
intending to use any of this, the basic sort of mechanical things 
and the changes that we intend in this legislation, to do 
something else. 
 
As is the case in this, we would be proceeding to pass the 
legislation but we wouldn’t proclaim this part of the legislation 
until we ourselves were assured that it was not going to cause 
any complications in the taxation area. It’s clearly not our intent 
that it would. When the question was raised by you in some of 
your discussions and also by some of the people from within 
the municipalities, then we’ve taken some other looks, you 
know, a hard look at this. And we will not proclaim this if it’s 
going to cause some kind of problem. 
 
But we would like to proceed with this because it does facilitate 
a number of issues relating to the purchase of business, 
businesses and land, by groups which are very important and I 
think part of the future of Saskatchewan. We want to encourage 
them to invest money here in some of the businesses that will 
benefit their people and we don’t want to have it as a stumbling 
block in, you know, future business development throughout 
Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So in other words, 
there is an assurance that Indian bands will be required by law 
to pay municipal property tax on lands which they own within a 
municipality. Is that what I understand you to say, that the 
assurance is there that there will be no implications in that 
respect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that I want to give the assurance to 
the House that all the details of the legislation, as it affects the 
ability of Indian bands to own land directly, will be discussed 
with municipalities and with other interested parties before we 
proclaim it. We won’t be proclaiming this legislation until we 
are satisfied that it will be neutral. I mean it will be tax neutral; 
it won’t cause a problem. 
 
And if in fact out of those consultations we see that there are 
still some concerns, then it would be our process that we would 
come back to the legislature next year with some consequential 
amendments before we actually proclaim the legislation to 
make sure it’s absolutely clear that’s the case. 
 
It’s our understanding, and our intent with this legislation, that 
it does not have any tax consequences. But because of the 
questions that have been raised, we are going into this process 
where we will not proclaim this legislation until we’re assured  

that all the concerns have been answered. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. So for all 
intents and purposes, nothing will change for the time being. I 
appreciate that assurance. 
 
Clause 4 of the Bill makes some significant changes to section 
14 of The Land Titles Act. It completely does away with the 
statutory qualifications for employment as a registrar of a land 
titles office. That particular responsibility has the supervisory 
duty regarding the examination of documents that are submitted 
for registration and certification and so on. The decisions as to 
whether or not these documents are ultimately accepted or 
rejected are made at that point. And those decisions often 
involve a fair bit of legal judgement and perhaps experience as 
well, which is best learned on the job over a long period of 
time. 
 
I guess my question is, if the present, rather rigid employment 
qualifications for becoming a registrar of land titles offices are 
somewhat outdated, wouldn’t it be better to make an honest 
attempt then at updating them rather than abolishing them 
altogether? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This change will make it so that the job of 
registrar would be based on experience and other attributes 
within the public service. The plan here is really that there are 
virtually no other jobs within the civil service that have their 
qualifications defined in them. The only ones we could really 
think of are Public Trustee and the Master of Titles. And those 
jobs have their, you know, the qualifications set out in them. 
The purpose here is to allow for a little more flexibility, a little 
more ease, in recruiting some of these people. 
 
The other question that you had about some of the legal advice 
is that these people always will relate and work with the Master 
of Titles. That person always has to be a lawyer. And so that 
would be the person that supervises the whole land title system. 
 
Mr. Osika:  So the selection would be by way of a 
competition rather than appointment, Mr. Minister, I take it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That always has been the case, but it’s 
just that with these qualifications embedded in the statute, we 
have quite a narrow group of people that we could select. And 
often people who had been in the system, had a lot of 
experience and should be encouraged to be part of the system, 
couldn’t apply for some of the jobs. This gives us a little bit 
more flexibility in running this whole land titles system. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Clause 5 of your Bill, it completely 
abolishes section 16 of the Act. That will have the effect of 
completely eliminating the statutory qualifications for the 
positions of deputy registrar. 
 
I just wondered what the justification was for doing that, if 
there was a specific reason, if it was redundant? Could you 
please clarify that. 
 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The same rationale for this one as in the 
previous situation. The deputy registrars will still exist in the 
system. The jobs will be obtained by competition. But it gives 
us once again the flexibility to have non-lawyers do some of 
these jobs if they have the required experience within the 
system. And once again it goes to the fact that this is one of the 
few places where right in the legislation it sets out the 
qualifications for a job. 
 
Mr. Osika:  May I ask then, sir, how many deputy registrars 
will be affected by this change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The answer to that is none. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I appreciate that short answer. 
 
Let’s go on to clause 8 of the Bill. That will create a whole new 
section of The Land Titles Act, no. 62.1, which will place 
restrictions on the registration of instruments which will be 
either executed by Indian bands or which will result in the 
ownership of land going to an Indian band or which will result 
in an interest in land going to a band. 
 
I guess one of the questions that I have here, Mr. Minister, is 
the preparation of this list of bands and how that is to be 
accomplished. How do you intend that list to be prepared, as far 
as that particular section is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This whole area about how the land titles 
system would have proper evidence of who should sign 
documents is subject to negotiation. And we would be 
negotiating with the federal government and also with the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and the bands to 
figure out exactly how this procedure . . . There doesn’t exist 
now a registry which would have all of this information, and we 
need to define something so that we would have the proper 
information. 
 
Right now, if it’s a corporation, well then corporations branch 
has a document which sets out who should sign documents, and 
that’s a public record. And that allows us to have that 
information. We think we can set up a similar system which 
will meet the needs of the bands, meet our needs, and we’re 
going to do that through negotiation. 
 
That’s one of the other reasons why some of the concerns you 
had about the taxation will fit in with this, because we’re not 
going to proclaim these sections until we figure out how they’re 
going to work. And we have to do that through negotiation. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, sir. Just for clarification, and I 
apologize if I missed something, will you be using the already 
existing lists of bands  the federal one  or will you be 
creating your own in addition to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We would be using the existing lists 
because the definition of Indian band on the first page of the 
Bill means a band as defined in the Indian Act (Canada) that is 
located in Saskatchewan and includes the council of that band. 
 
So practically, that’s why we need to work with the federal 

government and their Department of Indian Affairs, which has 
the registration of bands there, as well as the people in 
Saskatchewan who would actually be the ones that would be 
signing the documents. 
 
So it’s a process of consultation that needs to take place as to 
how we set up this, I guess, registry of . . . if that’s what’s 
necessary. I mean obviously, if we have a system that’s pretty 
clear that’s right in the federal government system, well we 
would use that. 
 
But we need to make sure that it meets our requirements. Just to 
give you a little example of why that might be necessary, if you 
know anything about U.S. (United States) history, they have 
registered and deregistered bands in the United States sort of on 
and off over the decades, and there are quite a number of bands 
that call themselves bands that aren’t registered with the federal 
government in the States. 
 
We don’t have that same problem to that same extent in Canada 
but that’s why the definition is set out as it is here because we 
would want to have some connection with the federal 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Osika:  So in other words, Mr. Minister, you will have 
your own provincially certified list as well and keep that 
updated. Is that what you propose to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. We would propose that that would 
be part of the regulations that we will develop through 
negotiations. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I just wondered if there might be, under those 
circumstances, a danger of down the road for whatever reason, 
the opportunity for political interference and just a danger 
perhaps of an Indian band falling out of favour with the 
provincial government of the day  whatever that might be  
and then finding itself suddenly left off the list by virtue of a 
change in the regulations. Would it be better to not have that in 
place to avoid that possibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think that would be possible in 
that we’ve defined Indian band as defined by the federal 
government. And so I don’t see how the provincial government 
could decide that a band that was in Saskatchewan and is a 
band as defined by the federal legislation, that they wouldn’t 
have the same rights. I mean there would be many remedies 
both legal and political to deal with that kind of fooling around 
with the rules. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, sir. Clause 10 of the Bill creates a 
new section again of The Land Titles Act called section 63.11 
which will require the special affidavit must be sworn whenever 
an Indian band wants to register a document at the Land Titles 
Office. Now the affidavit will have to state, I understand, that a 
properly constituted meeting of the council of the band was 
held, a resolution was passed authorizing the signing of those 
particular documents along with its contents, and that a 
particular person was the individual authorized to sign. 
 
These are some cumbersome and complicated provisions with 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

considerably more detail than the usual requirements for either 
a business corporation or a non-profit corporation, Mr. 
Minister. I just wondered what prompted this complex and 
stringent requirement upon Indian bands when they wish to 
submit documents for registration at the Land Titles Office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The provisions for signing a document, if 
you’re a corporation, are set out in other legislation so it doesn’t 
have to be in The Land Titles Act. When we’re dealing with a 
band and we’re dealing with a special situation, we needed to 
have it clear that the person who signs the document on behalf 
of the band has the authorization and that it later couldn’t be 
challenged by some other member of the band or some other 
faction. 
 
And so we have tried to be as specific as we can to make sure 
that there wouldn’t be any subsequent challenge that, oh well 
that guy shouldn’t have signed it because he didn’t have any 
authority. If we have the authority that’s set out according to 
these rules, well then it would prevent any subsequent person 
coming along and saying that you didn’t have the right to do 
that. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, clause 15 
of your Bill completely repeals section 159 of The Land Titles 
Act and replaces it with a newly written section. I have a 
number of concerns about this new section. 
 
Firstly, I want to state that we have had the benefit of lengthy 
and thorough discussions about the subject of lapsing of caveat 
since the delivery of our speeches on this subject during the 
second reading of the Bill, and our discussions were useful. 
 
It appears that a great many members of the legal profession 
who carry on the practice of law in the field of land 
transactions, the granting of security on land, and the 
registration of interest in land, have much to say in favour of a 
return to the system whereby the lapsing of caveats is carried 
out by the staff of the Land Titles Office rather than by the legal 
profession. 
 
Our views have accordingly evolved on the subject after fruitful 
and earnest consultation with those that are affected. None the 
less, we still have a number of concerns about the specifics of 
the proposal as set forth in this Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, subsection (2) of the new section 159 provides 
that, and here I quote: 
 

The owner or other person claiming an interest in the land 
seeking to lapse a caveat registered against the land . . . 
may request, in the prescribed form, that the registrar send 
a notice to the caveator pursuant to subsection (4). 
 

So my question, Mr. Minister, is, I would like to know what you 
intend the phrase, “other person claiming an interest in the 
land” to mean in the new section 159(2). 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that there are a few examples that 
are quite simple and straightforward. One of them could be a 
lessee, somebody who wants to have the lease registered ahead 

of a caveat that has been filed. And so they would have an 
interest in having the caveat removed from the property so that 
their interest would take priority. 
 
Another person could be a credit union that’s lending money, 
and that this credit union wants to make sure that their interest 
in their mortgage precedes the interest that is there by the 
caveat. And neither one of those examples, those people are not 
owners but they do have an interest in the land. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Well, Mr. Minister, the new section 159(4) also 
uses the real charming term “prescribed method” when it refers 
to a person making a request that the registrar begin the lapsing 
procedure. Mr. Minister, what will the prescribed form be? 
 
(2015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This is actually a suggestion of a new 
form and it meets the need of a number of people primarily 
within the legal profession who never quite knew what it was 
that you were supposed to fill out to request that the registrar 
would lapse the caveat. 
 
And I can recall from my own practice that sometimes you 
would see just a letter; other times people would try to do it by 
a telephone call. But it always at land titles has to be written 
down. But what they’re doing here is they’re setting out one 
form which would make it very clear that that’s what being 
requested, is that the land titles system get involved in the 
lapsing of a caveat. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, your Bill at clause 15 changes the 
manner of delivery of what are commonly called “notices to 
lapse” so that personal service is eliminated entirely. Personal 
service of a document is a tried and true method of delivery 
which has been used for centuries in the context of important 
legal documents. It’s one method that is virtually guaranteed to 
get the attention of the recipient. Why do you want to eliminate 
personal service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The actual form of service would be set 
out in the regulations. When this system was in effect a number 
of years ago, the most common way of sending out notice was 
by registered mail, and it’s assumed that that would be the 
method that would be used here. And one would have to file 
with the Land Titles Office, or the Land Titles Office 
themselves would have the acknowledgement of service which 
was basically a signature that’s somebody’s picked up the letter 
that sets out that the caveat is going to be lapsed. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, the other aspect of the new section 
159(4) which disturbs me quite a great deal, is that it 
completely fails to set out any new, specific method of service 
of a notice of lapse. It simply says in here, I quote: 
 

. . . the registrar, subject to the regulations, shall send a 
notice in writing in the prescribed form and by the 
prescribed method: 

 
Mr. Minister, is the prescribed method going to be . . . like you 
know, you mentioned ordinary mail, certified mail, single 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

 registered mail, double registered mail, with a receipt card, 
acknowledgement of courier service  or some other method? 
What’s it going to be, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The method is going to be an effective 
method. Now if 10 years from now an effective method, 
because everybody has their own e-mail address, and it’s clear 
that people will get e-mail, well that’s what it will be. Right 
now the effective methods include everything from personal 
service through to the most common form, which is the sort of 
double registered mail. And the prescribed form, we’ve set it 
out this way to deal with all the possible changes in methods of 
communication. 
 
The other thing that we have to recognize, as I was explaining 
previously, if we go to a more automated land titles system, 
well then there may be other ways of giving notice in the 
system, especially to registered users. And for example, if there 
is a credit union that has a caveat that we want to lapse, and we 
knew that that credit union has its own number in the land titles 
system, we might be able to put in an e-mail to them and under 
the regulations we would set out the rules how that’s done. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, 30 days goes by rather quickly if 
you’re a busy farmer, a businessman, or a busy professional 
person. And I’m concerned that your Bill does not give a person 
who receives one of the notices from the registrar sufficient 
time to obtain the court order that is required under the new 
section 159(5), as set out in clause 15 of the Bill. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what groups did you consult with in reaching 
your decision that 30 days was an appropriate period of time 
and what do the interest groups say was an appropriate period 
of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This time line is a carry-over from the 
previous legislation and it’s been used for many, many years  
that it was 30 days. Often what would happen is that somebody 
finds out about this on the 29th day, they go over and make an 
emergency application to the court, and get the time extended to 
prepare all the documents. Basically lawyers who work in this 
area know how to deal with the time limits and usually haven’t 
had any problems figuring out how to get the time that they 
need to actually present all of the information. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
new subsection (6) of the new section 159 of the Act is a bit 
disturbing. It suggests that a person who has a caveat registered 
against land, and who receives one of these notices from the 
registrar, and who goes out and obtains an order preserving his 
caveat under subsection (5) of the Act, will have to seek yet 
another court order before the expiration of his initial court 
order. In effect, you would be requiring caveators to seek 
multiple court orders in order to preserve what may be perfectly 
legitimate rights. 
 
So my question, Mr. Minister, is that in this context, is this: 
why should a person who has a perfectly legitimate interest in a 
piece of land, protected by the registration of a perfectly 
legitimate caveat, be put to the inconvenience and expense of 
multiple court applications for the purpose of preserving the 

registration of his caveat? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The procedure that takes place when one 
applies to the court to have certain time to basically take a 
lawsuit to prove your interest that is shown in the caveat . . . 
Well basically the order that you would get is you have six 
months to do this or you have two months to do this. If in fact 
in the two months or the six months or a year or however long 
the judge decided that you needed to prove your interest in the 
land, if you hadn’t taken the steps to prove that interest and the 
six months expired, then the caveat’s lapsed automatically. 
 
What this does is makes sure that the person who has applied to 
have the caveat lapsed has the benefit at that end if you haven’t 
taken any steps to prove your interest. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Clause 15 of your Bill 
also includes a new section for the Act, to be numbered 159.1, 
which deals with the subject of notices to lapse for caveats 
where the caveator is either dead or has no legal representative. 
 
The new subsection (1) of the new section 159.1 directs the 
registrar to send the notice to lapse to official administrator for 
the judicial centre nearest to the location of the affected land, 
together with a fee of $10. 
 
So my question is: what is the official administrator supposed 
to do with a notice to lapse and the $10 fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The official administrator is the Public 
Trustee in a situation where that person has no legal 
representative, and so practically what this does is, this is giving 
notice to the official that would be in charge of the property of 
that person who has deceased. 
 
And so this is just setting out the procedure in a situation where 
the caveator is deceased and they haven’t for some reason 
obtained letters probate or letters of administration setting out a 
legal representative. In that case, the official representative, or 
official administrator, takes over. The official administrator for 
Saskatchewan is the Public Trustee. 
 
A number of years ago the official administrator would be 
different in different parts of the province. For example, it used 
to be Guarantee Trust, and then Guarantee Trust did that for the 
whole province. Now the Public Trustee fulfils that function. 
 
The $10 fee is the traditional fee that had been there for many 
years. Basically it was just left at $10. It’s really a nominal 
amount that . . . It doesn’t have any great significance that way. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In subsection (2) of 
the new section 159.1, you state that upon the request of a 
person wishing to have a caveat lapsed, the registrar may also 
send a notice to lapse to either the surviving spouse of the 
deceased or any named member of the deceased’s family, or 
both of the above. 
 
What possible motivation, Mr. Minister, would there be upon a 
person seeking to have a caveat lapsed to call upon the registrar 
to serve these additional notices? 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The surviving spouse of the deceased or 
any member of that family may have an interest in the estate. 
Because obviously  we’re dealing with land  it may have 
some value but it may not have sufficient value that a person, 
the surviving spouse or one of the children, has applied for 
letters probate or letters of administration. And so that we’re in 
a situation where there are some people that technically have an 
interest in some land that maybe does not have very much 
value, and it’s important that these other people receive notice 
of that in addition to the official administrator. 
 
And so you may . . . in this situation, the official administrator 
would notify these people. That’s most likely the case. But this 
is just a double protection to make sure for the person who 
wants to lapse the caveat that all interested parties receive 
notice on something. They don’t show up later and claim they 
didn’t know about it. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, sir. Mr. Minister, clause 22 of the 
Bill effectively repeals all the forms which used to be found at 
the back of The Land Titles Act and replaces them with the 
charming term, “the form prescribed in the regulations.” 
 
These were the forms which went by the designations, form A, 
form B, form C, form D, etc. Mr. Minister, these forms were 
convenient, easy to find, easy to access, and for the most part 
served their intended purpose very well indeed. I would just 
wonder if you could tell me why you’ve decided to repeal all 
these forms from the Act itself and put them into the 
regulations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The present situation is that some of the 
forms that are in the Act are slightly outdated  not very much, 
but slightly  so that there have been some changes or 
corrections that are set out in regulations. And so you end up 
with a bit of a confusion sometimes, whether you use the forms 
that are in the Act or forms that are in the regulations. 
 
But I think a more important reason that we’re doing it this way 
is that it allows for the changes that will most likely be 
necessary to forms when we go into an automated system or 
some other systems that we may end up with. If we don’t have 
all of those forms within the legislation, well then it’s easier to 
adjust them to deal with whatever new technology that we have. 
 
I think it’s fair to say that we’re hoping at some point that the 
land titles system will operate in a similar fashion to the 
personal property registry system as far as ease of access and 
also the ease of the use of the forms. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to 
sincerely express appreciation to yourself and to your officials 
for responding to us about some of the complexities of this 
particular Bill, complexities that you have explained very well 
to us. 
 
And we appreciate your efforts in trying to not only streamline 
but to ensure that there is parity and equity in this type of 
legislation for all the people that will be involved in dealing 
with these various types of processes. I want to thank you and 
your officials. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

(2030) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 90  An Act to amend 
The Provincial Mediation Board Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 83  An Act to amend 
The Limitation of Actions Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure 
of Information related to Individuals who Pose a 

Significant Risk of Serious Harm to Other Persons 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
and to make a consequential amendment 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I have all the same officials that I 
had earlier, and I can read their names again because they’re 
very good names. I have Brent Cotter, the deputy minister. I 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

have Doug Moen, who’s the executive director of the public 
law and policy branch; Tammy Pryznyk, who is the executive 
assistant to the deputy; Elizabeth Smith, who is the director of 
administrative services; and Richard Quinney, who is the 
executive director of public prosecutions, as well as others who 
will assist as we need them. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome back to 
your officials and yourself, Mr. Minister. We just have some 
questions here continuing on with the legal services aspect. I’d 
just like to ask a question about the aboriginal courtworkers’ 
program and the positions. Could you tell us the number of 
positions that are available in those positions? And what 
funding . . . is there any additional funding for that particular 
aboriginal courtworkers’ program? And do you anticipate 
increasing the positions in that particular service area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The number of courtworkers is 28 
full-time equivalent positions, and that actually involves 35 
people because of the part-time nature of some of the work. The 
funding for this is 500,000 from the provincial government and 
500,000 from the federal government. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. My next question is 
with respect to the number of judges. Would there be an 
increase in the number of court judges? Are you able to tell us 
that? The replacement of judges that have retired, and do you 
have any indication of additional judges that will be appointed 
within the justice system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are 45 Provincial Court judges 
positions, including the chief judge. At the present time, there is 
one vacancy. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Just going back 
to the question I had asked previously with respect to aboriginal 
courtworkers, along those lines. Do you have any funding in 
place to assist communities, aboriginal communities, for 
sentencing circles? What type of support, funding, and/or 
otherwise is available or is in place for helping those people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There isn’t a separate base of funding for 
sentencing circles, but the present arrangement is that in some 
communities there are community justice workers and 
committees that will work with it. Probation officers are 
involved with it. Also the aboriginal courtworkers get involved 
with sentencing circles, as well as the police, and sometimes the 
prosecutors and defence counsel as well. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just moving on to 
another item, one that’s kind of near and dear to my heart, and 
that’s the provincial policing services area. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if you could in fact identify for me the reasons . . . 
perhaps explaining the fairly significant increase this year in the 
provincial policing services cost? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Perhaps you could clarify what you’re  

referring to? Are you talking about the heading called, police 
administration? Or provincial policing? Because I’m not quite 
certain what the question is. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Under the police administration, Mr. Minister, 
there is a fair increase and I was just wondering if you could 
clarify what that’s for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Are you talking about an increase from 
552,000 to 645,000? 
 
Yes, okay, well then that relates to the police administration and 
the biggest amount relates to firearms, and we need another 
clerical position to deal with the Firearms Act. And then also 
we’ve budgeted for money that is reimbursement to the 
municipalities relating to firearms registration and that . . . 
there’ll be also some cost relating to the driving while impaired 
forms that have to be printed. 
 
So with those three items, that adds up to about $90,000, which 
is the increase. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. The issue of the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) and the bills attached to that 
particular service has become a bit of a sticking point to some 
municipalities  the increased costs of policing services in 
rural municipalities and in communities. 
 
I just wondered, Mr. Minister, how much say, does the 
provincial government in fact have over those policing 
services? What I’m asking is, is it a case of the RCMP telling 
you how much they need and you writing the cheque, or how 
much actual discussion is there related to the budgeting of 
policing services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The answer to this is not as simple as it 
might appear. There are arrangements for those communities 
over 500 that they would negotiate their own policing 
arrangements with the RCMP. And I’m not sure if that’s what 
your questions relate to; those municipalities which choose to 
contract with the RCMP to provide policing services to their 
communities. 
 
And those are the ones that often end up with the higher bills 
than the RMs (rural municipalities) around them which are 
included in an overall policing arrangement through our 
department negotiating with the RCMP to provide the overall 
policing. There are clearly some disparities in how much it 
costs in a community of 450 versus a community of 550. And 
we are very extensively involved with SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) to look at an overall policy 
for the province that would somehow balance out the fair cost 
of policing over the whole of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s not a very simple thing to do when we have so many 
different organizations that are involved in the discussion, but 
clearly there’s a cooperative effort to try to resolve this, and 
that’s about all we can say at this point. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. You pretty much answered, Mr.  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

Minister, the next question I was going to ask  if there was a 
move afoot to attempt to alleviate the disparity that does in fact 
exist in some of those areas. In this Supplementary Estimates, 
getting back to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, an 
additional $400,000. Under provincial policing services, 
subvote JU05  Royal Canadian Mounted Police  $400,000. 
What would that entail, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Supplementary Estimates, that 
$400,000 figure, is comprised of a number of items  I think 
three items. The first, the RCMP costs are above the approved 
budget due to a $150,000 carry-over from 1994-95. In other 
words, the costs were a little higher in that term. Also Grey Cup 
policing expenses of $100,000. And also there was an inability 
to achieve the level of savings that we anticipated in the 
subdivision reorganization, which then makes up for a total 
$400,000. 
 
Mr. Osika:  On that note, Mr. Minister, how much input did 
you have on the recently announced move to centralize the 
RCMP communications divisions; and would that be part of 
any of this costs; and will that in fact save the government 
money, that particular move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Any savings that are part of that proposal 
will be used to offset the telecommunication costs of the new 
system. The proposal was brought forward to us by the RCMP, 
as a suggestion by them, to allow them to do the policing for 
Saskatchewan within the budgeted amount that we had set with 
them. 
 
Basically what happened, as with all government departments, 
we said there’s no possibility of an increase. In fact we’re 
looking for you to try to save money because we have all these 
other amounts that we need to have for health, education, and 
social services. They said, well look, policing’s important. We 
agree with that very clearly. So we then . . . they came to us 
with some suggestions about how they might organize things in 
a different way. 
 
The other big factor for them, and I think you’ve probably heard 
this from them directly, was that much of their equipment was 
so outdated that they were going to have to buy something new 
anyway just to deal with the fact that their equipment was 
outdated. Doing all of these things at the same time was a way 
that some savings could be achieved. They could have a much 
more effective communication system and it serves the needs of 
government to do things more efficiently and effectively. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And again, the 
concern over budgetary processes and dollars and cents, the 
potential for a move to centralization in rural areas. I’m 
wondering if the government has done any studies on 
centralization of detachments, or other forms of downsizing, 
and what effects that might have on the service for people in 
rural Saskatchewan. What can they expect from their police 
force in the rural areas  a concern that people do have now, 
about perhaps, the distances from their local police forces, the 
inability to contact them directly because of some of the 
changes that have taken place. Has there been any kind of study 
done to determine what effects that these types of moves will 

have on policing services in rural areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The questions that you raise come directly 
out of the kinds of proposals that the RCMP have made to us. I 
have to say that I’ve been very impressed with how 
forward-looking they are in their organization and their 
planning for their force. 
 
And what happens in this particular reorganization that they are 
discussing in their models of policing for Saskatchewan is that 
it’s the intention that it will increase the actual policing on the 
street, because they are taking jobs out of sort of office jobs and 
putting them out into the force or onto the roads and into the 
communities. There’s no plan to reduce the number of 
detachments but it will reduce the number of administrative 
positions. 
 
The other thing is that it ties in very clearly with the new 
telecommunications system, with the goal over the longer term 
to have very quick, interactive response from a police vehicle to 
a telephone call. A policeman in a car will be able to answer the 
telephone, possibly we hope at some point have computer 
screen facts, whatever, right in the car, and so that there will not 
be the necessity of going out, investigating, then going back 
into the office, doing up a report, or whatever’s done. It can be 
done right on the spot. 
 
What is happening, and I think this is changing every six 
months even as far as the RCMP are concerned, there’s new 
ideas, new plans, about how one can police more effectively 
and more cost-efficiently as well as providing greater, sort of 
police service throughout Saskatchewan. And with the concerns 
that we have coming through SUMA and SARM, that directly 
affects, we hope, over the longer term, how much policing is 
actually going to cost the province. 
 
Mr. Osika:  The potential for centralizing some of the 
detachments into one larger operation, from the smaller 
detachments into one larger one  centralization of 
detachments  is that in fact perhaps a possibility in the not 
too distant future? I believe it is. And I wonder if you agree 
with that type of consolidation. With the dollars being so few 
and the costs of policing services increasing, the sparsity, if you 
wish, of individual policemen in communities becomes a 
concern. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think it’s the intention of the 
models of policing that we’re working on with the RCMP that 
there would be fewer detachments. In fact there may be more 
detachments. Because some of the communication jobs that are 
required in all of the different regions now, wouldn’t be 
required there because we’d have a centralized system for the 
telecommunications, the dispatching, those things. 
 
And what it would actually mean is that a person who was in, 
they call it sort of . . . there’s the full service detachments and 
 what’s the term that’s used?  community detachments, 
which will be all tied together and will actually provide more 
policemen out in the communities than we have now because  



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

there won’t be the same requirement to have the people in the 
office, in the regional office, doing all of these administrative 
things. 
 
And it’s something that the police tried over a number of years 
in the west-central part of Saskatchewan as a model. And they 
ended up realizing that there were many things that they were 
doing in other areas, after using this experiment, that they didn’t 
quite require. 
 
One of the really positive things that I’ve heard from some of 
the officers is that the person who is out in the field is given 
more discretion, more responsibility, but also the full 
expectation of backup of experienced people in a way that 
allows that local person to do much more of the policing on 
their own initiative as opposed to waiting for orders to do this 
or to do that. And I think it recognizes the professionalism of 
the police officer as a member of the community who 
understands and knows what policing services are required. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, what percentage of the cost of the 
RCMP for service in our communities, what percentage does 
the province pay? What share of the costs, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are three sort of categories of 
payment for policing services involving the RCMP. If you are a 
community under 500 people, in that situation the province 
pays 70 per cent and the federal government pays 30 per cent. If 
you’re a community over 500 and your community decides to 
contract with the RCMP, the community pays 70 per cent, the 
federal government pays 30 per cent, and the province is not 
involved in the funding at all. 
 
If it’s a tripartite aboriginal policing agreement, much like the 
one at Standing Buffalo, that’s funded 52 per cent by the 
federal government, 48 per cent by the province. And so those 
are the funding thing, but practically, the province does not 
contribute anything for those communities where the population 
is over 500. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Could you just indicate perhaps, has 
that changed significantly since 1991, over the last four or five 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  In 1991 we signed a 20-year deal with the 
RCMP, which is the 70/30 deal. That’s the basic part of it. 
 
The other thing to remember or recognize is that there are 
certain situations where a community has a contract with the 
RCMP to service their policing needs. For example, it may be in 
Yorkton. The positions that are designated as city positions for 
within the city of Yorkton, those would be paid for by the city 
of Yorkton, 70 percent, and the federal government, 30 per 
cent. But there are also positions that cover the rural areas 
around Yorkton. Those would be funded by the province, 70 
per cent, and the federal government, 30 per cent. But they’re 
all in the same office. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Can I just jump back to that 
federal-provincial agreement with aboriginal policing? The 52 
per cent that the federal government pays, is that included in  

your budget here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, just the 48 per cent is included in our 
budget. The 52 per cent would be in the federal budget. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Just one final question from myself 
before I defer to my colleague from Humboldt. 
 
Overrun costs, Mr. Minister. I know that it’s difficult and 
there’s no way you can project or anticipate a disaster, if you 
wish. In those instances where something occurs, where now 
we’re into a situation where essential services like our police 
services are not on a straight salary, but if they’re called back to 
work are paid additional monies for having to return to carry 
out certain responsibilities, where does that money, in the event 
of a significant problem, if you wish, requiring a number of 
police people to be moved around the province to certain 
locations . . . those overrun costs, how are they budgeted for 
and where would that money now be sought or obtained to pay 
for all those additional costs? Not unlike . . . I believe earlier we 
talked about the additional costs for police services for the Grey 
Cup, I believe it was, was somewhere in the $100,000 mark. 
Those are significant costs, and how do you project . . . and 
where would you get the money to pay for those costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The situation as it relates to some 
exceptional expenses that might come under policing is that 
presently in the RCMP budgeted contract that we have with 
them, or that they manage, they have a certain amount set aside 
for contingencies, for what they estimate might be within that 
year exceptional expenses. And they would use those funds. 
 
If those funds aren’t sufficient to cover the particular problem 
or disaster, then we ask that the RCMP try to manage within 
their total budget to try to come up with some funds to cover 
that. If that doesn’t work, well then they would come to the 
Department of Justice and we would try to work within our 
total budget to come up with the funds to meet that extra need. 
 
If we weren’t able to do that within the Department of Justice, 
then we would go to the Minister of Finance and request that 
there be funds used for this out of the general funds of the 
province, much in the same way, I suppose, as the forest fire 
costs last year had to come out of the general funds because it 
was much beyond the ability of the Department of Environment 
to cover. 
 
The other thing is that over the last three or four years, the 
RCMP have done very well at predicting what kinds of amounts 
they might need in a contingency, and that we have not had to 
go into all of the extra expense monies that might have been 
caused because of some kind of disaster. 
 
So really I guess what I can say is that there’s been a very 
careful planning and budgeting both within the RCMP and 
within our department, and this has not been a problem. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I do take comfort in the fact that 
your explanation indicates that if it comes to the point where 
money is desperately needed, it would be made available. So I 
take note of that. Thank you. 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

Again, under provincial policing services, one more question 
about Complaints Investigator. Is that something new, and 
could you just give us an idea what that’s all about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The provision for a complaints 
commissioner for police was part of The Police Act which was 
passed in 1990, but it only relates to those police officers that 
are employed by municipalities. 
 
In other words, it doesn’t cover the RCMP. The RCMP have 
their own complaints commissioner. And I’m not sure if you 
were asking about the RCMP complaints commissioner or 
about the provincial police one, but the one that’s in the budget 
is the provincial police complaints commissioner and it only 
relates to those people who are not in the RCMP. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I see the budget has 
gone down in that so I’m happy to see that perhaps we need 
fewer of those than more, and hopefully that’s the trend. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s only one person who does this 
job. It’s Mr. Elton Gritzfeld, and he is the Complaints 
Investigator. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have 
some questions in reference to the Ombudsman and the Office 
of the Ombudsman. 
 
The Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act gives the 
legislature the responsibility to oversee the Office of the 
Ombudsman. But as it is right now, there are no workable 
mechanisms in place to allow it to do so. 
 
The Ombudsman, in her 1995 annual report, calls on the 
government to consider the establishment of an all-party 
committee to oversee administrative matters related to the 
Office of the Ombudsman. This committee would have 
responsibilities to make recommendations to the legislature 
with respect to the appointment of the Ombudsman, and the 
committee would also receive, consider, and approve the budget 
for the office of the provincial Ombudsman, and would receive 
reports by the Ombudsman. The committee would be able to 
consult with the Ombudsman on questions of administration, 
and this committee would also have the authority to receive 
complaints from citizens against the Office of the Ombudsman. 
 
Now the Ombudsman would like to present her budget to an 
all-party committee in a similar way as is done by the Provincial 
Auditor, whose budget is determined by the all-party Board of 
Internal Economy. The Human Rights Commission has made a 
similar argument for independence from government influence. 
 
The Ombudsman has requested on several occasions that her 
office be more autonomous from government because she 
reports to the entire Legislative Assembly and not just the 
government, and feels that it should be the entire Legislative 
Assembly that approves her budget. Ombudsmans in the past 
have made similar requests but to no avail. I would imagine, 
Mr. Minister, that there is some resistance to the Ombudsman 

by the government and it . . . I mean because sometimes there 
are complaints against the government to the Ombudsman, and 
that may appear to be the government . . . to the government 
rather, as a sort of a thorn in their side. 
 
Nonetheless, it is important that this office be totally 
independent from government. As it is, there are no accessible 
links for her to the Legislative Assembly and that causes some 
problems for the Ombudsman when she is attempting to relate 
concerns. 
 
(2115) 
 
Just a couple more points. The Office of the Ombudsman exists 
primarily to ensure the protection of the rights of citizens. There 
is a great need to ensure that there is an elimination of 
government influence over the department and that cannot be 
overstated. It is extremely important. 
 
So I would ask the minister, do you agree that the 
Ombudsman’s concerns are valid and that an all-party 
committee should be established in order to deal with these 
problems and in order to ensure that the Office of the 
Ombudsman is very effective in its autonomous and 
independent nature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The government is looking at the report of 
the Ombudsman and is reviewing that carefully. I’ve met at 
length with the Ombudsman and discussed this whole issue 
with her at length myself, as well as hearing her perspective on 
some of the kinds of issues that she’s been dealing with. 
 
I think it’s very fair to say that she’s been doing a very good job 
within the budgetary restraints that all government departments 
and areas have been constrained by, I guess, in the last while. 
And that with the concerns that she’s raised in her report, we’re 
taking those very seriously and we’re going to look at them and 
see whether that does make sense as far as how government’s 
organized. 
 
But I think that’s as far as I can go right now. I’ll just say again 
though that the work that the Ombudsman does is very 
important for the overall functioning of government and that 
I’m personally very supportive of the kind of work that she 
does. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that the budget of the Ombudsman’s office, I mean 
as it appears in the budget, has remained the same but the very 
fact is some of the money has been, I think, relayed to a move 
of the office. In fact the funding for the matters at hand and for 
her to do her work has probably gone down a little bit. The fact 
is that the office would like to focus more on public education 
 that that office of the Ombudsman is there for their service. 
And you know it’s there for seniors and also there could be, I 
guess, more information given on the services of the 
Ombudsman’s office to high schools and so on and other 
interested parties. 
 
Right now, as it is, when I ask anybody in the province whether 
they understand there’s an Ombudsman’s office there for their  



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

service, they hardly even know what I’m talking about. And so I 
think that we have to ensure that people have a knowledge and 
access of the Ombudsman’s office and that they understand 
that, you know, that it can be accessed and that there’ll be some 
public education in that regard. It’s non-effective to have an 
office there if people don’t know really very well that it’s there. 
 
I guess that’s really all I’d like to say and I understand too that 
there may be more and more requests going to the 
Ombudsman’s office, in fact, if people know about it and that 
they can access the service. So I would really call on the 
government to look into this matter more deeply. The 
government really needs to take some action with regards to this 
matter because it has been called for by past ombudsmans also 
and there’s a reason for it. 
 
Now it matters not who is in government, what party is in 
government at all. It matters simply that this office is able to act 
in a way that it is very independent of all government influence 
of any kind. This isn’t a new concern and so I believe it’s really 
time to listen and to move on the concerns of the people of this 
province and for government to move on the matter, and I 
would encourage you to do so and do so quickly. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to you and to your officials. There’s a certain incident 
regarding . . . I’m going to do some questions regarding 
maintenance enforcement. I’m bringing one right to the floor of 
this Assembly and soon as I mention the name you’ll probably 
recognize it because it’s been one I’ve been dealing with for the 
last little while. 
 
I just got off the phone talking to the lady and she’ll be 
following the discussion we’ve got here tonight. It’s regarding 
an Alice Herold in the city of Regina, a lady who has worked 
very hard to build a new life for herself, a lady who left a 
situation, a farming situation, and basically walked away and 
agreed to the fact that she wouldn’t demand a lot of her 
husband. She would look after her family. She would raise her 
children. A lady who didn’t get the opportunity of continuing to 
raise her elder children. They’re now graduated. They’ve got 
jobs of their own. Her two younger boys that she had in her 
custody and helping along and came to the city, bought a home, 
got a job, and ended up asking her husband for some help after 
the older girls left the home that he was looking after, because 
she’s got two young boys in their early teens who are looking at 
many things that other children would like to do, but she wasn’t 
able to offer them any of these fun things  like being on a ball 
team or being on the hockey team or doing the extra functions 
at school  because she didn’t have the finances and the 
resources. 
 
And unfortunately, to make the long story short, Mr. Minister 
 I think you’ll be aware of it  they ended up back in court. 
And in this case, whereas most of the maintenance orders tend 
to be the husband being forced to pay, in this case the wife was 
asked to pay maintenance of some $800. They went and did a 
review, or an appeal, and dropped it down to $500. 
 
Mr. Minister, I find it very absurd that we have a system that 

seems to allow this to take place. And I think what happened 
here, when you look at it . . . In most cases that come to us, it 
appears that the person who happens to have the better, more 
knowledgeable lawyer probably gets the best out of the legal 
system. 
 
You gave Ms. Herold a couple of options to look at, mentioned 
the appeal process. Well quite frankly, I don’t really believe in 
the appeal process, for the simple reason that the appeal process 
is made up of individuals out of the legal community. And in 
many cases, do they take the time to really look at the situation? 
Or are they there more to protect what has taken place, rather 
than listen to what has happened to the innocent victim and 
maybe make some recommendations that may address the 
concerns? 
 
And the reason I raise this one, Mr. Minister, is because in this 
case, Ms. Herold just recently was released from her job, 
basically down to living off social assistance, trying to maintain 
a house that she’s worked so hard to try and pay for, and make 
sure she keeps it as well as the other ongoing operations, and 
has this fund to pay and no money to do it. She was released 
because her employer felt she wasn’t giving her all because of 
the trauma and the emotional stress she was facing because of 
the circumstance. 
 
What I’m asking, Mr. Minister, is what do we do to address 
circumstances such as this? 
 
And the farmer from south-east Saskatchewan, in the Wawota 
area, who’s basically got the Department of Justice sending out 
ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) to 
collect cattle to enforce some of the maintenance enforcement. 
 
Some of the circumstances . . . I know people get into some 
difficult circumstances themselves. But, Mr. Minister, there 
doesn’t seem to be a specific liaison, if you will, that people can 
go to, to really have an issue like this addressed where some 
fairness may be resolved in the circumstance. 
 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what do people like Alice 
Herold do to try and protect their dignity and to try and 
maintain a level of existence for themselves, especially when 
she basically lost everything? Her family was taken from her, in 
fact. And then she’s asked all of a sudden to put out the support 
when she had been supporting the two younger boys right from 
day one with no help from her spouse. 
 
Mr. Minister, what do people like this do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well there are clearly unfortunate 
situations that arise and the difficulty that I have as Minister of 
Justice addressing this particular situation relates to a couple of 
things. One is that she’s not involved at all with any of our 
maintenance enforcement procedures. So that is clear. 
 
What we’re talking about is the courts. And the remedies within 
the courts are, as they always have been, if there is a change of 
circumstance, which it appears that maybe there would be, the 
appropriate place is to apply to the court to vary whatever 
previous order was made. 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

Now I was very surprised, and I think I heard you correctly, 
make some very disparaging remarks about one of the other 
branches of government. We’re here now in the legislative 
branch; I’m one of the members of the executive branch; and 
some of the comments that you made tonight are extremely 
unparliamentary as it relates to members of the judicial branch. 
And you may wish to consider whether you want to withdraw 
those remarks now or whether you would reconsider what 
you’ve said. Because it’s entirely inappropriate to make the 
kinds of remarks that you did here. What we’re talking about is 
a matter that’s within the court structure and involves an 
individual. And the policy of the department is clearly that I 
cannot, as Minister of Justice, make any comment about that. 
 
That doesn’t mean that I’m not sympathetic to some of the 
concerns that people have when they get into these problems, 
but in this particular case I can’t say more than that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So basically what you’re saying, Mr. Minister, 
there’s just nothing you can do  nothing you’re interested . . . 
or your department is willing to do  to raise an issue or 
maybe to open up the door to offer an alternative. 
 
You mentioned that the opportunity there is to go back to the 
courts. Well that’s fine if you’ve got a major salary and a lot of 
money because the courts cost money. If you don’t have the 
funds to do it, Mr. Minister, how does a person get back to the 
court system when you do not have the money to put up the 
funds to go back and address this issue? 
 
Now you mentioned maintenance enforcement . . . Enforcement 
of Maintenance Orders Act, and I would like to know exactly 
what you mean by the maintenance of enforcement orders Act. 
If I read your letter correctly, all that does if you register with it, 
that office then is responsible to collect the maintenance and to 
pass it to the person that’s been required to . . . or that the order 
or the funding has been given to. And if I’ve got that wrong 
then I’d like to be cleared on that. 
 
But I’d also like to know . . . what I’m asking, Mr. Minister, is 
what avenues . . . or is there an avenue that can be pursued and 
maybe, if you will, another mediation . . . The former minister 
and myself have had an ongoing series of debates on this issue 
and we have, back in the last session of this Legislative 
Assembly, instituted a mediation process. However I don’t 
think that mediation process takes place once a matter has been 
into the court system. 
 
And as I said earlier, the thing is if a person happens to find a 
lawyer . . . one party happens to choose a lawyer who is very 
well versed in maintenance enforcement orders, they may have 
an advantage in the court system. I don’t know about that, but 
what I’m asking, Mr. Minister, are there other avenues that 
could be pursued or could be looked at to address concerns that 
people have in situations such as this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the most obvious answer is, if a 
person cannot afford the lawyer that they’ve used to this point 
 which sounds to be the case  but if that’s the situation, 
then a person can apply for legal aid. And as the minister 
responsible for legal aid, I would say that we have some very  

capable, able people dealing with these kinds of issues, and 
they can provide advice and help them deal with the problem. 
 
Now if that option’s not available it is possible for a person to 
be a litigate on their own, and that what can happen is that the 
person can try to argue their own case. Now most of the time 
that would not be recommended. 
 
So what we end up having though is a situation where, if there 
is a change in circumstances in any situation, the remedy is 
always to go back to the court with the information about the 
change and an order will be made. That order can wipe out any 
arrears. It can adjust a payment if that’s necessary. And that’s 
been the law for a long time, and that would be a remedy for 
somebody who is in a situation where they can’t pay the amount 
that a court has ordered. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, you mention legal aid. And I 
guess the problem we have here with legal aid . . . because I’ve 
had a couple other circumstances that have been brought to my 
attention where people have gone to legal aid. One 
circumstance, Mr. Minister, and fortunately we were able to, in 
consultation with legal aid, finally got legal aid moving, and 
this was a very simple matter. 
 
This matter goes back almost two and a half years where a 
couple had decided that they could no longer live together and 
they sat down, between the two of them, and they decided what 
would be agreeable in a separation. They didn’t have a lot and 
they went to legal aid. And basically every time they called the 
legal aid lawyer they weren’t getting anywhere. And all the 
lawyer needed to do, as I understand it, was to sign . . . I don’t 
know whether it’s a specific sign-off order or an agreement to 
sign the fact that they had agreed to certain details of their 
separation. And, Mr. Minister, that took two and half years. 
And I just don’t remember in this case if . . . I believe in this 
case as well, where Alice Herold did look at legal aid as an 
option but didn’t seem to be getting anywhere. 
 
And I think the problem there, Mr. Minister, is whether or not 
the legal aid lawyers have the time or just aren’t getting the job 
done. My understanding is they’re so overworked that the 
process gets dragged out and so a lot of people end up for such 
a long period of time trying to get a simple matter taken care of. 
 
And I guess that’s the concern, the concerns, that have been 
raised with us regarding legal aid. While you would suggest 
legal aid as an option, it might be an indication that the legal aid 
system is not getting the funding that is needed to address the 
number of cases that end on their doorstep and how they are 
addressed. So I’m wondering if you could respond to that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m not sure if you’re aware that I’m 
a mediator and have been for . . . well actually there were two 
mediators in Saskatchewan in 1985: one in Saskatoon and one 
in Regina. I was the one in Regina. I’ve practised mediation for 
many years and I am very much in favour of that method of 
resolving these kinds of disputes, always though assessing and  



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

making sure that it's an appropriate matter to be dealt with that 
way. 
 
What I would say in response to your question is that legal aid 
also has some money budgeted for mediation and they in fact 
do use some of the mediators, either in private practice or in 
mediation services, to resolve cases when that’s appropriate. 
 
And so that is always an option. The process of mediation as 
practised as it relates to these kinds of cases would go 
something like this: a person would come to see a lawyer and 
say, I want to get this resolved. Now maybe that if the person 
came to the mediator they would say, well look, clearly both 
parties need legal advice in this process and the mediator does 
that. When I personally practised, I usually only took cases 
where I was referred cases by other lawyers and so that I always 
knew very clearly that the parties had legal advice in whatever 
the process was. 
 
Under the law society rules, the parties must, if they’re using a 
lawyer as a mediator, enter into a contract that sets out the 
parameters of the mediation, but also protects the 
confidentiality of whatever discussions take place in the 
mediation, which is a very important part of that. 
 
When agreement is reached, the arrangement, such as it may be, 
as it relates to property, custody and access, child support, 
spousal support, all of that is set out in a contract which would 
then be signed by the individuals with independent legal advice. 
 
Then what would most likely happen is that the terms of that 
contract are incorporated into a divorce judgement or an order 
under The Family Maintenance Act which then becomes a court 
order. And that could be then registered in the maintenance 
enforcement system which is administered by the Department 
of Justice. 
 
Now what happens is, if the parties cannot agree that mediation 
makes sense, you can’t force somebody to mediate. And it 
seems to me that some of the questions that you’ve raised 
involve situations where there is not the appropriate 
communication or agreement between the parties so that they 
can use the mediation to solve the problem. And that’s 
extremely unfortunate because mediation can work very well. 
 
I guess the whole point in many of the changes that we are 
making in the justice system relates to the fact that people want 
problems solved; they don’t want problems created by the 
justice system. And it’s very clear that any time a problem is 
created within the justice system, it costs the taxpayers lots of 
money because it costs the system lots of money; it costs the 
individuals lots of money. And all of those things are not goals 
of any minister of Justice or any department of Justice if they’re 
doing their job. 
 
So it’s a bit of a long answer, but I thought you would 
appreciate understanding that mediation and all of those aspects 
of resolving disputes are very much a part of our total justice 
system, but they need to be used in the appropriate places. 
 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, coming back to the case I just 
mentioned a minute ago about the couple that had resolved how 
they were going to separate, and two and a half years later . . . 
How do you explain why it took two and a half years just to get 
a legal aid lawyer to fill out whatever papers are needed to 
finalize the settlement when it was already agreed to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I have no idea why that would take that 
long. I mean it may be . . . I mean there’s all kinds of 
possibilities but that’s not the normal process. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I did ask a question a minute ago  and I still 
haven’t received an answer  regarding The Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Act a person could file under. What does 
that really mean? And this is to do with the Alice Herold. . . It’s 
in a letter you sent to . . . you actually you sent it to me on 
March 14  and mentioned about Alice Herold not being . . . 
filing with the maintenance order office. And I’m exactly 
wondering why she would file if she was a person that is 
ordered to pay a maintenance. Why would . . . or what’s the 
process? Why would she be asked to be filing if she’s been 
asked to make a payment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well one of the reasons that she might file 
it  and if she could come to me when I was a lawyer I might 
have said something about this  is that there are some 
processes within the maintenance enforcement office that allow 
for the communication and the arrangement for payment that 
takes into account the situation that a person might be in. They 
obviously can’t bury the court orders but they can, through 
various methods, make sure that the payments are made in a 
way that is affordable by the respondent, by the person that has 
to pay. 
 
And that is done through the director of the maintenance 
enforcement office. Now that person cannot get involved in the 
case if it’s not an order that’s registered with that office. That’s 
what that point would be. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So basically are you saying to an individual like 
an Alice Herold, in this circumstance, that if she would register 
with the maintenance enforcement office, and this maintenance 
order that has been ordered by the courts which she finds 
impossible in order . . . while she’s trying to have enough 
money to make payments on her . . . plus insurance on her car, 
make payments on her house, and live, that the maintenance 
enforcement office could actually look at it. 
 
If I understand it correctly, the maintenance enforcement office 
can’t really change that court order. So I guess that’s what I’m 
trying to understand. Her problem is, how does she meet this 
goal of every time she does finally get a job, and if it’s not a 
high paying job, she’s stuck with not a lot left in order . . . if 
she’s forced to try and maintain this maintenance enforcement 
order. And I guess I just don’t understand how applying to this 
enforcement of maintenance orders really would help a person 
like Ms. Herold, and I’d like your response, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer to your question 
is that if the order is being enforced through the maintenance 
enforcement office, then the director of maintenance 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

enforcement and the staff take over the enforcement of the 
order, and therefore the other lawyer who seems to be 
particularly persistent has to wait and enforce the order through 
the office. And I mean, it’s especially important in situations 
where a person does not have a large income and the income 
that the person does have might be fully garnisheed so they 
have nothing to live on. Well the director of maintenance 
enforcement has some discretion to figure out how much of that 
person’s income might be appropriate to pay towards the 
maintenance order, and the guidelines that are set up for that 
office make it so that people can live as well as meet their 
obligations. 
 
So there is a bit of a protection there. And I think that was 
clearly the intent of the suggestion, which is that if you get the 
maintenance enforcement office involved, they’re not there to 
help you avoid making the payments, but they are there to help 
you deal with your own, personal finance problems and deal 
with the obvious obligations that you would have for child 
support. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re saying is that office, if Alice 
would have registered with it, with the office, they would have 
. . . I believe the lawyer for her spouse, if I’m not mistaken, did 
garnishee all the wages. Now if she would have registered with 
this office, the maintenance enforcement office could have 
saved her the problem of the garnishee on those wages. Is that 
what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s right. The maintenance 
enforcement office would have the management of the 
enforcement and would replace the lawyer that, in this case or 
any case, that the parent with the children would have. They 
would replace that lawyer, take over the management. It’s very 
rare, if ever, that a maintenance enforcement office enforcement 
would take a whole pay cheque from somebody, because it just 
doesn’t make sense. You have to end up managing the 
obligation for the children over and against the obligations of 
the person who’s trying to survive. And if the person can’t live, 
can’t work, then they can’t pay the future payments. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what happens if a person hasn’t registered and 
their wages have been garnisheed? And the fortunate part for 
Ms. Herold  I just talked to her a few moments ago  she 
was quite pleased about the fact she’d found another job. But 
the realities are she’s probably still got a garnishee on any 
wages she makes. If she were to register with maintenance 
enforcement, would that remove the present garnishee that is 
there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That would possibly be the result. The 
director of maintenance enforcement would look at the whole 
case and make an assessment of what’s the best way to assure 
some payment, maybe not the full payment if that’s not possible 
given the financial circumstances, but some payment and then 
the management of the debt. And in a situation where there is 
an existing garnishee that names a particular employer and the 
person doesn’t work there any more, that garnishee wouldn’t 
have any validity. It’s most likely that a person wouldn’t go 
back to the same job but to a different job, so they’d have to get 
a new garnishee anyway. 

Mr. Toth:  So for anyone who would actually end up in 
similar circumstances coming to my office, it would be 
appropriate to suggest that this would be the first avenue, since 
they’ve already been through the court, they’ve already been 
through the appeal system, and they’re just in a position where 
they’re tied financially. And as well, even to go to legal aid and 
when there might be another review, or going back to the court 
system, this might be a means of giving them, if you will, some 
breathing room so that they don’t have everything . . . lose 
everything while they’re trying to at least get themselves on 
their feet. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Minister, very seldom do we end up actually 
standing up and defending women in a circumstance like this. 
It’s usually the man that’s on the losing end when it comes to 
maintenance of enforcement or settlement, or at least the feeling 
is there. 
 
But I think it’s something we need to be aware of. It’s 
something we need to take a serious look at and I raise it 
because of the frustration that was felt in this case and a couple 
of other cases that have come to my attention over the last few 
years regarding maintenance of enforcement orders. And the 
interesting thing is, no one has really come to me looking for 
the fact that they want to get away without anything. But they 
have found, to be quite candid with you, they have found that 
going through the process of the courts has cost them big 
megabucks. It’s cost them . . . in some cases individuals have 
lost their livelihood, whether it be a farm or a business, just 
through the process, because of the time it takes. 
 
(2145) 
 
And I guess maybe here’s a time we talked about . . . the former 
minister suggested the mediation process so we don’t get this 
drawn-out court system. Maybe the other avenue is to set a level 
of whatever fee could be struck so that there’s, if you will, if 
there’s a level . . . and in dealing with lawyers, every time you 
make a phone call there’s a 50-minute charge on your bill. It 
starts to add up. Another 50. And if it takes two or three years, 
who knows what you’re going to end up with. Maybe if we had 
some limits. And I’m not sure the legal system is . . . or the 
legal community would like to hear the fact that there maybe 
should be some limits or some guidelines. 
 
Mr. Minister, we just brought . . . or your government just 
brought in no-fault insurance in SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) to protect the company from the 
outlandish settlements that were being offered. And yet 
individuals on many cases end up in situations where they are 
going through the legal system, have hired a lawyer, and 
depending on the level of lawyer they’ve hired, their bill can 
grow immensely until they finally get through and finalize the 
court system. 
 
And sometimes I think that’s what many people feel in the case 
of maintenance enforcement orders, that by the time they’re 
through with the system, they should have sat down I guess and 
gone through mediation because they’ve given up everything 
they tried to work towards, at least dividing with each other. 
 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

So those are some of the circumstances, I think, Mr. Minister, 
we need to address and look at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think in response to some of those 
things, I would have many things that I would agree with you 
in. And it fits right in with an overall concern of this 
government and this minister, which is access to justice, and 
how do people get their problem solved when they need it 
solved. 
 
One of the things that will be of great assistance specifically in 
the kinds of cases we’ve been discussing tonight is the 
introduction of child support guidelines. It’ll be very clear what 
the amount of child support should be. And the argument will 
be, well why shouldn’t it be what’s on the guidelines as 
opposed to a present system which involves a lot of work to try 
to set the amount of support. 
 
The child support guidelines will be in effect next year. I’m not 
sure  is it May 1 of ’97? But I’m pleased to report that it 
appears that in Saskatchewan many of our judges have adopted 
the use of the child support guidelines in making their orders 
now. There are some proposed guidelines and so that the 
practice of law in this area has changed and has been simplified 
in setting the amounts. 
 
Now I think there are still many places for looking at how we 
get to the particular solution that is needed in any particular 
case. And there’s a place for mediation; there’s a place for, in 
some cases, clearly a full-blown system. And there may be 
some places for more education, which we are already doing in 
the department, where people can go to a class and hear about 
all the different kinds of options about how their problem can 
be solved. 
 
Some of these kinds of courses, which are taught through the 
family law division, actually provide enough information so 
that people can get legal advice based on some knowledge of 
how the whole system works. And that really cuts down on 
legal costs as well. It also allows people to work through some 
of their problems on their own. 
 
But the whole question I think, is access to justice, and that’s 
very much a concern of this minister. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to pose a couple of questions to you that I omitted 
the last time we were here and speaking on legal aid. Legal aid, 
I understand, is paid by the government. Is that correct? For the 
lawyers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  In Saskatchewan we have a system 
whereby the Legal Aid Commission receives money from the 
government and they then have staff lawyers who work for 
them and they are paid salaries. And there are a few very 
specific situations where private lawyers are retained to defend 
individuals, and one example of that would be murder. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what is the 
salary that a lawyer would get that is being paid through the 
legal aid process? Are they paid . . . Well I’ll ask you that  

question first. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There’s a salary range probably between 
30 and 70,000, depending on the years of experience. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So, Mr. Minister, it 
doesn’t really matter then, according to that response you gave 
me, on how extensive the case is or how much time is incurred 
by the lawyer in dealing with a case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Perhaps I’m not understanding your 
question. But there are a few very specific situations where a 
lawyer in private practice would be hired to handle a case. And 
if you’re asking about how much those people are paid, then 
that’s another question. I think I can get the answer for you. 
But, for example, if it’s a murder case and it takes 100 hours or 
200 hours to do that case, then there’s a standard hourly rate 
that is paid to the lawyer for that case. 
 
They may also be able to apply to get some special money if 
they need an expert witness or if they require some special 
information. But I think the hourly rate is still . . . 
 
I think . . . I mean if your question is specifically on the private 
lawyers and how much they get paid, I can find out the exact 
hourly rate. But I do know that it is substantially less than the 
normal hourly rate that a lawyer would charge, and that some 
lawyers will take these cases out of a commitment as a member 
of the bar. But there are people who need assistance even if 
they don’t make the same amount of money on that case as they 
might on another one. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the case of a couple 
who are vying, I guess, for custody of their children as such, 
and if they have a legal aid lawyer and they’re not happy with 
the lawyer, and you know something is not working out; and 
the lawyer in fact maybe works on this situation for let’s say 
two weeks, three weeks, and so he is no longer the lawyer for 
this person or couple, and another legal aid lawyer is appointed, 
is the initial lawyer paid just to serve a lump sum for any case 
that is not criminal, or how does the pay to them vary? And it 
has to be determined, it seems to me, by the amount of work or 
success that they get for these people. And I’m not sure; I’m 
just trying to find out how we can determine or understand what 
the payment is to the lawyer. 
 
Because it seems to me that if there’s a salary that’s given to a 
lawyer for each case, then really if they’re not successful in the 
case, they may care less and they may end up just sort of, you 
know, if they’re frustrated and they can’t get anywhere and 
people are unhappy with him, they will just simply say, well 
you know this is not successful; I can’t represent you. And in 
that case really we’re paying them for not accomplishing what 
they were set out to do. So I’m just wondering how that works 
in the case where it’s not necessarily a criminal situation and 
it’s a short-term sort of employment for the lawyer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I don’t know of a situation like 
you’re describing in Saskatchewan. I mean it sounds to me that 
you maybe have some information from Ontario which had a 
system whereby private lawyers would get legal aid certificates 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

and then take cases and deal with them. 
 
In Saskatchewan the system is  especially as it relates to civil 
cases  I would say 99.9 per cent of all cases are handled by 
staff lawyers who are paid a monthly salary to handle all the 
cases. They don’t get paid by the case at all. And the net effect 
is that you have somebody working on your case who isn’t 
affected by the length of the case in how they’re paid, if that’s 
one of your concerns. But you do have a person who will have 
specialized in that area of the law and is very good at providing 
advice and doing court work. 
 
I know from my own personal experience that some of the 
lawyers in the civil area that had the most court experience were 
the legal aid lawyers. And that was obvious when you were in 
court and dealt with them, that they were doing a very good job 
for their clients. 
 
But practically, if you’re a person who’s only been a lawyer for 
one year, you might be at the lower end of the scale and receive 
30, 35, $40,000 a year. If you’ve been somebody who’s there 
that’s 25 years, you’re probably at the top end of the scale and 
be making approximately $70,000. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I feel 
compelled to make a comment, and I really have every respect 
for the person of lawyers, legal aid lawyers, or any lawyers. 
 
But I have had certainly a number of phone calls with problems 
of the duration of settlements of . . . just great problems with 
legal aid lawyers and great dissatisfaction and frustration by 
people. And that’s just in the short term that I have been here. 
And I’m not sure exactly what . . . you know, there’s two sides 
to every story with everything. And so I haven’t certainly heard 
from any lawyer’s perspective, but on behalf of some of the 
clients there has been a great deal of frustration. And I guess in 
time we’ll probably be able to find out. 
 
And I sometimes think it may be attributed to the great number 
of cases as opposed to the number of lawyers we have in legal 
aid. And it becomes overwhelming for them and very difficult 
for them to deal with a case properly. And so I guess we have to 
look into that and we have to see what we can do about it. But I 
would just appreciate your attention on that matter, and that we 
be astute and alert to that and see what transpires in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would just respond by saying that I 
would encourage you to have any people that have concerns to 
contact or correspond with the director of the Legal Aid 
Commission because I know that they are very concerned 
within the Legal Aid Commission and the legal aid clinic 
system that they are responding properly to people. And the 
director of the Legal Aid Commission is, I think, very pleased 
to receive concerns and has done a very effective job of 
responding to concerns. 
 
Another role that she does have is also responding to appeals 
where people aren’t qualified for legal aid, and she deals with 
those matters as well. So I would just encourage you to do that. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, I’ll 

turn it over to my colleague here I think that has. . . 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m not quite 
prepared to relinquish the floor totally yet. But, Mr. Minister, 
we were discussing the maintenance of enforcement. I think 
we’ve come to an understanding. 
 
You made a comment about accessibility to justice or 
accessibility to the courts or whatever. And as I’d indicated 
earlier, I mentioned this even with the SGI situation where 
legislation was brought in, the no-fault insurance program, and 
the fact that there are definitely individuals, especially younger 
people, who are getting caught in the squeeze and are probably 
losing because of the limitations on that no-fault. And I’d 
mentioned at that time when that legislation came in that you 
maybe could have set some limits as to how high a judgement 
could be made. 
 
(2200) 
 
You talked about the fact that now we’ve got a process whereby 
maintenance, there are going to be some guidelines and 
limitations for child maintenance or whatever the . . . I just 
don’t remember the specific term. And I’d mentioned that in 
SGI. You could have set that too. I realize that legal suits and 
awards were getting just outrageous and I don’t think anyone 
disputes that fact. But most people would feel that there should 
be something that would be fair and appropriate. 
 
And I guess what I’m suggesting as well, when we look at the 
courts and the cost of going to court, making it accessible, I’m 
not exactly sure what all you’re looking at, but there may be 
some areas where we need to address a person’s ability to get to 
court fairly without having to worry about surrendering 
everything they own just to get a free and fair trial. And I’m not 
sure how far you’re going or what proposals or what ideas 
you’re looking at, but I would suggest that this is something we 
need to take a serious look at, Mr. Minister. And I’d like your 
response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I appreciate the question because it 
allows me to talk about some things that are really quite 
interesting. I think it should be clear that access to justice 
doesn’t equal access to court because people don’t always see 
going to court as the only way that they can have their problems 
solved. And so we’re looking at a number of options which 
include mediation and some other possible community 
mediation situations. 
 
The other thing is, we’re looking now at small claims court, and 
the jurisdiction of small claims court, and how one can enter 
that court because often there are disputes that aren’t receiving 
the whole process of the court because of the size of the amount 
involved. And so people avoid going anywhere near the court to 
get those matters resolved. 
 
We’re looking at some changes to the rules, in consultation 
with the judges and lawyers, and individuals who are concerned 
about this, and people within the department, that may address 
and open up the process of small claims. Most likely included 
in that would be a mediation aspect or even some other kinds of 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

arbitration that are governed by rules other than the court 
system. 
 
But I think it’s important to recognize that we’re not alone in 
Saskatchewan in trying to deal with some of the concerns that 
you’ve raised about how much . . . or how can we afford to 
resolve problems in a system that is set up to be very expensive. 
And obviously we need to figure out some other ways to do it. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Getting back to the appeal process, Mr. Minister. 
How does the appeal process work? If a person feels that they 
haven’t been treated fairly in the court system, and make an 
appeal, or go through . . . I believe there’s an appeal process 
that they go to. How does that work and who are part . . . Who 
makes up the appeal process and what are the guidelines? 
 
If I understand correctly, in most cases appeals look at whether 
or not due diligence was followed. And in many cases that can 
be specifically related to: were the aspects of the law followed 
in the court case. But they don’t really get at whether or not the 
case, and scenario for the victim or the individuals, whether or 
not they felt they were dealt with fairly. Is it strictly looking at 
the technicalities of a case as it’s brought before the courts and 
whether those are followed properly, or does the appeal process 
even review some of the court mechanism to see whether or not 
that person is, can, was, or feels that they were treated fairly in 
the court system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think what I would say is that the 
appeal process is usually set out in whatever legislation is 
involved. But if it’s an appeal of a court decision from Court of 
Queen’s Bench where most matters dealing with family law 
issues  which is what we’ve been talking about tonight  the 
appeal from a decision there is an appeal to the Saskatchewan 
Court of Appeal. And the appeal can be appealed on facts, law, 
mixture, and it can deal with just some of the questions that 
you’ve raised about how the matter was dealt with, the overall 
part of it. 
 
But practically, I would have to say that the Court of Appeal 
over the years has had the role of sorting out problems that 
might have arisen in a trial situation by making some 
corrections and suggestions. They also have a role of setting 
some policy in some tricky areas that aren’t clearly laid out in 
the legislation. 
 
But we’ve had a system of courts with appeals, and then the 
ultimate appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada is possible as 
well. We’ve had that system for, well in Saskatchewan I 
suppose, a hundred years, but in our Canadian . . . or in our 
British background system for hundreds of years. And it has 
proved to be quite effective in dealing with issues. 
 
I’m not sure if that totally answers your question, but that is the 
process that we as a society have set up. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re basically saying is the appeal 
mechanism, the individuals of an appeal group are basically 
from the legal community and would address an appeal raised 
by an individual based on whether or not the technical details of 
the law were followed versus whether that person may have felt 

that they were represented fairly in a court of law. 
 
And the other option, the other thing I was going to suggest, for 
the fact that people sometimes feel that under the appeal 
mechanism they may not have received, in their minds, a fair 
appeal, would there be room for a person outside of the legal 
community to be involved and part of an appeal process? I 
would take it that the appeal process all centres around the legal 
community. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m not entirely certain. If the concern is 
about a complaint about a lawyer, then the process can be to file 
a complaint with the law society. And the law society has a 
system of assessing and dealing with complaints against 
lawyers which includes a hearing. There are, at present, two lay 
members of the law society, and those people are involved in 
some of the discipline processes. And it’s . . . with some of the 
legislative changes this session, we have the opportunity to 
appoint up to four lay people on that particular one. So that 
would deal with complaints against the lawyers. 
 
If there’s a complaint about a judge, it is also possible to file a 
complaint with the Saskatchewan Judicial Council or the 
Canadian Judicial Council in certain circumstances. And then 
there is a process of review of the conduct of the judge. 
 
You may have seen some of those in the paper, not about 
Saskatchewan judges, but I think there was one involving some 
of the comments made by a judge in Quebec that were . . . the 
person received a fairly severe reprimand. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think what happens is the 
fact that an individual may not feel that they had been 
represented fairly. And I’m not exactly sure if it’s a matter of 
the particular person representing them had indeed presented 
the case properly or even probably had done the best that that 
individual had, just may have come up against a . . . whether 
it’s a prosecutor or lawyer on the other side who did a better job 
of presenting it. 
 
And that’s what I guess . . . what I’m raising, the concerns that 
have been raised with me — is how do you address it if you feel 
that you were let . . . and I guess what most people have talked 
about, if you feel that you were let down in court, not that your 
particular legal representative didn’t do their job well but may 
not have done it as well as the other presenter. 
 
And so I think what . . . I think, Mr. Minister, what we need to 
do in addressing and raising that . . . and that’s why I tossed out 
the idea of looking at a system where you had someone outside 
of the legal community that may be involved that you could go 
to. 
 
But as I understand it, under our system today, if a person isn’t 
satisfied then you go back through the courts. But I would think 
you would probably have to have some kind of particular 
reason to get back into the courts to address certain 
circumstances. And so I’ll leave that with you for one comment 
before I move on to another issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Okay. I think that we all have to  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

remember, is that the judges are outside the legal profession. I 
mean they were lawyers, but they’re no longer lawyers and they 
end up making some of these kinds of judgements. 
 
The other point is about a person who doesn’t quite meet the 
expectations that the client has in a particular case. I think the 
best judge of that is the market-place, which I think is very 
much a tenet of your party and some of the things that they do. 
 
And it’s pretty clear that if a lawyer does not live up to the 
expectations of one or two or three clients in a row, that the 
word spreads fairly quickly that, hey, maybe that’s not the guy 
that you want to hire if you’ve got a problem. And I have to say 
that that’s how the system works, and that within Saskatchewan 
there are certain lawyers that will end up charging higher fees 
because of how they handle cases and others that will charge 
some other fee because that’s what the market-place deems 
them to be worth. 
 
And so I guess the answer to your question has many 
complicated facets to it. But I don’t think you’re advocating 
some kind of TV Guide with assessment of lawyers that says 
this is how the situation is. But even though, that it is possible 
to get some of those assessments within the community. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I know we can’t 
address all of these concerns, and we’re not going to get all the 
questions answered that people have and the fact of whether or 
not they felt they were dealt with fairly, whether it was through 
the court system or what have you. But some of these 
circumstances certainly are still available to them. 
 
Another question I’d like to raise with you before I turn it back 
to the member from Kelvington-Wadena and allow some 
questions  and I’ve got questions on other issues that I’ll be 
bringing up another day — but we got a letter from an 
individual who mentions that, I think . . . I’m not sure if it was 
last summer or fall, this person understood that the former 
minister had suggested that there would be no photo radar in 
this province. And I’m not sure, I’d like to know whether or not 
there is a particular policy in regards to that. If there is, the 
reason I raise the question, apparently there’s . . . CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) a.m. reported that 
Rosetown has been using COPCAM to enforce traffic 
violations for the last month. 
 
And I’m wondering what the policy of the department is, 
whether or not there was an initial or original statement that 
photo radar would not be allowed in this province. It seems to 
me there were some suggestions about that almost a year ago or 
even last fall, and I’m wondering what, in regards to the 
circumstance in Rosetown, what the details are and the 
particulars around it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well my understanding  and it’s very 
sketchy about the situation in Rosetown because I haven’t 
received much of a briefing about that at all  is that the 
Camcorder was used to assist in providing evidence, but there 
was actually a police officer there with the camera and it was 
just confirming what the police officers also saw when they 
were filming some of these things. And so it’s a situation where 

it’s like a police officer taking notes and then, when they go to 
court, they can say, well in my notes I saw this car do this at 
that time, or I saw this person do this at that time, and so that’s 
my understanding. That’s about all I know about that situation. 
 
Mr. Toth:  What is the policy at the present time in the 
province of Saskatchewan regarding photo radar or do we have 
a policy? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The policy at the present time is that 
photo radar is not used in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and 
welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. Under the adult 
corrections subvote, could the minister explain the correctional 
facilities revolving fund subsidy. Is that for the correctional 
institutions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The answer to your question is that within 
the prison system  all four correctional centres  there’s 
Prism Industries, which is basically work for people that are in 
the correctional centre. For example, in Saskatoon they make 
pallets for companies on a contract basis. They also, I think, 
make some parts of buildings. Another part . . . they do steel 
work and machine work and make different kinds of, I guess 
equipment would be the best way to say it, for some of the farm 
machinery businesses in Saskatoon. And the people that are in 
the correctional system that work in these jobs get paid a certain 
amount for working, but they also generate some money for the 
cost of doing the business. 
 
But the amount that we pay as a government to sort of subsidize 
the work and provide the training — because of some of the 
people are learning job skills as well —is I think about 2 or 
$300,000. And so that’s what shows up in the budget as a cost 
to us. So it’s . . . what they produce provides income of 2 to 
$300,000 less than what the total program costs in the 
correctional centres. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, this part of the budget then 
actually is something that in some cases is a concern to many 
businesses because in some cases some of the work is done in 
the prisons by people that are, I guess, being trained, in effect 
takes work away from businesses. 
 
And I know of cases where there’s actually been tenders where 
the corrections workers have gotten jobs and it is actually a 
problem for businesses, because they don’t have the same 
overhead as a business may have, and we end up competing 
against somebody who doesn’t have overhead plus paying their 
wage. I’m wondering if you can give me your thoughts on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I can say that based on the Prism 
Industries program, is designed to provide meaningful work 
opportunities and basic job skill training for the inmates in a 
practical work environment. So some people have never, ever 
had a job and end up in the correctional centre. 
 
And most of the projects are completed for government  



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

agencies or some private sector firms, and it produces revenues 
which then contribute to the cost there. The policy of this whole 
program is to not take away jobs from the private sector where 
possible. 
 
And the other side of it is that all people who might make use 
of some of the products from Prism Industries, within the 
correctional system, everybody’s given equal access to that. So 
we don’t allow somebody in the private business to have an 
exclusive market on some of these products. 
 
But the policy is that we are trying not to be in fields where 
somebody else would be losing business. And I guess if you 
end up hearing about something, or there are some concerns 
that way, well then you should let us know because we’ll try to 
address that. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I do know where there are cases 
when this happens, and I know it’s not done intentionally. But I 
know that an example would be barbecues that can be built in 
prisons, and there will maybe be a tender by Parks and there is 
no way that an individual company can build that particular 
piece of equipment for the same amount of money that it can be 
tendered for by the inmates. 
 
And it is a concern to a lot of businesses, not just that one item, 
but I know there are a number of items that are a concern for 
businesses. And I’m wondering if there’s any route that 
businesses can get to yourself or to whoever is responsible for it 
to let them know what product lines are causing concerns 
within industry for this. Because we end up competing against 
ourselves in a way. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think there are a few very narrow 
areas where the Prism Industries do compete for Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation work. And that’s where I 
was talking about a lot of this stuff they produce goes to other 
parts of government. 
 
But if there are concerns, you know, please let us know and 
we’ll take a look at them. But I know there are a few specific 
things that they have sort of traditionally made that they’ve 
been involved with. I don’t know for sure about the barbecues, 
but that sounds to me like something that they might have been 
working at over a number of years. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Has there ever been a time when individual 
companies have been able to go to the prison system and order 
a supply of, let’s say barbecues, for lack of a different piece of 
equipment at this time, to be able resell them  purchase them 
from the prison system and resell them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think that’s possible. And often 
what happens is the type of work that Prism Industries does is 
sort of job work for another business. So perhaps a business has 
a product and there’s a specific component of that product that 
could be made by the people in Prism Industries. That particular 
component is made and then the other company would then 
take that piece and fit it into their overall product. So I suppose 
that could be barbecues. It could be houses if they’re getting, 
you know, pre-framed walls or something; or, for example, with 

the pallets or crates or something like that, the other company 
may have a product that they need to put on a pallet or put in a 
crate. And they would then get the job work done through 
Prism Industries. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know it’ll be 
reassuring to know that we’re not going to compete against 
somebody with our own dollars type of thing. 
 
Can you give me an idea of how many employees are hired in 
the provincial corrections in the facilities in Saskatoon and in 
North Battleford and Regina? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think your question is how many people 
work within the correctional system in Saskatchewan? The total 
number is about 850. And in, for example, Saskatoon area, 
there’d be about 160 employees. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Has the number of workers that are full-time 
equivalents, has that gone up? From what I understand, there’s 
a lot more part-time people working and the ones that were full 
time are actually . . . Once they go out of the system, or they’re 
laid off, or retired, they’re more apt to be just . . . their positions 
are going to be filled by part-time workers or people that are 
brought in on a more casual basis. 
 
So that’s my question: is there the same number of full-time 
employees as there was, say four years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Over the last four years it would be about 
the same. From this year, I mean this year as compared to last 
year, it’s possibly down 7 jobs but in the last two years there 
were a number of . . . about 20 non-permanent jobs that were 
made permanent jobs. And so it fluctuates a bit but it’s 
basically been about the same over the last four years. 
 
Ms. Draude:  My question, Mr. Minister, then is there more 
money spent on overtime for correctional workers because there 
are a lot of people that are on call in some of the systems and 
when there isn’t the permanent workers there there’s more 
people having to stay on to work overtime? I’m wondering if 
the overtime dollars has risen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Over the last year the amount of money 
spent on overtime has gone down between 2 and $300,000. 
And that’s been managed, the overtime’s been managed, by 
creating a larger pool around each correctional centre of 
part-time employees or non-permanent employees. Often they 
work sort of full shifts, but they’re not given permanent status. 
 
(2230) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, does the corrections system keep 
track of money spent to guard or supervise inmates that are 
under medical care within the hospital or having to go to 
receive medical treatments of some sort? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Those figures aren’t kept separately. It’s 
basically just part of the correctional system. If somebody ends 
up in the hospital and somebody has to accompany them, that 
would be part of their job for that day or that couple of days. 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

Ms. Draude:  In the supplementary estimates, there was an 
additional $1.2 million put into the system. Can you tell me 
what that additional money was required for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Almost all of that money related to 
increased prison counts last year. On average over the year, the 
prison counts were about 50 to 60 inmates over what had been 
budgeted and planned for. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
for the last 3, 4, 5 years now I think it is, we’ve raised this 
question about a public inquiry into the Martensville situation. 
Now I believe there are some ongoing court challenges now 
that are boiling out as a result of that circumstance and 
situation. For the longest time your government has continued 
to refuse any kind of public inquiry into what happened here, 
Mr. Minister. And I have a feeling that my question tonight is 
just going to fall on deaf ears, that that’s going to be refused 
again as well. 
 
But many people have many concerns with regards to the whole 
process and the individuals whose lives have just been thrown 
in turmoil as a result of that case. And one has to wonder, Mr. 
Minister, what real reasons would the department have for not 
conducting a public inquiry into the way the whole Martensville 
case was handled, and why we wouldn’t allow a totally 
independent review of the circumstances so that something like 
this would not happen again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the situation is that out of the 
Martensville situation and out of a number of cases that have 
been dealt with over the last number of years, people have 
learned many things, and there have been some changes made 
within the administration of justice. 
 
Now to actually assess what’s happened in particular parts of 
the Martensville case, there are a number of court cases under 
way right now, and the nature of the court case is that it 
becomes a public inquiry or revealing of what’s happened, and 
I think that the courts have served our society well over 
centuries in doing that job. And I think practically, we should 
allow the courts to do their work, such as it is, and that at this 
point we don’t see any need for any additional inquiry on top of 
that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I guess, Mr. Minister, that depending on 
what happens when these cases finally get to court, the 
unfortunate part is . . . and the former minister, your colleague, 
did acknowledge that yes, in situations like this when charges 
have been laid and then at the end of the day all the charges are 
dropped, the court finds that, as we’ve seen in Martensville, all 
but one of the charges was actually held . . . you can’t turn back 
the clock. 
 
And a number of individuals’ names were splashed before the 
public. I’m not exactly sure how you would feel, Mr. Minister, 
if you happened to end up in a situation like that where your 
name came up over something that you felt very . . . that you 
were totally innocent of, and at the end of the day where the 
courts threw it out and your innocence was proven. But the 
realities are, you would have to live with that for the rest of 

your life. 
 
These people have to live with it. It becomes almost a smear on 
your name no matter how much we would like to suggest our 
court system does its job and does it properly. And I think the 
questions that are asked and the questions that continually arise 
. . . and while I appreciate the fact that as we do now have a 
number of ongoing lawsuits, it probably wouldn’t be 
appropriate to try and do a review right now, but had we done a 
review earlier, it may have stayed, and possibly wouldn’t have 
neither. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, what it points out is that we definitely 
need to look at how justice is carried out and how 
circumstances evolve so that at the end of the day, when 
charges are actually being laid, or when a person faces a charge, 
that there is  I don’t know if you can use it  substantial 
evidence. It would seem to me that probably that’s the reasons 
why. And yet there’s certainly a lot of questions about the 
whole investigative process and why the charges were laid. 
 
And I guess, if you will, Mr. Minister, if it would’ve been one 
or two individuals, people would say, well you can see when 
you’ve got a group, a number of individuals being charged, it’s 
possible that maybe there was a mistake made in one or two 
cases. But when you see . . . I forget the number now, but 
you’re down to one out of about seven or eight; there certainly 
are a lot of questions in the public’s mind about the whole due 
process. 
 
And I can appreciate the fact that while we do now have some 
lawsuits pending, when they’re done  and they may bring out 
some other information  the facts are, as we see in the case of 
Mr. Popowich and what he’s gone through in his life, I don’t 
think there’s anyone would like to have to go through what 
some of these individuals have faced. 
 
And while we’re sitting in this building, Mr. Minister, we’re 
fairly well protected. And the fact that I think people  well 
I’m not sure, they may not think that well of politicians at the 
best of times or even lawyers  I think we understand we’re at 
the lowest level of the respect in this province. But the fact is 
none of us in this building have had to actually face that, to my 
knowledge. And so you live here and you feel good about the 
fact you’ve never really come across, or abreast of, the law. 
You may feel a little sheepish if you’re pulled over for speeding 
some day or other, but you haven’t really been charged with a 
particular offence such as that. 
 
And I think in some ways, Mr. Minister, I’m not sure how we 
do it, but we need something that basically addresses the 
problems that may arise to make sure that we are indeed, when 
investigations such as this, as large as the Martensville case 
was, and especially with the type of allegations that were being 
made, that every effort is made to make sure that before charges 
of any kind are laid against a person, that there is sufficient 
evidence to back it up so you don’t destroy a person’s character. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, what you need to do is we don’t just say 
the courts work so we’ll lay the charge, and if the court finds  



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

that we didn’t have the evidence and you’re innocent, well I 
guess you’re innocent and we shouldn’t have laid the charge. I 
think we need to be careful that we aren’t laying charges and 
letting the courts do the job. I think the whole department, the 
whole investigative procedure, needs to be handled in such a 
way so that, if you will, we are sitting down with what are very 
basic, realistic charges so that innocent individuals don’t get 
dragged into court. And then at the end of the day, what’s it 
going to cost the province if some of these defendants actually 
win their case in their lawsuits against the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are a number of issues that you’ve 
raised but I think the most important one relates to how our 
system works. And I think we all appreciate being part of a 
justice system like we have in Canada, which means that if 
you’re accused of something, you end up having to have that 
accusation proved beyond a reasonable doubt before you are 
convicted. And that’s a part of our law that has been there for 
centuries and I don’t think we would want to change that. 
 
We are looking at many aspects of the justice system. As you 
know, we are looking at the department of public prosecutions 
and looking at a number of the issues that may be related to 
some of the things that we’ve learned in some of the difficult 
cases that have happened over the last number of years in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that the way our system works, is that we’re learning 
things all the time and that when something is not perceived to 
have been dealt with in a fair fashion and it is something that is 
wrong with the system of how we do things, that we then look 
at making some changes. 
 
One of the things that people all over North America, in fact I 
would say all over the world, have learned over the last 10 years 
is that it is extremely difficult to be involved in criminal 
matters, criminal charges, where the evidence that is needed in 
the case involves children or other people who are not fully 
competent. 
 
And we have learned many things; we are going to learn many 
more things. I think what we need to recognize is that the 
system evolves but that we have, I think, one of the best 
systems in Canada, in the world, and we should be proud of it. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
think it’s very important that we certainly do respect the rights 
of individuals and the fact that at any time, regardless of what 
circumstances we’re facing, that before . . . and I realize the 
public in most cases demand . . . basically put a lot of pressure 
on policemen and on prosecutors to lay charges. They’re 
looking for a guilty person. 
 
But I think that it’s very imperative that we’re also mindful of 
the fact that we make sure that we do have information that 
basically says at the end of the day that this is most likely the 
possible individual involved, rather than laying some charges 
and maybe finding out that we didn’t have exactly all the 
evidence that was needed. 
 
We have a case in Saskatoon right now where . . . unfortunately  

it’s a situation where a person has said no, they lied in court 
over circumstances and that creates a problem even for 
policemen. You’re bringing evidence, all of a sudden your key 
witness is now saying they really didn’t . . . they maybe were 
coerced into giving that kind of testimony and it certainly 
makes it difficult for the courts. But I think you need to really 
be careful, and you mentioned that you ordered or put in place a 
review process, a public prosecutions office, in this office. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, when do you expect this report 
brought back to your office and when do you think you may be 
able to present it to this Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well as I announced when we entered 
into this process, we anticipated that it would be in the fall. 
September is when we would hope to have our report and it 
may be that it will take a little bit longer than that. We don’t 
know for sure, but that’s the intention. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, we recently found out that there 
was a report conducted last spring into a law firm of Woloshyn 
Mattison over a number of . . . over the negligence of 
processing bad mortgages  the SaskTrust affair, I guess is 
what you would say. And as of May 1 of this year we find out 
that actually that report was available, interestingly enough, just 
before the last election, just really came to play. 
 
And I’m going to quote from the Star-Phoenix, Wednesday, 
May 1: “Report clears former Romanow law partner in 
SaskTrust affair.” 
 

The Justice Department has quietly decided not to charge a 
former law partner of Premier Roy Romanow and cabinet 
minister Bob Mitchell in the SaskTrust affair. 
 
Deputy Justice Minister Brent Cotter said the decision not 
to press charges against Saskatoon lawyer Dean Mattison 
was made last year by an out-of-province lawyer. 

 
The interesting thing is a lot of this information apparently did 
. . . and was available. It’s interesting to note that the Deputy 
Minister Cotter said: 
 

He said his decision to keep the matter quiet had nothing to 
do with the fact a provincial election was being held 
around that time. 

 
I’m not sure, I think a lot of people in this province are fairly 
political and astute in their politics, but it certainly wouldn’t 
have been appropriate for this report to have come out. And I 
do have a concern though, Mr. Minister, about the fact that you 
have refused to release the details of this report. 
 
I wonder why you’re refusing to release the details of that 
report, Mr. Minister. Is it because it may have some of the same 
information that the report regarding Mr. Mitchell . . . and the 
investigation into the young offender’s breach, where Mr. 
McIntyre states that he accepts that an offence under section 
38(1) of the Young Offenders’ Act was committed by the 
former minister of Justice. But then goes on to say in his report: 



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

It is clear in all the circumstances that no public interest 
would be served by a prosecution of Mr. Mitchell at this 
time. 

 
Mr. Minister, and this report was released in that investigation. 
Why is your department, or why are you, refusing to release the 
report that your department had commissioned in regards to the 
SaskTrust affair? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I should clarify that this was an 
investigation into one person  not a law firm  to a Mr. 
Dean Mattison. So that’s the first point. 
 
The second point is that the report from the independent 
prosecutor was received on . . . well the report’s dated June 28 
and arrived on June 29, in Saskatchewan, of 1995. The situation 
is that . . . 
 
It’s quite interesting actually that you would ask the questions 
that you did five minutes ago and then ask these questions. 
Because you strongly encouraged the department of public 
prosecutions to be very careful in laying charges where you did 
not think . . . or they did not think that there was any chance of 
success, of a conviction. And now you are saying, well no, let’s 
reverse that process and analyse every time or analyse 
sometimes when those decisions are made the other way. 
 
It’s very clear policy within the department, when a decision is 
made not to prosecute, that this does not become a public 
matter when it involves a private citizen. 
 
(2245) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, I guess what . . . and certainly 
this whole SaskTrust affair was brought to my attention . . . 
Even four and five years ago people were asking questions in 
the Saskatoon area. I didn’t know what avenues to follow. So it 
isn’t something that’s just happened overnight, and then there 
was a review done of the circumstances. 
 
But you mention about not releasing . . . it’s not in the public 
interest, I guess is what you’re saying, to release that 
information. If a review is completed, if that review has nothing 
that can be damning whatsoever, if the review is basically 
saying that everything is in order, then what is the problem with 
releasing it? 
 
I guess people in Saskatoon will be asking, what is the problem 
with releasing a report in a review regarding a circumstance that 
many people had and have asked many questions over the years. 
I just mentioned to you the one regarding Mr. Mitchell was 
released. Got it right here. And we’ve got three other ones just 
in the last two years. So our reports were done. 
 
The circumstances regarding Mr. Koskie and Phoenix 
Advertising. That information was released. So I guess I have a 
hard time trying to understand why one is released and why the 
other isn’t. 
 
And it’s obvious, if what the papers are saying and if what 
you’re saying and what the deputy minister has said, that there 

was nothing wrong, then obviously a report that basically clears 
an individual being released should probably bring all that 
information to the point that that individual is certainly 
vindicated totally. 
 
And when a report is being withheld, in most people’s minds 
the view is, if you’re withholding something, then there’s a 
reason for withholding that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think I can reiterate the policy is, 
that when people aren’t charged, we don’t talk about it, we 
don’t make it public. Another factor here is that this was an 
investigation into one individual, Mr. Mattison. There is a 
lawsuit involving the SaskTrust situation that’s going to court 
this fall. There also were specific charges against some other 
individuals that are proceeding and will be dealt with or have 
been dealt with publicly already. 
 
And so this is not the only case; it involved one individual. It 
was assessed that no charges should be laid, and that’s it. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So basically what you’re saying then is that this is 
one circumstance in what is actually a broader picture where 
there’s still some ongoing work going on. So that’s fair. I don’t 
think many people realize that. Many people, I think, the way 
the comments were coming to me . . . there seemed to be a lot 
more going on. And I have no idea because I’m almost going on 
hearsay too. The comments are coming and all of a sudden this 
report is out; it won’t be released; this person has been cleared. 
And that’s where it ends up. 
 
So I think it’s important, Mr. Minister, that the public are even 
aware of that. So when questions come, well there’s still 
ongoing circumstances that even release of this type of 
information, you must appreciate, may have an effect. And I 
can certainly accept that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I do have one other question, and you may 
wonder why it would be coming from a member from this side 
of the Assembly. But my question, Mr. Minister, to you, is to 
your department, and I’m wondering: to date, what has the 
Department of Justice spent . . . And I look at the Star-Phoenix 
 and this goes back to May 3, 1995  political bias in 
Justice, former NDP candidate, regarding the whole ongoing 
investigation into former Conservative members. 
 
What has been spent to date in that investigation and in all the 
court cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This situation puts me personally in a 
conflict because one of my former partners is a defence counsel 
for one of the individuals involved, or maybe more than one. 
And so I’m not in a position to answer this question. The 
information is not available right here to answer that question, 
and I would suggest that the best way to do that would be to 
provide the information later through Mr. Cline, who would be 
the Acting Attorney General and Minister of Justice on this 
issue. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re basically saying, you do not have 
at your fingertips today what would have accrued as far as  



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

expenses to the department in the ongoing investigation to date. 
And I guess while I can appreciate the fact that you may have a 
law partner who may be acting as counsel for some members 
and you may feel at the same time just releasing information 
with regards to the costs that have been associated . . . I guess I 
don’t know how that might be a conflict. 
 
All we’re asking for is what has accrued as far as costs that 
have occurred to date. But I do know that many people across 
this province, including the former NDP candidate, has some 
real grave concerns. His comment is very hard to believe. 
 
Somebody has to be . . . it’s an unbelievable coincidence that 
charges should be laid against so many in the run-up to a 
provincial election campaign. It’s very hard to believe; 
somebody has to be in charge, he says. This is one of your own 
candidates who basically wasn’t allowed to run. 
 
Plus questions that are coming from individuals about the 
whole process and questioning it. So I would appreciate, Mr. 
Minister, if you will, at your leisure or time, through your 
officials, just assess to this date, because I can’t ask you to 
suggest where it may be down the road or what the costs are 
going to be. 
 
But I think there should be enough information that would 
indicate what it basically has cost the legal system and the 
Justice department to date to process . . . where they have gotten 
to date from the time they started. And I certainly do get a lot of 
people inquiring and asking what kind of money have we put 
into this particular case. 
 
With that, Mr. Minister, I believe those are most of the 
questions that I was taking the time to ask tonight. However, I 
would suggest to you that I’m not prepared to vote off Justice 
tonight until we receive the global questions. I think I’ve got to 
the point of the overall questions. And if the global questions, 
when we receive them and if I can have your assurance that 
would be next week, we can certainly, unless there’s some 
major questions come out of those globals, we’d certainly be 
willing to vote off, if the official opposition is in agreement, 
without having to bring your officials back. But I’ve got most 
of the other questions raised tonight and I look forward to a 
response to the last question I just asked you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I will undertake to provide that 
information through the Acting Attorney General. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a few 
questions that I want some clarification on, perhaps on what the 
member from Moosomin just asked. Do you have a figure on 
what the lawsuit brought by the judges against the former 
minister of Justice has accrued to this point in time? Or if that 
in fact is ongoing, you can’t release that, the cost itself up to 
this point. Do you have those available? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Up until April 30 of 1996, which is our 
last account, we’ve paid out in legal fees, $76,728.46. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just want to go on 
briefly to the boards and commissions, and I notice that five out  

of the six sub-programs under boards and commissions have 
been cut. How do you see this affecting services to the public 
with those kind of cuts under those particular votes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the simple answer to that is 
the answer that I provided previously when we were talking 
about some of the other budget areas. That we were requested 
to go through all of the kinds of work that we did in the 
Department of Justice, and all the boards and commissions that 
work with us, to look if there was anywhere where we could get 
some dollars to deal with the money that we had to pay in the 
health, education, and social services area. And we asked that 
all of the boards and commissions also participate in this 
process. And we’ve figured out some ways of doing things that 
allow us to work within the budgets that we have. There are 
some places where we maybe will have to re-examine how 
we’re doing that. 
 
But I guess the important point is that all of the different 
government expenditures within my area of responsibility, 
they’ve all come together and tried to recognize that we don’t 
have as much money as we used to to do all the things we want 
to do. 
 
Mr. Osika:  The reason for my question was a concern that 
those boards and commissions that were a service to the public 
were not affected to any great extent. And I would hope that it 
does not lessen the opportunity for people to have access to 
those types of services. 
 
And going into that, under the farm protection program, for 
example, can you please tell me what type of programs this 
covers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If your question is what’s incorporated in 
that particular budget item, it includes the Farm Land Security 
Board, the Farm Ownership Board, the Homestead Protection 
and the Farm Tenure Board. Those are all different statutory 
boards that deal with different aspects of farm ownership and 
protection of farmers. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. As a result now, is there less need 
for these farm protection programs than there were in the last 
year or five years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it’s a positive sign about the 
improvements in the economy and that there are fewer farmers 
who need the protection of some of these boards in their 
dealings with financial institutions. And also we have looked at 
some sharing of some of the administrative costs of some of 
these things so that we are doing things a little bit differently as 
well. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under the Human 
Rights Commission, how many people are employed in that 
particular area, please? 
 
(2300) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are 18.3 full-time equivalent jobs. 
So there are 18-plus that work at the Human Rights  



May 23, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

Commission in Saskatoon and Regina. And some of them 
obviously travel all over the province to deal with complaints or 
issues. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I should have asked this at the same 
time. At what cost? And the other question then would be: how 
many cases do they handle on the average in a year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The cost for the total budget for the 
department is 925,000 for this upcoming year, and the . . . I 
guess the question is, how much work they have done, is that 
correct? 
 
Well it’s a bit hard to actually explain how this works, but as of 
March 31, 1996 there were 197 active files. During the year 
‘95-96 there were 221 files opened and 232 files closed. I have 
quite a few other statistics but I think that gives you a bit of an 
idea of the numbers of files. 
 
There have at various points been some backlogs and there has 
been implementation of some changes in the procedure which 
allows for some of the disputes to be mediated. And that has 
changed the nature of how some of the problems have been 
dealt with and that has reduced the backlog somewhat. And I 
think it’s also identified that there may be some other changes 
in the procedure in the Human Rights Commission that would 
make some sense in resolving problems. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you just clarify 
for us please, the duties and responsibilities of the Rentalsman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Rentalsman’s job is created under 
The Residential Tenancies Act. And the main activity involves 
dealing with complaints by landlords about tenants and by 
tenants about landlords. There used to be an element of rent 
control but in 1992 all controls on rent were changed. The 
Rentalsman also is involved in dealing with the issues 
surrounding security deposits. As well, the same person, the 
Rentalsman, administers the Provincial Mediation Board. 
 
And so the things that we talked about earlier, about orderly 
payments of debts, and working between creditors and debtors, 
that’s another job that is fulfilled by the person who is hired to 
do the Rentalsman’s job. So they have some other aspects that 
way as well. 
 
Mr. Osika:  What are the number of staff in that office, Mr. 
Minister, please? And while you’re at it, the costs, or the budget 
for that office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The number of staff, full-time 
equivalents, is 12.9. The total cost for the salary part is, I think, 
550,000. The numbers of applications for hearings in the Office 
of the Rentalsman in ‘95-96 was 1,750. Under the Provincial 
Mediation Board side there were . . . new debt repayment 
proposals, there were 182. Those were new ones. They had a 
hold-over of ones that they had been dealing with from the 
previous years of 348. 
 
The amount of monies that were collected and paid to creditors 
through the debt repayment proposals was one and a quarter  

million dollars. And the fees that were received by the 
Provincial Mediation Board through the debt mediation was 
$66,370. There were also some property tax enforcement 
applications, 910 of those. And there were in that area of 
property tax  I guess that’s an area I didn’t mention before  
there were also some ongoing repayment plans under property 
tax arrangements, so there were 963 cases there. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I, if it would be 
possible to share that with us, would very much appreciate it. 
That seems like an awful lot of cases that are referred to that 
small a number of people in that particular department. Are they 
adequately enough staffed? I guess the reason I ask that 
question is it has been asked of me where the decisions . . . if a 
decision is arbitrarily made by a Rentalsman in a dispute 
between a tenant and a landlord, the next step then would be for 
the landlord to . . . if it was the landlord who was asking for 
some mediation, would it be then the landlord’s responsibility 
to approach the Mediation Board to request assistance? How 
would the appeal process from one side or the other be initiated, 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The process of appeal from a 
Rentalsman’s decision is to the Court of Queen’s Bench, a 
judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
Mr. Osika:  So in other words, if there is a dispute between 
the landlord and a tenant over the refusal of a tenant to pay the 
amount of rent that was originally or initially agreed to, the 
landlord would then have to go to the Court of Queen’s Bench 
to . . . if the Rentalsman said, well tough, that’s between you 
two to sort out, and the landlord was not happy, it seems like 
that might turn into a costly process for the landlord. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Because the Rentalsman’s no longer 
involved in rent controls and that issue, any issues around the 
payment of rent, it’s dealt with like any other civil matter, 
probably in small claims court. But if it’s an issue around the 
security deposit, and whether that security deposit should be 
paid back to the tenant when they were moving on to some 
other place, then that’s an issue that the Rentalsman would have 
a hearing about. And if after that decision was made, there was 
some disagreement, well then there could be an appeal from 
that decision to the Court of Queen’s Bench. That would be 
extremely rare, I would think. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. It still appears to make it a little 
difficult to recover or recoup some monies that perhaps a 
person, an individual, rightfully feels they have coming to them. 
A couple of things here on these different boards. You have a 
Surface Rights Arbitration Board. Can you just tell me a little 
bit about what that is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Surface Rights Arbitration Board is 
the board that assists in resolving disputes between landowners, 
primarily farmers, and oil companies  or sometimes mining 
companies but usually it would be oil companies  over the 
drilling of oil wells, placement of pipelines, oil pipelines; and if 
there’s a dispute between a farmer and an oil company, that’s 
where it goes. 
 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard May 23, 1996 

Mr. Osika:  Would that involve the payment for certain 
rights and damages to properties or access to properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Osika:  It would be not unlike something that the 
Rentalsman does with respect to damage deposits. 
 
On one other final note here, with all these boards involved 
here within your department, within your purview, how are the 
members to these boards appointed? And how are they paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The members to the various boards are 
appointed in many different ways. There are usually 
recommendations of names made, and ultimately they’re 
appointed by order in council, by cabinet. And so that’s the 
final. 
 
But practically, some of the boards need some special expertise. 
And we would then seek people, for example, on the Surface 
Rights Arbitration Board, who know something about 
environmental issues and knows something about the oil and 
gas industry and know something about farming. And so 
suggestions are made and selections are made through a process 
of . . . I guess within the department and the areas where they’re 
administered within the Department of Justice. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. One final question, one that I 
overlooked earlier and it has to do with capital projects, I guess. 
And I just wondered if  getting back to corrections just for 
one last question  are there any plans for expanding and/or 
building additional correctional facilities within the near future 
or the not-too-distant future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. A short, final answer to a final 
question. Mr. Minister, I would like to express appreciation to 
yourself; to your officials for assisting us in this process this 
evening. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As well, I would 
extend my thanks and appreciation to the minister and his 
officials just in case the global questions all meet our 
expectations and we don’t have to really bring the officials back 
to the Chamber. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before moving we rise and report 
progress, I want to first of all thank the officials for coming. It’s 
a late night. One of the officials indeed was at a banquet and his 
 two of them were at banquets  their meals were within 
sight and they got a call from the legislature to come back, and I 
think they’ve been here without eating. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Oh, no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I want to thank you and apologize for 
all the sympathy you’re getting. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Why don’t you take them out for a late 
night snack? 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We should do that. The Minister of 
Labour will pay. 
 
I also, before I sit down, in addition to thanking the officials, I 
want to thank the member from Moosomin for placing our 
agreement on the record as he did. We agreed to stop the clock 
on the understanding that we would finish all questions but 
those that might arise out of the global undertakings. And 
questions, if the estimates were brought back, would obviously 
be limited to questions arising out of the global estimates. 
 
I want to make a comment about when you’re going to get the 
global questions before I take my seat, just because your 
comments are on the record, so I want mine to be as well. We 
got some global estimates. What I’m told by the officials who 
are struggling with these things is, it is a fair amount of work. 
 
What I am told is that we got one set of globals from the 
official opposition. They are a lot less work. They’re actually 
what we did last year and they’re a lot less work. Those they 
hope to have ready next week. I don’t give it as a formal 
undertaking because I’m not in charge of it, but I’m led to 
believe those will be ready next week. 
 
The other globals which we got from the third party are new, 
and apparently they’re considerably more work, big time. I’m 
not undertaking to have those ready next week. What we will 
have next week is the globals which were forwarded to us by 
the official opposition. Those, I’m told, will likely be ready next 
week. The ones from the third party may not be. 
 
With those explanatory comments and just to confirm our 
understanding with respect to these estimates, I will move that 
we rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:15 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

EVENING SITTING 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1793 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 90  An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1795 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1795 
 Bill No. 83  An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1795 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1795 
 Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure of Information related to Individuals who Pose a Significant Risk of 

Serious Harm to Other Persons 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1796 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1796 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1797 
 Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1798 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................1798, 1802 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1801 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 90  An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
 Bill No. 83  An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions Act 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
 Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure of Information related to Individuals who Pose a Significant Risk of 

Serious Harm to Other Persons 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
 Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Justice  Vote 3 
  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1803 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................1804, 1820 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1807 
  Toth ......................................................................................................................................................................1808, 1813, 1817 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1815 
 
 
 


