
























































May 22, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1735 
 May 22, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
with respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre in 
Regina. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition are from Regina, Neudorf, Lemberg, 
Melville, and a number of other small communities in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, to present petitions of names from throughout the 
province regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, Wawota, Indian Head, Craven. There’s a couple from 
Langley, B. C. (British Columbia) and from Calgary, and 
there’s one signed, deprived rural Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present names of people throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of people concerned about the intended closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on this petition are primarily from the city of 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer  

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 
Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Everyone that has signed this petition is from Regina. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, once again this petition is signed by concerned 
citizens from the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names with respect to Saskatchewan people in the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, the vast 
majority of them are from the community of Radville. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise 
today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from Regina here, they’re from Whitewood, they’re 
from Esterhazy, they’re from Imperial, they’re from Stalwart, 
and they’re from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
urge the Department of Social Services to reconsider the 
decision to reduce the parent education and support 
programs. 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 61 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
regarding order in council no. 283/96: (1) why did order in 
council 797/94 have to be amended to read $775,000 
instead of $718,700; and (2) what is the reason for the 
additional funding of $56,300? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure today to introduce to you and to all the members in 
the House, a group of 39 people seated in your gallery. The 
students and teachers are from the community of Canora, 
specifically the Canora School within the Canora School 
Division. 
 
I would also indicate that some of these students . . . I had the 
pleasure of acting as a substitute teacher last spring and I 
recognize a few from class. I see they’re as well-behaved now 
as they were during my class. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce grade 12 students from 
Canora; their teachers, Mr. Larry Neufeld and Mr. Merv 
Tomski; and bus drivers, Kathy Thompson and Lawrence 
Stefanowich. Welcome, and I wish you well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to all my colleagues 
in the Assembly, 27 grade 4 students from Pilot Butte School in 
the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. They’re 
accompanied today by their teacher, Marjorie Gross  and 
they’re standing to have an opportunity to be recognized  and 
chaperons, Mrs. Bernhardt and Kim Magnuson. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them in room 218 later on to share a 
refreshment and to talk about their tour and the happenings in 
the Assembly and a photograph later. I ask all members to join 
me in giving them a warm welcome here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure to introduce today to you one of the grade 8 classes 
from the Rosetown Central High School; happens to be the 
class of my daughter Teresa. I don’t want to embarrass her, but 
she’s with them. And the class is led here today by Mr. Cline — 
who happens to be a cousin of the Minister of Health — Mr. 
Berezowski, and Mr. Gawletz. I’m delighted that you’re here to 
visit us today, and I ask all members to join me in welcoming 
this class here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I just want to join with the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar in welcoming the students from  

Rosetown, and in particular my cousin, Norman. I’m not going 
to use the same line that the member from Rosetown-Biggar 
said about . . . I don’t want to embarrass Norman. I hope the 
opposition will bear with me today so that Norman doesn’t get 
unduly upset about anything you might ask me. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members, a group of 12 students 
who are seated in the east gallery. They’re from the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
English as a second language program, and they’re 
accompanied here today by their teacher Ann Saleski. 
 
Now previously I’ve had visits from this group, and they’re 
from various countries and Quebec, which is still a part of this 
country. I’m not sure what stage they’re at in acquiring English 
at this time, Mr. Speaker, but I’m sure they’ll get the message if 
we give them a big smile and put our hands together 
enthusiastically. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Scotty the Tyrannosaurus rex 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, the potential spin-offs from a 
dinosaur find at Eastend, Saskatchewan continues to grow with 
great promise. 
 
Through Future Skills, Eastend Community Tourism Authority 
have hired a trainee who manages a community organization 
that coordinates, organizes, and markets tourism activities to 
increase the town’s viability as a tourist destination point. This 
will help maximize the tourism potential created by local 
dinosaur finds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what makes this project unique is that the relevant 
tourism training did not previously exist in Saskatchewan. In 
addition to business courses at the SIAST Palliser Institute, 
arrangements were made with Capilano College in Vancouver 
to develop a tourism course which addresses the specific skills 
needed to fulfil the mandate of the Eastend Community 
Tourism Authority. 
 
The trainee will receive credit from both Palliser and Capilano. 
As a result of this Future Skills project, SIAST will now have 
access to the cultural tourism training development in Capilano 
College. 
 
While all of this is coming together, Scotty  whether it’s an 
ancestor of mine or not, I’m not sure  the Tyrannosaurus rex 
is also coming together. Scotty’s jaw was found a few weeks 
ago with one of the largest dinosaur teeth found so far at the 
site. It is still being put together piece by piece at the field 
research station. 
 
Since the research station opened, thousands of visitors have 
stopped to see one of Eastend’s most famous creatures. 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Positive changes to Wascana Energy 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
express support for the government’s recent decision regarding 
Wascana Energy. Mr. Speaker, the announced changes to 
legislation governing the structure of Wascana Energy are 
positive changes and deserving of both our support and 
recognition. 
 
Under proposed reforms, Wascana Energy will be better 
positioned to acquire capital while the people of Regina acquire 
greater assurances that key management jobs, support staff, and 
spin-offs will remain in Regina. While we regret these changes 
did not occur before 55 jobs were relocated to Calgary, it’s 
always better late than never. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to Wascana Energy 
continuing to play a role employing Saskatchewan people right 
here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spring Break ’96 Direct Seeding Demonstration 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, today I’d like to congratulate 
the Zealandia Elks and Sovereign Lions clubs on their second 
annual direct seeding demonstration coming up on June 7. 
 
Spring Break ’96 is a fund-raiser for the organizations, but it is 
much more. It is an important event for anyone who wants to 
learn about direct seeding. Saskatchewan is one of the leading 
places in the world for both the manufacture of implements 
related to direct seeding and for farmers to convert to that 
practice. But there are still many of us who are trying to learn 
from each other about how to do it better. 
 
We know there’s a lot of interest out there because Spring 
Break ’95 was such a huge success. Fifteen hundred people 
came from across the province to check out the latest in direct 
seeding equipment and to see how it works in the heavy gumbo 
soil around Zealandia. 
 
The manufacturers are very enthusiastic about the event. This 
year there will be eight manufacturers demonstrating their 
equipment on 60 acres of land. 
 
But much more than that, there will be acres of static displays 
of everything from seeders and harrow bars to motor homes for 
the odd farmer that gets a break once in awhile. 
 
Farmers always want to see the latest equipment in action, and 
this year the manufacturers will have plenty to show them. 
 
It’s shaping up to be a terrific annual event for the community 
of Zealandia, and I invite everybody from across Saskatchewan 
to come and enjoy the day with them. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

 

AIDS Awareness Campaign 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week the 
Saskatchewan AIDS Network is launching its new awareness 
campaign. The campaign will feature billboards and other 
advertising across the province to focus on the deadly impact 
that HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) is having on 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan AIDS Network is also calling on the 
provincial government to show leadership in the fight against 
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), starting with 
more funding. To date, HIV-related illnesses have claimed 100 
lives in Saskatchewan. There are also about 300 people in the 
province who know that they are infected with HIV. 
 
What is also extremely frightening is that the Saskatchewan 
AIDS Network estimates that another 3,000 Saskatchewan 
people are unknowingly infected with HIV. 
 
For years, medical officials have been telling people that 
education and prevention are the two most important methods 
of stopping the spread of HIV. Saskatchewan AIDS Network is 
hoping that this new campaign will give people the accurate 
information they need to fight this deadly disease. 
 
I would ask all the members of this Assembly to join me in 
commending the hundreds of professionals and volunteers 
across Saskatchewan who are committed to battling this deadly 
AIDS virus. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lumsden Lions Club Marks 35 Years 
 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seventy-nine years 
ago in Chicago the first Lions Club was formed; 76 years ago in 
the city of Windsor, Ontario, the first Canadian Lions Club 
organized itself. Today there are over 42,000 clubs in 180 
countries with over 1.4 million members. 
 
One of those clubs is in Lumsden in my constituency, and 
recently the Lumsden Lions celebrated their 35th anniversary; 
another reminder, I suppose, that we are by comparison a very 
young province  a young province with very mature 
accomplishments, I should add. 
 
The ceremony celebrating the anniversary was attended by 
District Governor Harold Grace, and a good time was had by 
all. The evening was also a time for Mr. Grace and for the new 
members to be informed of the worthwhile activities over the 
years of the Lumsden Lions. Most significantly, from society’s 
viewpoint, is the Lions annual Journey for Sight and its eye 
bank, to which the Lumsden chapter is an active contributor. As 
well, the Lumsden Lions are actively involved in youth 
programs, in Red Cross donor clinics, in disaster relief, and in a 
host of other community activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the term, service club, is not one the Lumsden 
Lions take lightly. I congratulate them on their first 35 years 
and I am sure they will continue to contribute for 35 more and  



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

beyond. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wynyard Public Library Awarded 
Most Improved Branch for 1995 

 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
always known that people in my constituency like to read, and 
recently that fact has been confirmed through a special 
recognition. 
 
The Wynyard Public Library, branch no. 9 of the Parkland 
Regional Library system, has been awarded the most improved 
branch award for 1995. Of the 52 branches within the region, 
when taking growth in circulation and other improvements into 
account, the Wynyard library came out on top. During 1995 the 
library had a circulation of 16,000 books, an increase of 66 per 
cent over the previous year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as librarian Wendy Howie can confirm, a great 
deal of effort has gone into library programing as well. More 
than 1,000 people took part in 57 events connected with the 
library in 1995. They include public information and 
entertainment events featuring authors, poets, speakers, and 
video presentations. 
 
Wynyard mayor, Sharon Armstrong, and RM (rural 
municipality) councillor, Bill Moulton, accepted the award on 
behalf of the Wynyard branch earlier this month at the Parkland 
Regional Library annual meeting held in Yorkton. 
 
This is another good example of people working together for 
the benefit of rural Saskatchewan. I would like to congratulate 
librarian Wendy Howie, and the staff and volunteers connected 
with the Wynyard Public Library, for doing an excellent job in 
promoting positive activities such as reading and providing 
information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passing of Arthur Putz 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to mark a sad event affecting a member of our legislative 
staff. On Saturday morning Arthur Putz, the father of Greg 
Putz, the Deputy Clerk, passed away after a long illness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all have special people in our lives on whom 
we rely for love, support, and guidance. When one of these very 
important people passes on, it touches us all. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Putz has the continuing support 
of many family and friends at this hour. Through their 
memories, their love, and their lives, Arthur Putz will live on. 
 
On behalf of our caucus, I would like to extend to the Deputy 
Clerk and his family our sympathies and our regards. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

Saskatchewan Museum Week 
 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last session I was 
pleased to make a statement about the railway historic museum 
in the RM of Corman Park in my constituency. It’s a great place 
to spend some time reconnecting with our province’s 
transportation roots, and it is one of many museums in 
Saskatchewan which are dedicated to preserving and 
publicizing our past. 
 
This week has been declared Celebrate Saskatchewan Museums 
Week  a week that coincides with the beginning of tourism 
season, a week whose purpose is to stimulate public and media 
interest in our museums and their activities. 
 
A few pertinent facts about Saskatchewan museums: they 
employ 826 people, provide more than $8 million a year in 
salaries; 2.4 million people visit Saskatchewan museums each 
year, 800,000 from out of province. Museums spend $22 
million buying goods and services every year. Sixty-five 
hundred volunteers are involved in the museums, and over half 
of which are in towns of populations of fewer than 1,000. 
Museums hold over 5 million artefacts in public trust for future 
generations. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, 43 per cent of the museums’ revenues 
come from the provincial government; 29 per cent is 
self-generated; 10 comes from the federal government. This 
money is well invested, connecting the world of our 
grandchildren to that of our grandparents, as our museums do. 
It is a good and laudable objective, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Regina Health District Funding 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, much 
has been said about the two-tiered health system that this NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government has developed through its 
so-called health reform wellness model. Well it appears that this 
government is trying to reduce the gap, Mr. Speaker, but not by 
improving rural health care but by bringing down health care 
funding in our more populated levels to that of our rural 
communities. 
 
The Regina District Health Board is holding a press conference 
this hour to announce a budget strategy to deal with the funding 
shortfall of $13 million over the next two years. We are also 
aware and understand that there are about 100 front-line 
care-givers who are about to receive their lay-off notices. 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain what health care facilities 
will be closed and what services will be lost as a result of this 
funding shortfall? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I understand that the Regina 
District Health Board will be making its announcement this  



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

afternoon with respect to measures it intends to take to be 
fiscally viable, Mr. Speaker. If the member is suggesting that 
the Regina District Health Board or any other health board 
should not take steps to live within its budget then I can only 
say that I disagree with the member. 
 
What we need to do in our health care system, Mr. Speaker, is 
make far-sighted, correct decisions about spending money, 
allocating resources fairly on the basis of population of the 
districts and on the basis of need. The Regina District Health 
Board will be meeting the health needs of the people in the 
Regina district and elsewhere, but it will be doing so within its 
budget. That’s part of its job, and I commend the Regina 
District Health Board for undertaking the planning that is 
necessary to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, a number of rural health 
districts have seen their funding cut because of this 
government’s needs-based formula. The minister has explained 
that this is because funds should follow the patients. If this is 
the case and more rural people are in fact taking their health 
care needs to the larger urban centres, it would seem then that 
the Regina Health District Board should receive more funding, 
not substantially less. 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain how this government can 
continue to under-fund the Regina District Health Board when 
its patient load is apparently increasing at a substantial rate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the Regina District 
Health Board did in fact receive an increase in this year’s 
budget because of an increase in utilization. 
 
And I say to the member that he and his party and the rest of the 
opposition cannot have it both ways, Mr. Speaker. They cannot 
get up day after day and say on the one hand that the rural 
districts are getting less because some of the services are being 
performed in the city, Mr. Speaker, and complain that the 
money should be kept in the rural districts. And on the other 
hand get up and complain that they want the Regina district to 
have more money. It doesn’t work that way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I’ve indicated to the members in the House before, the 
reality is that the seven largest districts have 61 per cent of the 
population but they perform 94 per cent of the surgeries. 
 
And I say to the member that when a resident of his riding in 
Arm River comes into Regina for a surgery, if that’s the 
appropriate thing to do, that surgery has to be paid for. And if 
the member is saying that that surgery shouldn’t be paid for, the 
member should say so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Care Centre 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a  

pair of meetings took place yesterday in Swift Current to decide 
on a course of action to fight this government’s decision to 
close the Swift Current Care Centre. Already more than 3,000 
people have signed petitions opposing the closure and a 
committee has been established to lobby this NDP government 
to make the right decision and properly fund this facility. 
Yesterday the Minister of Health used words like consolidation, 
and streamlining, to justify this decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is not a business. Health care is a 
service that should be based on common sense, not just dollars 
and cents. Will the minister now demonstrate some common 
sense, intervene in this matter, and restore appropriate funding 
for the Swift Current Care Centre? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  You know, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of 
the Liberal opposition becomes apparent when this member 
gets up and says health care is not a business. A few weeks ago, 
the member from Arm River, who was just up, said if there are 
people that are prepared to pay, then I think we have to let them 
pay. That’s what he said. He said they wanted a two-tiered 
system, and they wanted the health care system to be run like a 
business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member from Melfort that there is an 
alternative vision that some people have for health care. And I 
would use as an example of that alternative vision what is 
happening in the Prince Albert Health District where, Mr. 
Speaker, they have cut the number of long-term care beds, but 
they have seven empty long-term care beds at the moment and 
no waiting-list. Why? Because they are providing care in the 
community and allowing people to remain independent in their 
own homes until they need to go to a nursing home. And that’s 
the vision that we need to embrace, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  The vision that this government has, Mr. 
Speaker, is to leave people alone, afraid of what’s going to 
happen to them, and that’s what you’re doing with your 
example, Mr. Minister. 
 
Under section 39 of the districts health Act, Mr. Minister, you 
have the power to step in and intervene and override decisions 
of a board where it is in the public interest. Mr. Speaker, the 
closure of the care centre threatens the quality of life for our 
sick and elderly in the Swift Current area. It tells our seniors 
that they are not a priority. Our seniors are concerned about 
their futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, a committee of concerned citizens 
has been formed. Will the minister make a commitment in this 
House today to meet at the earliest convenience with this 
committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the Prince Albert 
Health District a moment ago. I want to advise the member and  



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

the Liberal opposition, and the Conservatives for that matter, 
that the Saskatoon District Health Board has cut the number of 
long-term beds that they have. They have reduced the 
waiting-list for long-term care from 400 to approximately 50 
because they have centralized assessment, adult day care, and 
home care for people who wish to stay in their homes until they 
actually need to be in a nursing home, Mr. Speaker. And that is 
the vision that we embrace; that is the vision that the health 
districts are trying to deliver. 
 
I want to say to that member that if that member was concerned 
about health care that member would acknowledge that the 
federal Liberals cut the budget of the Swift Current Health 
District and every health district in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
by hundreds of thousands of dollars. And what we did, Mr. 
Speaker, was to put in a dollar for every dollar that the Liberals 
took out. 
 
That member will get up and try to make political points on this 
situation, Mr. Speaker, but that party has no commitment to 
medicare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Information Systems 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, 
responsible for information and technology. Mr. Minister, we 
know your government’s tendering policy has caused a lot of 
controversy since it was introduced. This morning you 
announced that you will provide ISM (Information Systems 
Management Corporation) with the first access to analyse 
government information systems regarding the year 2000 
requirements. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you tell this House whether it is standard 
government practice to offer tenders for communication 
information systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
question, of course. I sent to the member opposite a ministerial 
statement that I’ll be making in a few moments after question 
period regarding ISM 2000 and the MOU (memorandum of 
understanding) that we signed this morning. So the member is 
aware this proposal has the support of the broad range of 
information technology companies in Regina and throughout 
the province who were at the press conference this morning and 
supporting the concept of strategic procurement in information 
technology area. 
 
The reason being that most information technology companies 
know that it should be well within their purview to come 
forward with new ideas and concepts unrequested by 
government, and that’s the way we will keep on the cutting 
edge of information technology. It has the support of the 
industry. I really urge you to read the documentation, and I 
think you’ll accept this form of MOU as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But I didn’t get an 
answer from the minister. I’m asking, is it normal procedures 
for you to tender communication? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the member opposite that we didn’t tender anything. This 
was a proposal from industry, from a company, ISM, to come 
forward and create a situation where they would employ 200 
people in Regina to do a project that you will understand, 
dealing with the need to change computers as we approach the 
year 2000. They came to government with the proposal. 
 
We have signed a memorandum of understanding so that they 
will look at the needs of government. There’s nothing automatic 
about any tenders going to this company. This, I want to say 
again, is supported by the industry in general, who see this as a 
great opportunity, not only in this area but many other areas 
where the government may have information technology needs 
in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
in her budget address, the Finance minister said, “Saskatchewan 
people told us to cut ‘red tape’. We . . . (are listening) and we 
are responding.” 
 
Yet this memorandum of understanding creates red tape. If a 
government department doesn’t like the proposal, they have to 
go to a standing evaluation committee of the government. Only 
if that committee agrees can they then select a supplier using 
normal procedures. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much will this extra step cost taxpayers, and 
don’t you think you have the process in the wrong order? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m realizing 
now that the Liberals are opposed to this job creation initiative 
that is supported by ISM. I would urge you to phone other 
information technology companies like Systemhouse who were 
at the press conference this morning, members from CDSL 
(Co-operators Data Services Limited), who support the concept. 
 
I don’t know who you’re asking these questions on behalf of 
because basically the industry and the people of the province 
are excited about this. The Regina Economic Development 
Authority was there, the mayor of Regina, the business 
community in general. I’m not sure who’s writing your 
questions for you but you should check to see whether or not 
there’s any support for your opposition to these 200 jobs that 
are being created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Long-term Care 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my  



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

questions are to the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, I thought I would just take a minute to give a 
report on the meeting held in Swift Current last night, since 
neither you nor the NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) had the courage to show up. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
there wasn’t one NDP MLA or even a Liberal MLA at this 
meeting. People were wondering: where is the minister; where 
is our MLA? One alderman said, and I quote: “My only 
question is, where is Mr. Wall?” How many care that we’re 
throwing these people into the street, literally? 
 
Mr. Minister, since you were far too busy last night to worry 
about elderly people losing their home, will you make the 
commitment that you will go to Swift Current, go the care 
centre, and answer the questions people are asking? Will you go 
to Swift Current and take responsibility for the people you are 
throwing out of their homes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat, although it 
shouldn’t be required, that no one is going to be thrown out of 
their home onto the street. It is simply incorrect for the member 
and other members to get up and say that people are going to be 
thrown into the street. People are going to be provided with 
good and decent housing. 
 
But the Swift Current Health District has made a decision to 
change the way in which they are going to deliver long-term 
care. And, Mr. Speaker, I support the decision of the Swift 
Current Health District Board. It is their right to make that 
decision; they’ve made that decision; they will provide 
appropriate long-term care for people who need it, and they will 
also provide community care for people in the community. 
 
The member says, will I accept responsibility. I will accept 
responsibility for believing that the health districts and the 
Government of Saskatchewan should live within their budgets, 
something that if that member had believed when he was in 
government would have put us all in a slightly better position, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
unfortunate that the minister gives us his same pat answer, and 
that’s the question that was being asked last night. Mr. Minister, 
Swift Current City Council says the district board isn’t getting 
the autonomy and flexibility it needs to make good decisions. 
Alderman Robinson says, and I quote: 
 

The health boards and their administration have the best 
information about what their district needs in terms of 
services, but are not always able to react to these needs 
because of the rules handed down from Regina. 

 
Mr. Minister, the marching orders are coming from Regina. 
You continue to blame the district health boards. Last night I 
attended the meeting in Swift Current. Tonight I’m going to 
meet with the people in Central Butte about their hospital 
closure. Tomorrow night again in Canora. Mr. Minister, it’s 
becoming a full-time job keeping up with your health care  

closures. 
 
When are you going to start taking responsibility for these 
decisions? When will you go out and meet with the people 
being directly affected? Will you be at the meeting tonight or 
tomorrow night? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member’s 
question, I meet with people every day across the province in 
terms of health care needs, and I’ll be at a meeting in Yorkton 
tonight, as a matter of fact. 
 
The member should understand that district boards do make 
decisions at the local level, and I support that. And either you 
believe in local decision making, or you do not. If the member 
says that, well their decision making is somewhat limited 
because they get a set budget, then I agree with the member. We 
can’t apologize for that, Mr. Speaker, in the sense that that is a 
fact of life. The Government of Saskatchewan, the universities, 
the schools, the health districts, have to live within a certain 
budget. That is a reality, especially a reality these days 
following upon the ‘80s, Mr. Speaker. And that is what we 
must do. 
 
But at the same time we have to have a health care system that 
is sustainable into the future. And I believe that a vision which 
says we can have community-based care and home care in 
addition to long-term nursing home care for people that need it 
is a sustainable, appropriate vision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question. Last 
night, Mr. Speaker, while I listened to the pain and the anger in 
people’s voices and the questions that I’m raising today coming 
directly from people  and they weren’t fed by myself or any 
of the other members from our caucus  I couldn’t help but 
think, Mr. Minister, that this was your plan all along. 
 
Your government throws 70 elderly people out of their home  
this place, this care centre which they consider home, the only 
home some of them have known for many years  and then, as 
we’ve heard again today, you blame it on the district health 
board. That way you and your MLA for Swift Current don’t 
even have to show up at the meeting to take the responsibility. 
That’s pretty clever, Mr. Minister. It’s also a pretty heartless 
and gutless plan. Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now I think the hon. 
member realizes that he’s just crossed the boundary in the use 
of parliamentary language and I’ll ask him to withdraw the 
remark and get on with his question. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, my apologies to the Assembly. 
However, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister . . . 
 
The Speaker:  I asked the hon. member to withdraw the 
remarks as well. If he’ll withdraw the remark and proceed with 
his question. I didn’t hear the member withdraw the remark. 
Just to withdraw the unparliamentary remark and then proceed 
with his question. 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the remark. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, people in Swift Current don’t feel any 
compassion. They feel that they’re being dealt a heartless blow 
by a government that is not responding to the needs that they 
are facing. They feel, Mr. Minister, that you have let them 
down, that the funding is being directed to the larger care 
centres and we’re forgetting all about rural Saskatchewan. 
 
People who have lived in a centre for a number of years . . . 
and, Mr. Minister, while you say some of the people will be 
taken care of, Mr. Minister, 39 patients in the Swift Current 
health care centre still don’t know where they are going. 
 
Mr. Minister, why will you not accept responsibility and go and 
listen to the concerns of people in Swift Current and all across 
this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member repeats the 
question, why will I not accept responsibility? But I say to the 
member, if the member wants me to accept responsibility for 
saying that there’s a health care budget and we have to live 
within it and build a sustainable system, I accept responsibility 
for that. 
 
The member has said three times now that I get up and blame 
the health district board. I don’t blame the health district board. 
I support them. I say that they are headed in the right direction; 
they’re making a good decision. I support them. The member 
shouldn’t get up and say I blame them or that I don’t accept 
responsibility. I do. 
 
But I want to say to the member that I also acknowledge that 
change is difficult. It’s difficult for everybody and it’s difficult 
for the residents of the Swift Current care home. I acknowledge 
that. But what doesn’t make it easier, Mr. Speaker, is really 
emotional appeals and scare tactics instead of reassuring people 
that they are going to be provided with appropriate care. 
Because they are going to be provided with appropriate care, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Urban Crime Rates 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Justice or his 
designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, many people in our larger centres like Regina and 
Saskatoon are becoming increasingly concerned about urban 
crime rates. Back in 1994 we heard a lot of media coverage 
about car thefts and the Oldsmobile gang in Regina. However, 
auto thefts actually increased from 1,472 in 1994 to 2,215 in 
1995 according to figures provided to us by the Regina city 
police. That’s an increase of approximately 50 per cent in 1994 
and over double the number of auto thefts in ’93. 
 
Mr. Minister, at the same time that urban crime rates are 
increasing, you are cutting funding to urban government, and 
that means cuts to police services. Mr. Minister, what specific  

steps are you taking to bring the urban crime rate down and 
make our streets safe for the families of people in places like 
Regina? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that if the 
Minister of Justice was answering this question, he would want 
me to thank the hon. member for the question, and I do that. 
 
I want to say to the member that one of the things that the 
Minister of Justice is talking about and doing  which I think 
is a very good development because the member raises a very 
serious problem  is trying to inject into the Justice system the 
idea of restorative justice and people taking responsibility for 
their actions. 
 
One example is the work that is being done in the city of Regina 
with respect to the so-called Oldsmobile gang. And I think in 
the long run that if we encourage people to take responsibility 
for their actions and sometimes to have to face up to the people 
who have been victimized by their crimes, that this would 
indeed be the way to go. And I commend what the Department 
of Justice here is doing in looking at that issue and trying to 
work with the police and others to move us along in that 
direction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, auto 
thefts wasn’t the only crimes that increased in Regina in 1995. 
Break and enters hit a four-year high of over 6,000. Assaults 
were also a four-year high in 1995. There are increases from 
1994 to ’95 in prostitution violations, weapons charges, thefts 
of vehicles. And this year, Mr. Minister, your casino opened, 
and many studies have linked casinos to an increase in urban 
crime rates. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, does Regina have adequate police 
services to deal with increasing crime rates, and what are you 
doing to ensure that public safety is being protected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well yes, I believe that Regina has 
appropriate police services, Mr. Speaker. But I would say to the 
member that the answer to this problem is not just more police 
and spending more on police. The answer to the problem is 
involving families and communities and different parts of the 
community. 
 
I know that there is a victims of crime program run out of the 
Friendship Centre in Regina. I think that’s a good example. 
There’s sentencing circles that are going on. Some of those 
things are good examples. We’ve got to involve the whole 
community, the families of offenders, and the victims — get 
people together to talk about crime. We will not solve the 
problem just by spending more money on police and having 
more police. We will solve the problem, Mr. Speaker, if we try 
to deal with the issues, if we have some restorative justice, if 
we work together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

Funding For Street Youth Outreach Programs 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 
important street youth outreach program in Saskatoon could be 
in jeopardy if this government does not renew its commitment 
to funding next month. Egadz outreach workers provide 
invaluable assistance to street youth. 
 
In fact during the first three months of this year, Egadz workers 
made 848 contacts, providing street youth with nutrition, 
clothing, first aid, and counselling. The number of young 
people on the streets seeking the services provided by the 
outreach van are dramatically increasing, including child 
prostitutes. Will the Minister of Justice or his designate commit 
to continued funding for the outreach program at Egadz? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 
Justice, I would thank the member for the question. The Egadz 
program  she’ll be interested to know  the outreach 
program which has served the city well was dependent, and 
began, on federal dollars. It’s the federal dollars that have 
disappeared and put the outreach program at risk. 
 
Now I have a suggestion for the member and her caucus. We 
have a problem, Mr. Speaker, as all will recognize in the House, 
that on a daily basis the Liberal members come in and say we 
should spend more here and spend more there and spend more 
there and spend more there, as they also say we should cut 
taxes, cut taxes, cut taxes, cut taxes. I have a suggestion for the 
member and her caucus in terms of youth programing, child 
programing, in the province. 
 
In January of this year, the federal MP (Member of Parliament), 
Mr. Kirkby, from Prince Albert made quite an announcement. 
He said, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal government recently 
delivered on a key red book promise, which was to provide 
$700 million for new child care initiatives. Mr. Speaker, we all 
know that money has never appeared. How would it be, Mr. 
Speaker, we work together, approach the federal government 
for some of that money, and put it into valuable programs in our 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
challenge that member to go into Saskatoon and talk to the 
child prostitutes and tell them to refer their cases to the federal 
government. They’re depending on this government in this 
province to help them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina and Saskatoon city police are warning the 
public about the infiltration of street gangs. It’s a well-known 
fact that these gangs roam our streets, preying on children who 
are vulnerable to drugs, prostitution, and crime. 
 
Separate committees in Regina and Saskatoon are both 
recommending the establishment of transitional safe houses as a 
way to get child prostitutes off the streets. But safe houses are 
not a viable proposal if funding for street outreach programs is  

not maintained. 
 
Mr. Minister, as part of our commitment to the well-being of 
our children and society as a whole, will this government take a 
leadership role and propose an integrated funding arrangement 
for street youth outreach programs and transitional safe houses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I much appreciate the 
member’s obvious concern about this issue. I hope she will turn 
that obvious concern into constructive action rather than simply 
criticism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am inviting the member, as I stand now, to join 
with me in approaching the federal government who have 
promised Canadians over $700 million in new funding for child 
care and family, youth initiatives across Canada. Not one dollar 
of that has been designated, Mr. Speaker. Of that money, Mr. 
Speaker, I calculate that Saskatchewan, as a percentage of the 
Canadian population, should merit somewhere between 25 and 
$30 million. 
 
With that kind of money, Mr. Speaker, we can do some great 
things in our province. I challenge the member to join with me, 
to join with this government, to have her caucus join with us, in 
approaching the federal government with proposals to meet 
some of these needs. Let’s get serious about this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Information Systems Partnership Agreement 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform 
the Assembly of an initiative announced this morning by 
myself, ISM, and the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, 
that will create up to 200 new information technology jobs in 
our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  As you have heard numerous times 
during this session, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Partnership 
for Growth economic strategy calls for developing strategic 
alliances to stimulate job growth in key sectors such as 
information technology. 
 
This morning, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of joining with 
the Hon. Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs at the signing of 
a landmark partnership agreement with Canada’s largest 
provider of information systems management, ISM, or 
Information Systems Management Corporation, headquartered 
right here in the capital city of Regina. 
 
The memorandum of understanding puts Saskatchewan in the 
forefront of addressing a problem affecting computer systems 
all over North America and around the world. Many of the 
information systems implemented over the past 25 years, of 
course, utilize a two-digit date system. Starting in the year  



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

2000, these systems will be unable to recognize a current date, 
resulting in massive disruptions in virtually all areas of 
date-sensitive information systems, including hardware, 
software, data storage mediums, and report generation. 
 
This innovative partnership between the Government of 
Saskatchewan and ISM will result in the Canadian centre of 
competency to address the problem. It will create up to 200 jobs 
in Saskatchewan and will help develop leading edge industry 
expertise in our province. 
 
Briefly, Mr. Speaker, the agreement provides ISM with the first 
access to government departments and agencies to analyse their 
information systems regarding year 2000 requirements and to 
present proposals to provide solutions. 
 
While securing the centre of competency for Saskatchewan, the 
MOU does not commit departments to expenditures, nor does it 
commit them to award work to ISM if there are optional 
considerations which dictate alternate solutions would work 
better. This is truly an example of strategic procurement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the 200 jobs created at the centre 
itself, the agreement will enhance Saskatchewan’s position as a 
centre of information technology at no incremental cost to the 
taxpayers and it will lead to spin-off growth in this and other 
industries. Mr. Speaker, it’s another example of how 
Saskatchewan people turn potential problems into 
opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members to join with me in 
applauding this partnership with ISM which will create the 21st 
century jobs now so our young people can use their world-class 
education and training right here at home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to receive the ministerial statement prior to this 
announcement. 
 
As a business person and as a taxpayer, I’m delighted that a 
Saskatchewan firm will be working on international problems 
surrounding the actual date of the year 2000. Providing access 
to government departments, with their immense diversity of 
interests and concerns, will enable ISM to work with an array of 
problems on hand. 
 
My concerns, addressed in question period, were simply this: 
were other companies given the opportunity to work with the 
government department in the same manner? Or did you pick 
and choose who would be given the opportunity to work on the 
proposal? 
 
I congratulate the minister for working with the companies to 
solve problems in the future. I congratulate the government for 
working with companies to create jobs that the rest of the 
province doesn’t pay for. And I’d like to point out that the 
people of the province only have to hear 100 more of these 
announcements for the minister to reach his goal of 20,000 jobs 
in three years. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
indeed a good initiative set forward by a very good company 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. Information technology 
of a cutting edge like this is indeed a great step forward for 
Saskatchewan and for the company involved. The jobs will 
undoubtedly be an added bonus and great thing for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
A little history of this company might be in order, however, at 
this point If you recall, this is a privatization initiative of the 
former administration. The government computer company was 
WESTBRIDGE at the time. It had a net profit in 1992 of 
$500,000. After privatization that jumped to $12 million in 
1994. It went from a little over 200 employees in 1988 to over 
3,000 employees in Canada by 1994. Last year 48 per cent of 
ISM was sold to IBM for $142.5 million. They have contributed 
magnificently to the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s paying millions of dollars in taxes, donations, payrolls, 
spin-offs, etc., to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a great initiative. The foresight of this 
privatization should not be overlooked, and we’re hopeful that 
other privatizations through the Crown corporation review will 
be forthcoming. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  With leave, to comment on the ministerial 
statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 
the members. I appreciate very much that the minister sent a 
copy of his ministerial statement earlier to me today. And I do 
want to comment, primarily because from 1991 onwards, the 
then third party in 1991 made reference on a regular basis to the 
province taking advantage of information technology through 
what we termed a centre of excellence. 
 
And I’m most excited about this announcement today. It’s 
termed a centre of competency, and it’s timely for sure, given 
our discussions in the committee on Public Accounts when we 
were recently discussing information systems protection. It 
think strategic procurement is something that should be 
encouraged. We’re delighted. I am delighted that 200 jobs in 
such an important area are going to be focused in our province, 
on our concerns, and I’d like to congratulate the government 
and the minister in this undertaking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 115  An Act to establish 
Regional Telephone Districts 

 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I move first reading of a Bill to establish 
Regional Telephone Districts be now introduced and read a first  



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker:  Question 100 is converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 
 
Written question 101 is converted to motions for returns 
(debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 80  An Act to amend 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my remarks 
I will be moving the second reading of The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Amendment Act, 1996.  
 
In Saskatchewan where so much of our economy is based on 
our natural resources, maintaining a healthy ecosystem is 
possible if we stop the loss of species and their habitats by 
improving the way we manage our resources. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I will summarize The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Amendment Act’s new features. The first area of 
concern is the first nations’ treaty land entitlement. The 
proposed amendments will remove land to fulfil first nations’ 
treaty land entitlement settlements. In consultation with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and the 
Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat, 21,500 
acres of protected lands have been identified by specific first 
nations as part of their land entitlement selections. Both the 
province and the first nations are anxious to complete the 
transfer of title and add to the reserve lands, in order to resolve 
this long-standing debt. 
 
The Canada-Saskatchewan Treaty Land Framework Agreement 
will remain in effect for the next several years. This amendment 
adds a clause which will allow lands to be removed by 
regulation for Framework Agreement purposes. Removal by 
regulation will help the province fulfil its commitment to the 
Framework Agreement without having to go through the 
lengthy legislative amendment process. 
 
This amendment reflects the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
commitment to the Framework Agreement. I should also point 
out that all of the third-party interests in all of these lands have 
been dealt with before they will be turned over for treaty land 
settlements. 
 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act Review Committee is the 
second area which we will be dealing with. The amendment 
recommends the removal of 25,600 acres of land as a result of  

extensive consultation with farmers and ranchers following the 
1992 amendment to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, which 
added lands to the Act. 
 
An appeal process was initiated after that amendment to deal 
with lessees’ concerns which arose out of those additions. Some 
of the lands being removed from the Act by this amendment are 
to become available for purchase by farmers and ranchers who 
wish to acquire them for their operations. 
 
All of the organizations involved in this process, including the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association, and Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation, support this amendment. 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act conserves some of Saskatchewan’s best 
remaining natural areas while protecting and managing Crown 
lands for agriculture and wildlife populations. The government 
remains committed to conserving and managing habitat lands 
while recognizing and respecting the role ranchers, farmers, and 
property owners have in conserving wildlife habitat. In total, 
47,100 acres  approximately 1 per cent of the lands under the 
Act  will be removed for the purposes of treaty land 
entitlement and farmer/rancher settlements. 
 
Another area that we are pleased to add here is, additional 
Crown lands adjacent to major wetlands are being added to the 
Act. In total, 3,600 acres will be added to the Act. These lands 
were identified as important for rare and endangered species, 
and particularly piping plovers and whooping cranes. 
 
We also saw fit, Mr. Speaker, to increase the penalty clause. 
This amendment also raises the maximum penalty for corporate 
violations of the Act, adds a penalty for continuing offences, 
and allows the courts to make restoration orders requiring 
offenders who have disturbed wildlife habitat lands to restore 
and rehabilitate those lands. These changes provide the 
government with a much better ability to control and manage 
lands designated under the Act. 
 
We also have concluded some administrative housekeeping 
details. Lastly, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment deals 
with administrative housekeeping, which includes the land 
descriptions. Currently there’s three schedules; one, two, and 
three schedules will all be compiled into one schedule so that 
the Bill will all be under one piece of paper. 
 
Grouping these lands under one schedule does not change the 
meaning or intent of a schedule but helps to simplify 
identification of these lands. In protecting a total of 3.4 million 
acres of government owned land, The Wildlife Habitat 
Protection Act is the most cost-effective habitat program this 
province has. It is less expensive to conserve our natural areas 
than it is to try to restore them later. 
 
These natural areas are valuable to wildlife and to those who 
enjoy them, and they can be protected with very little cost to the 
taxpayer. The government recognizes the importance of  



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

wildlife to Saskatchewan people and, in turn, the importance of 
private and Crown lands to wildlife survival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Wildlife 
Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 1996.  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just at the top, the 
Liberal Party believes that balance should be struck between 
farmers and ranchers, and the balance should be struck between 
developers and of course conservation of land, and also to fulfil 
the treaty obligations in reference to treaty land entitlement 
process. 
 
Once again, I’m also pleased to have an opportunity to discuss 
another very important piece of this legislation that is before the 
House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act is current . . . is undergoing its second set 
of revisions. This Act was originally passed as law in 1984. In 
1992 the NDP government tabled and passed a series of 
amendments that proved to be controversial to the Tory Party, 
the party that passed this Act in the first place. 
 
Now this Act is up for another set of changes. In 1992 a fair 
amount of debate occurred over the proposed changes to this 
Act. At the time, the NDP government included the remaining 
1.5 million acres of Crown land into the Act. This brought a 
total of 3.4 million acres of natural areas protected under the 
critical wildlife habitat protection Act.  
 
This Act at the time was seen as a unique piece of legislation as 
it allowed and continued to allow the traditional uses of haying 
and grazing by agricultural lessees to continue on Crown land. 
In keeping with its mandate to protect Crown land, this Act 
prohibits the clearing, breaking, and draining of these Crown 
lands or the sale of these lands. 
 
This Act is not only unique in its make-up. It is also cost 
effective, as the taxpayers pay nothing, and it’s cheaper to 
maintain our natural habitat now than it would be to try and 
rejuvenate them in the future. 
 
The PC (Progressive Conservative) Party, as official opposition 
at the time, was very much opposed to the amendments that 
were tabled in 1992. The view at that time was that this Act 
would deprive the ranchers and farmers of Saskatchewan from 
making their decisions as to the protection of the wildlife 
habitat. 
 
I think that the reason that we need protected land spaces is for 
the very reason that landowners and large corporations 
oftentimes don’t know or don’t realize how important it is to 
properly protect the natural habitats found on their land. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that was then, and this is now. The 
amendments to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act that are 
before us today should not be as nearly as controversial as the 
Tory Party tried to make them four years ago. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there is a great need to have policies in place to 
protect our province’s natural resources and wildlife and 
waterfowl habitats. Due to the extent of agricultural industry in 
Saskatchewan, over 75 per cent of our natural landscape has 
disappeared due to cultivation of land and the construction of 
roads, towns, and cities. Over half of our prairie wetlands have 
been drained and filled. It is with this loss of our natural 
ecosystem that we see a continuing and eternal loss of flora and 
fauna that is native and unique to Saskatchewan. 
 
It is important for us all as legislators to work together to foster 
and protect the environment of our province. The duck 
population in Saskatchewan continues to plummet. To add to 
this, over 20 per cent of our native plants are listed as rare and 
are disappearing at a horrific rate. 
 
The purpose of the amendments to this Act that were tabled in 
1992 were to include more Crown lands as protected by The 
Wildlife Habitat Protection Act . Today’s amendments propose 
to remove 21,500 acres from protection under this Act in order 
to fulfil first nations’ treaty land entitlement settlements and 
agreements. Another 25,600 acres of land will also be removed 
from the schedule as a result of consultation with farmers and 
ranchers following the controversial 1992 amendments. 
 
I can’t help but question the reasons why this consultation did 
not take place before the 1992 amendments instead of after. I 
guess that is of this same government’s act first, consult later 
attitude and way of doing things . . . is not a new concept. 
 
This Act therefore proposes to remove a total of 47,100 acres of 
land from that schedule and will subsequently add another 
3,600 acres of land to this schedule. These acres that are being 
added have been identified as extremely important pieces of 
land for their populations of rare and endangered species. I will 
mention once again that it’s very important to protect these 
endangered species so that they can multiply and flourish and 
therefore be around for many generations to enjoy. 
 
Saskatchewan has recently been given a C from the world 
wildlife federation for its projects to protect our natural spaces. 
This is up from a D plus of last year. 
 
Each year the world wildlife federation individually grades 13 
Canadian governments on their progress towards completing an 
ecologically representative system of protected areas. It is good 
to see that Saskatchewan has taken this seriously. Every hour 
over 240 acres of Canada’s wilderness disappears. This can 
never be regained. Once we lose wilderness lands, they are gone 
for ever. This is why it is so important to protect the wildlife 
habitats that we still have. 
 
In the 1994-1995 endangered spaces progress report, it was 
noted that Saskatchewan needed to, by March of 1996, continue 
to analyse lands under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and 
other privately protected lands to determine if they are a 
candidate for protected lands that require additional protection. 
We may be a couple of months off, but I am very glad to see 
that this government is making conscientious steps to fulfil its 
commitment to protect the endangered spaces and species of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

I must commend this government for its improvements in 
preserving and protecting our natural spaces, but so much more 
still needs to be done. 
 
Section 3(1) of this Act is amended so that Crown lands that are 
currently listed as wildlife habitat lands may be withdrawn from 
the schedule by regulations that’ll be proposed. The purpose of 
this amendment is to transfer the title of the lands in question to 
entitlements bands that have completed sale conditions required 
by the treaty land entitlement agreements. 
 
Amendments to this Act go on to increase penalties and fines 
for contravention of any provision of this Act or its regulations. 
The maximum penalty for the individuals is $2,000 while the 
maximum penalty for large corporations at the contravene 
section of the Act will increase to $50,000. This is necessary to 
deter those companies from harming Saskatchewan’s natural 
spaces. 
 
A new section has also been added that will hold an offender 
responsible for restoring wildlife habitat lands that have been 
damaged as a result of the offences committed by the individual 
or corporation involved. I think that this is extremely important. 
It not only acts as more of a deterrent but it also makes 
offenders realize the extent of the damage that they have 
caused. 
 
Education is the only way to ensure the preservation of our 
endangered species and natural land spaces. I find the 
amendments being tabled in this Bill as very important ones and 
I will enjoy the opportunity to question the minister in more 
details about this Bill’s implications in Committee of the 
Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 84  An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of Bill No. 84 to amend The Wascana 
Centre Act . 
 
This Bill implements the budget decision to maintain the 
1996-97 statutory funding for the Wascana Centre at the same 
level as last year. This is the fourth year that the province has 
maintained funding at this level, permitting the Authority to 
continue an excellent level of service in developing, conserving, 
and enhancing the park, the lake, and the legislative grounds. 
 
The Bill establishes the statutory funding contributions from the 
city of Regina, the University of Regina, and the province. For 
1996-97, this funding will be $1.42 million in total, and this 
amendment suspends a statutory formula for another year. This 
formula would require the three funding parties  the 
Government of Saskatchewan, the city of Regina, and the 
University of Regina  to pay a sum equivalent to the amount 
receivable by the city through a levy of 1.7 mills. This formula 
has in fact been suspended since 1986-87. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I know that all the members appreciate the 
importance of the Wascana Centre, not only to the residents of 
Regina but to all the people of the province. And thank you to 
the continued support of the partners, that we’re able to enjoy a 
beautiful setting for the many facilities that benefit people. 
 
Within the Wascana boundaries we find the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum, the Science Centre, the Saskatchewan 
Centre, the Diefenbaker homestead, the University of Regina, 
several government offices, and of course the Legislative 
Building  which is a rich variety of uses that surround the 
park. 
 
Furthermore, the Wascana Centre’s a great attraction for 
naturalists and environmentalists  a focal point where 
thousands of citizens, young and old, meet to enjoy the park 
and its recreational facilities throughout the year. 
 
Wascana is a unique setting among Canadian capitals and we 
should all continue to be very proud of it and to maintain its 
integrity for enjoyment by future generations. This has been 
achieved through the partnership  probably one of the 
original partnerships of its kind in the province  with the city 
and the university. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I now move second reading of this 
Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, urban parks 
are a key source of recreation and conservation. People from 
cities across the province spend hour after hour doing various 
activities in the park, including bicycling, walking, 
birdwatching, and relaxing with their children. These parks also 
feature various educational opportunities for our youth, 
featuring wildlife and heritage sites. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I 
feel it’s necessary to speak on Bill 84 today. 
 
As I understand it, the amendments outlined in this Bill will 
ensure that the same level of funding will be provided to the 
Wascana Centre Authority in Regina this fiscal year as was 
approved last year. This funding is retroactive to April 1, 1996. 
This funding is used to plan the maintenance, conservation, and 
development of this valuable green space. It also goes towards 
helping police activities in the park. 
 
With increased environmental awareness in today’s society, 
many community groups are focusing much of their efforts on 
increasing green space in the city. This is being achieved by 
creating more playgrounds, parks, and community gardens. 
 
I believe the amendments outlined in Bill 84 will provide the 
funding needed to maintain the services within the jurisdiction 
of the Wascana Centre Authority. And I see no reason to delay 
this legislation. 
 
Any questions I have on the staffing and funding arrangements 
can be addressed in the Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a  



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1445) 
 

Bill No. 85  An Act to amend 
The Meewasin Valley Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I move to give 
— will, at the end of my remarks — give second reading of a 
Bill to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act. 
 
This Bill implements the budget decision to maintain the 
1996-97 statutory funding for the Meewasin Valley Authority at 
the same level as last year. This is the third year that the 
province has maintained funding at this level, permitting the 
Authority to continue an excellent level of service in 
developing, conserving, and enhancing the river valley. 
 
The Bill establishes the statutory funding contributions from the 
city of Saskatoon, the University of Saskatchewan, and the 
province. For 1996-97 this funding will be $1,870,760 in total. 
This amendment suspends the statutory formula for another 
year. Suspension of the formula will mean that some river 
valley developments will still have to be paced according to 
available funds. 
 
The Authority plans to go ahead with further development of 
Gabriel Dumont, Kiwanis, and the Rotary valley parks this year. 
Ongoing operations at Meewasin should not be jeopardized by 
maintaining last year’s level of statutory funding. The Authority 
may have to slow down some jointly planned studies with 
provincial and local government agencies, such as groundwater, 
drainage, and shore line erosion studies, and capital projects 
like the trail development in the north-east sector. 
 
Last year the government amended The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act to permit Meewasin to share its experience and 
expertise in conservation and resource management with other 
municipalities in the province and beyond. I am pleased to 
report that the process has begun. In 1996-97, Meewasin will 
serve as the managing partner for the Saskatchewan River basin 
program. This program involves over 120 partners throughout 
the prairie provinces in environmental education and action 
programs in the Saskatchewan River basin from the headwaters 
in the Rockies to Lake Winnipeg and beyond to Hudson Bay. 
 
I would like to say a special thank-you to Peggy McKercher, 
Chair of the Authority for many years, an individual who was 
instrumental in establishing and guiding the Meewasin Valley 
Authority through many significant accomplishments. Peggy 
has moved on to commit her time to the University of 
Saskatchewan. The government thanks her for her dedication 
and leadership. We would like to welcome Ken Pontikes as the 
new Chair and look forward to success under his leadership. 
 
I take this opportunity to commend the Authority for a 
worthwhile year and look forward to their continued 
stewardship of the river valley. I hereby move second reading of 
this Bill. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Meewasin Valley 
Authority is equally important to the people of Saskatoon and 
surrounding area as is the Wascana Centre Authority to people 
in Regina. And I do commend all those who have had input and 
have taken the time and energy to make that a wonderful 
surrounding for the people of Saskatoon and the province. Bill 
85 proposes legislation amendments that will also ensure 
funding for Meewasin Valley is maintained for this fiscal year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have the same reasons for supporting Bill 
85 as I did for Bill 84. Therefore any specific questions or 
concerns that I have about Bill 85 can be also addressed in 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 54 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Scott that Bill No. 54  An Act 
respecting Conservation Easements and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you 
realize, we have already spoken at some length on this Bill, so 
today I would just like to make a few more comments. I look 
forward to getting to the heart of the conservation easements 
when we have a chance to discuss this Bill in Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Right now all I can do is make our point of view known. When 
the Bill reaches the committee stage, however, when I can get 
answers to my questions, I hope these answers will make 
rational, constructive changes that will benefit all the people in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can speak on this Bill as a farmer, as a 
landowner, and as someone who truly appreciates and respects 
nature. That is why I fully support the underlying goals that I 
think the government has set out. 
 
However, I think this government’s legislation may be either 
unclear or short-sighted because they’ve addressed all the 
positive things that would come from the passage of this Bill, 
but they’ve ignored some very potential negatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know I’ve already touched on the issue of 
easements on surrounding land. And this is a very serious issue 
in my constituency and in other areas of the province. Mr. 
Speaker, the laws outlined in this Bill have important 
implications for both landowners and conservation agencies. So 
to get to the heart of this Bill, I talked to some of the special 
interest groups and to municipalities. 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

It is their concerns that I bring forward today. Mr. Speaker, they 
are mostly wondering if there will be an impact and what type 
of impact the conservation easements will have on the Treaty 
Land Entitlement Agreement. Can the land be taken into reserve 
status if it has a conservation easement registered on the title? 
 
What about land that already has a drainage easement registered 
by a conservation and development area authority on the land, 
and then the landowner gives a conservation easement? Will the 
two conflict? This would be in as far as access is concerned. 
And what about the scenario that the land with a conservation 
and development easement was taken over by an Indian 
reservation? Is there a possibility the terms of reference for 
easement could be misconstrued to the point that C&D 
(conservation and development) easements could be terminated 
under the definition of this Act? 
 
If the reserve asks for termination of an easement, the authority 
would not have access to the drainage system. This would 
create flooding in surrounding areas. And who would take the 
responsibility? Would it be the government? I think, not likely. 
They seem to shirk responsibility any time something negative 
happens. So the problem and the expense would once again fall 
on the backs of the landowners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s legislation allows for easements 
to be easily withdrawn for special interest groups, and this is 
what has people worried. Is a conservation easement term 
defined well enough, so there can be no chance of confusion 
with a regular easement, especially in as far as the termination 
of easements are concerned? Landowners need a system to 
protect and maintain their investments. And if this legislation 
goes through, there doesn’t appear to be any legal obligation to 
ensure this happens. 
 
To me this shows the government hasn’t thought about all the 
implications or has decided that the potential problems are not 
serious. Well to landowners trying to make a living, the 
potential problems are serious, and I hope the government is 
prepared to give these people some sort of guarantee that it 
won’t end up with the short end of the stick for them. 
 
Municipalities are already struggling, and someone needs to 
start picking up the local governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that there is a way to promote the 
positive aspects of this Act and guard against the negative 
aspects, but it would mean that the government would have to 
identify potential pitfalls now before legislation goes through. 
Because, as the members opposite realize, if a law is incomplete 
or short-sighted, it may cause confusion in the courtrooms. And 
because our law is based on precedents, decisions made early 
on could have a long-term effect. Therefore, if the government 
ensures that measures are taken now to protect landowners and 
municipalities, it will benefit everyone in the future. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, this means that the government will 
have to make some changes; and as we all know, this 
government hates making changes even if it is what the people 
want. Once again we have to look at this government’s  

backward approach to legislation, and to all their policies for 
that matter. Consultation comes first. First you listen to the 
people  and I mean really listen. I’m not sure the government 
remembered that step, because if they did, why didn’t they 
recognize some of the potential obstacles? I certainly didn’t 
have to look that far. All I did was talk to people who could be 
affected and they had plenty to say. So if the government 
followed a process that is in the best interests of the people, 
why didn’t they hear the same comments? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, I can appreciate the 
government’s motives for introducing conservation easement 
legislation. I believe their intentions were honourable. 
Unfortunately I don’t think they looked far enough down the 
line. What sounds good on paper doesn’t necessarily work well 
when it’s acted upon. Perhaps they didn’t want to look beyond 
the positive, but in the best interests of Saskatchewan people 
they have to look at all sides of any piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe I have ample opportunity to present our 
concerns. As I said before, I now look forward to discussing 
this Bill with the government and to getting answers to the 
questions I have raised. Because, Mr. Speaker, if this legislation 
is passed, I want to be able to assure my constituents and people 
throughout this province that someone was looking out for their 
interests. 
 
I want to be able to go back to my constituency and tell these 
people that their concerns were addressed. And most of all, Mr. 
Speaker, I would love to be able to ease their fears. I would like 
to be able to give them a definite answer that they will be 
protected. It is these things I will look forward to discussing 
with the government. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 48  An Act to amend 
The Animal Identification Act 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me 
today, to my left is assistant deputy minister of Agriculture and 
Food, Terry Scott; and behind me is Merv Ross, manager of 
livestock operations. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to 
the minister’s officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, looking at clause 4, changes to the power of the 
directors as set out in section 4 of the Act. Under what 
circumstances do you envision the director registering a mark  



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

as a four-year mark and when will he register a mark as a 
lifetime mark under your proposal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Upon the request of the client. If the 
client wants a four-year, he can have a four-year; if a client 
requests a lifetime, he can have a lifetime. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So then it’s not your . . . it’s not at the 
minister’s discretion. It’s up to the animal owner to decide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, it’s up to the owner to make the 
request whether they want a four-year or a lifetime brand. We 
would like to see probably more lifetime brands. It cuts the 
paperwork down; it’s much more simple. And also the brands 
can be transferred to other people if passed on in the family. 
 
So it’s much less paper flow and much less administration, and 
also the person can have his brand . . . assured his brand for 
life. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, under clause 6, has there been 
any consideration given to allowing lifetime marks to be passed 
on from father to son; or in general terms, from the parent to the 
child? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, there is provision for the brand to 
be passed on intergenerationally. I believe along with that there 
would be a small fee for administration of the transfer. But the 
brand can be kept from generation to generation. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So will the . . . when you say there will be a 
small fee, does that mean that, when the transfer is to take 
place, that somebody will actually have to write to your 
department and ask for the transfer to take place so there will be 
a change on the . . . of ownership? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  They will apply to the department for 
transfer of the brand from the person who has it to the family 
member who wants to receive it. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Under clause 9, the power to cancel a 
registration mark is fairly drastic. The Bill reads that the 
director “may” give a person notice of intention to cancel 
registration. Why would it be left to the director’s discretion 
and why not say the director “shall” give notice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall: This is a permissive clause to allow the 
director to apply the rules and regulations of the Act. For 
example, when a brand is registered, there is a description of 
the brand plus the location where the brand will be located on 
the animal, and there’s a few other regulations. 
 
If the person does not adhere to those over a period of time  
it’s not like the first time there’s an abuse  but then the brand 
can be revoked. But it’s not anticipated that that would happen 
very often, nor does it happen very often. But it’s a clause that’s 
there if needed. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, can you give me an idea of how 
many different brands there are being used in the province? 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  25,000. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So when we say that under section 9, the 
registered trademark . . .the registered mark is a duplicate of 
another registered mark or so similar to another registered mark 
as to create the possibility of confusion, I would think that this 
could happen quite frequently. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  This would be very, very rare that there 
would ever be a duplicate brand. But in the event of a mistake, 
what happens is when somebody applies, the registry is 
checked. But being human, sometimes we all do make some 
mistakes. And in the event that there was a duplicate brand, 
then we certainly wouldn’t want to have two brands. You’d be 
defeating the purpose of the brand; so then this gives us the 
power to  if there is a mistake made and there’s a duplicate 
brand  just to revoke the latter brand, and they’d just have to 
choose a new brand. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So if the brand had already been . . . if the 
cattle had already been branded, then the cost of the re-branding 
would be borne again by the owner of the cattle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Is there such a thing as an interprovincial 
brand so that Alberta and Saskatchewan companies . . . or 
people would be allowed to use the same brand? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Actually right now the department’s 
working with other departments on a universal registry for 
western Canada. It’s not completed yet and they don’t know for 
sure if it can work, but there’s enough interest from all the 
governments to attempt to do this. So that is in the process. And 
whether it’ll come to fruition or not will depend if it can work 
in a way that won’t cause confusion or any conflict between 
producers. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
welcome your assistants. I feel confident that their advice will 
be more than adequate on any questions. 
 
Just on this business of human nature being what it is and the 
possibility of a brand being used more than one . . . or brands 
appearing to be similar. In the event that that does happen and 
two . . . there’s a conflict arises between owners of two 
different animals with the same brand, how can you envision 
that being resolved as to which brand belongs to whom? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  It would go through a normal procedure. 
Again, this is very, very rare occurrence that this might happen. 
But you go through a procedure where you would have to have 
people sign declarations and we have to do an investigation as 
to what the actual brand was. 
 
I assume that you meant two similar brands, not the same brand. 
Yes. Well two similar brands, then the process is there that we 
can work through that process to identify which brand that 
actually was. And so that’s in place. It’s very rare but we could 
. . . Never say always, but for 99.9 per cent of the time I’m sure, 
identify the right  never say never  the right brand. 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I again recall a few years back where 
the rustling became rather rampant throughout the Prairies. My 
next question is, with all these brands and the significance of 
them, are lists supplied to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) detachments in those areas where it may become a 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The department works very closely with 
the RCMP in these matters. In fact they do joint seminars; they 
do joint study sessions; they would work in any case where 
there’s a rustling reported. The RCMP and the brand inspectors 
would be working together to help solve that case and to 
identify cattle. 
 
Mr. Osika:  How many brand inspectors would you have 
currently out in the field? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  There’s currently about 40 positions 
filled by about 70 inspectors. Therefore, some of them are part 
time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  What type of training, Mr. Minister, would be 
supplied to these brand inspectors? How extensive? And maybe 
I’ll ask you another question at the same time: where are they 
located, specifically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The requirement for the education part is 
basically a good agricultural background with, you know, 
knowledge of farming, cattle, and a grade 12 diploma. Then we 
start training on the job, and that’s when we do the seminars 
with the RCMP so that the people that are hired, they on 
occasion have the training in order that they, you know, get a 
better knowledge of the industry. And it’s a fluid process; if 
there’s somebody fairly new, you know, then if there’s a 
problem, they can always have somebody that’s more 
experienced involved. 
 
But they are located at all the auction houses whenever there’s 
sale day. And they’re located, upon request, at the order buying 
houses, and upon request in the rural areas. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. It’s not unlike, then, crop insurance 
adjusters; as and when they’re required. They learn on the job 
from the more experienced folks. Thank you. 
 
One other question that I have is, what does it cost for a person 
to register a brand? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  As it stands right now, the cost is $25 
for the four-year brand. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, when 
a person receives notice under clause 9, he must, according to 
your Bill: 

 
. . . establish to the satisfaction of the director within 30 
days of receiving the notice that . . . registration of his or 
her mark should not be cancelled . . . 

I think this is sort of a one-sided process. The department could 
have been determining for awhile that they were going to cancel 
this, and the person at the other end only gets 30 days to rebuke 
it. Can you . . . doesn’t this seem a little one-sided to you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well generally the 30 days is an appeal 
period for the person with the brand. And it’s actually for the 
protection of other people who . . . might be the case where 
there’s the same brand or similar brands, for whatever reason. 
You don’t want it too long because the longer you let it go, the 
more problems you could have. 
 
However the clause says “may”; the director may. So if there’s 
a situation where somebody needed more time, the director can 
extend that period of time. So it’s fairly fluid. In fact the brands 
are such that this shouldn’t happen. But I mean if it does, we 
have to be a little bit flexible. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Do the people involved in this process know 
that its time frame is a little fluid? Do they understand that if 
it’s on 31 days they still have a chance to appeal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m not sure where you’re going with 
this. But the other day when we started Committee of the 
Whole on this Bill, I tabled letters from the cattle feeders 
association, the stock growers, and the order buyers, and they 
all said that they agreed with this Bill. They were consulted 
with, and they understand the 30 days, and they didn’t have a 
problem with it. So that’s why it’s there. They don’t have a 
problem, so I think it will work. And the fact that it’s a little 
flexible, if they need longer, is such that it should not be a 
problem. 
 
Ms. Draude:  That’s great, Mr. Minister, because I think 
there’s been more than one time when most of us have seen the 
time frame of 30 days, and 31 days was too long. So I’m just 
hoping that there isn’t a time when people will actually miss 
their opportunity because of this 30 days. 
 
It’s probably a good idea to give the inspectors the expanded 
powers set out in new sections 22 and 22.1. I want to ask why 
you have not protected the person who has done nothing wrong 
— the individual whose operations are a subject of repeated 
seizures and searches. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well this clause is set out because the 
inspectors have to have some power or some access to property. 
And the only reason that they would be there is on the basis of a 
complaint. Somebody’s complaining about . . . or a suspicion 
comes from somewhere that there’s a problem there. And if a 
person’s done nothing wrong, then they should have nothing to 
fear. And the brand inspectors aren’t going to harass them. 
 
But they wouldn’t just act on a whim. I mean there would be a 
reason for acting. And as you know, if somebody complains to 
a government body or to a police force or anybody . . . Same 
thing with the police forces, if somebody . . . they have the 
power to access property with warrants, same as here. You 
can’t go in a person’s house without a warrant or else without 
permission of the individual themselves. But if there’s a  



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

complaint, then you have to act on it. 
 
So you’re right. There may be situations where somebody, for 
whatever reason, complains about a neighbour and his cattle or 
brands or whatever, and he may be dead wrong, but we have to 
have the power to look at that to see if the complaint is 
legitimate or not. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, will such a person have any 
rights to redress or rights to damages then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I would hope and anticipate that 
the brand inspector who was acting on a complaint to inspect 
cattle . . . For example, if you said your cattle were . . . or you 
thought your cattle were in my yard, then the brand inspector 
would have to go and look at that. But we don’t anticipate any 
damages caused by that action. I don’t know under what 
circumstance there would be damages. And the brand 
inspectors aren’t there to harass people; they’re just there to do 
a job. 
 
Now the same thing applies, the same rights apply, to the police 
forces under this Act. I mean they have to have the right to 
access. They also fall under this Act. So either the brand 
inspector or the police officer has powers in this Act to go and 
search out and make documentation of any complaint in 
whatever the circumstances might be. But I don’t anticipate that 
there would be any damages unless you can describe to me a 
case where there might be. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I was just 
wondering there’s . . . animal identification is done also through 
ear tags, as you well know. I’m wondering whether or not this 
Act pertains to ear tags as well as branding iron brands. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, it does not apply to ear tags for the 
simple reason that the brands that we are talking about here are 
permanent brands into the . . . burnt into the hide. Ear tags can 
be easily removed. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just a 
couple more questions for myself. I believe what my hon. 
colleague was perhaps referring to was any damage to character 
as far as redress is concerned, someone coming along and 
accusing you of a misdeed which in fact you have no recourse 
. . . I guess I’ll ask that and while you’re perhaps considering it, 
also would it be the procedure then in the event of a complaint 
that a brand inspector would call on the assistance of the police 
prior to going to somebody’s property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  With regard to the restitution to a client 
or to somebody who’s been infringed upon, I guess that’s 
possible. It would be up to him if he wanted to have 
compensation through the court system or whatever. But I just 
believe that most farmers like the brand inspectors, like them to 
be there. Because 99.99 per cent of them are very, quite honest 
people and they know the value of having the brand inspector; 
him having the ability to go and inspect for other people’s . . . 
or for your cattle on somebody else’s property, and if  

somebody checked you, you know. 
 
It’s the same thing if the police are called to a building or a 
house in Regina where somebody reported an arsenal of guns in 
the basement or something like that, or whatever; there’s no 
restitution if you’re not guilty. But like I said, I think the 
farmers understand the necessity here because they don’t like 
rustling at all. 
 
The other thing is that in most cases, where possible, the policy 
is that if there is a complaint in a rural area, the inspector will 
get a hold of the police first to go with them and to help them 
with the case. It’s normal practice to do that, apparently. 
 
But in the case of an auction mart where the cattle are coming 
in and going out, and there’s a suspicion of a brand or whatever 
being wrong, or a reported brand and those cattle being in there, 
then the brand inspector has the ability to do it on his own. But 
we sort of like . . . we work in junction with the RCMP on these 
matters, if possible. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that. My 
concern was for the brand inspector, for the individual who may 
go  and as we talked earlier, human nature being what it is 
and animosities that overflow  an individual may take offence 
and might take some personal civil action against an inspector. 
That was the purpose of my question. 
 
As far as if in fact that did happen  someone going in all 
good conscience and in all good faith, but it backfires — what 
defence would there be for that brand inspector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, that is why we like to have the 
RCMP involved and in these . . . (inaudible) . . . cases to have 
. . . you know, you got two people there and you also have . . . 
there might be more respect for an RCMP uniform then for a 
brand inspector’s uniform. But it does help to have two people 
there. 
 
And for your other question, if the brand inspector is carrying 
out his duties as prescribed by regulation, in the normal manner 
and in good faith, then he is protected under the Act. Of course 
if he is negligent, then he is subject to anything that the person 
might want to allege toward him. But if he’s carrying out in the 
normal manner, he’s okay. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take comfort in that, 
because with the police forces, they may enter a premises or 
property with reasonable and probable grounds, and I was 
concerned whether or not a brand inspector might have, under 
the Act or those regulations, similar protection. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, as opposed to the federal gun 
legislation where there’s some question about accessing 
property, it’s a little different in that if the person is carrying out 
his duties, as I said before, in a normal manner and is not 
negligent, he is protected, as all government employees are. If 
there was a suit, it wouldn’t be against the individual; it would 
be against the department. So the individual is protected by law. 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One question. You 
mentioned that the brand inspectors would be at auction marts. 
Could you just give me an idea what would be expected of that 
brand inspector if there was an animal came through and there 
was a question of the brand not being properly registered or not 
being registered in the name of the individual that has a number 
of those animals for sale? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The process is that the brand inspector 
would check the brands. He’d have a list of all the brands that 
are registered. He would have a list of any cattle that were 
reported stolen. He’d check the brands; if a brand didn’t match 
. . . he’d check the brand, then go to the registry, see who 
owned the brand. If that owner wasn’t the same name that was 
on the manifest or the sale, then he would go to that person and 
request proof of transfer from the original owner to himself. 
 
If he can’t do that, then the proceeds are held up, and then he 
goes and contacts the person whose name the brand is 
registered under and asks that person if there was any loss of 
cattle or if his cattle were actually sold to this person. And if 
that person says yes, that’s fine; and if that person says no, then 
there’s a dispute involved. Then the funds come to Regina to be 
held until the dispute is settled. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So the transaction 
would all go through, but the funds would be held. Is that what 
I . . . how I understand it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Osika:  And this question may be redundant, but I 
expect that with our . . . all the technical skills and abilities and 
availability of equipment we have now, all the brands are 
computerized and the names and registrations. Are you to that 
extent at this point, where the lists of brands are all on a 
computer, and lists are available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay, thank you. I’ll just go back to the . . . the 
transaction goes through at the auction mart, but the monies are 
then withheld. So in effect, there are no powers of seizure on 
the part of the brand inspector, merely . . . he is merely to alert 
the department and/or people that may have an interest in the 
transaction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The brand inspector does have power to 
stop sale. That would be very, very rare. He would just report it, 
and like I described earlier, seize the funds or bring them to 
Regina until the 30-day appeal thing was over. And if there was 
a conflict then funds would be held until it was resolved. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just to sort of recap, I 
appreciate that legislation and regulations are put into place to 
protect all parties involved in any kind of transactions and I 
thank you for answering our questions. I want to thank your 
officials for being present in the House today to help us through 
this. We have no further questions. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to now introduce the 
official, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, along with the assistant 
deputy minister, Terry Scott, I have a new official behind, Mr. 
Doug Matthies, general manager of Sask Crop Insurance 
Corporation in Melville. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I’d like to once 
again welcome the official with the minister, Mr. Matthies. Just 
a couple of questions on this Bill. The section of The Crop 
Insurance Act which your Bill proposes to amend, section 11  
that’s one which establishes the crop insurance fund  also 
describes the components of the fund. And forgive me, I’ll just 
do a little preamble here. 
 
The components of the fund as set out in subsection (3) of 
section 11 are, firstly: 
 

All moneys paid by the minister pursuant to subsection (4), 
all premiums received in respect of contracts of crop 
insurance and (thirdly) all other moneys received by the 
corporation for the purposes of this Act . . . 

 
My question, Mr. Minister: since we are being asked to amend 
this section, section 11 of The Crop Insurance Act, what is 
meant by the phrase: 
 

. . . all other moneys received by the corporation for the 
purposes of this Act . . . 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That simply means any monies handled 
by the crop insurance fund, including premiums, indemnities, 
and also interest that might be earned on those. So that’s the 
area it covers. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. It would be appropriations as well, 
to the fund? Mr. Minister, I take it that would be a part of that 
as well  premiums and . . . Okay, thank you. 
 
Subsection (4) as it presently reads gives you, Mr. Minister, the 
power to make payments to the Crop Insurance Corporation for 
any number of different purposes. Those purposes are fairly 
broadly defined and they include, and here I’ll quote from the 
Act itself, such purposes as: 
 

. . . grants . . . for the payment of the administration costs 
of the corporation; 
 
. . . grants . . . for the payment of the financing costs of the 
corporation; 
 
. . . grants . . . for the purpose of making up any difference  



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

between the amount in the fund and the amount necessary 
to meet all indemnity payments for the year; and 
 
. . . grants . . . for any purposes that may be determined by 
the minister. 
 

And the one you want to change now in this Bill: 
 

. . . an amount not exceeding the amount that insured 
persons have paid as premiums with respect to contracts or 
crop insurance in that fiscal year; 

 
What is wrong with the present dollar-for-dollar formula, Mr. 
Minister, where you pay Crop Insurance Corporation $1 for 
each dollar that the corporation collects in premiums from its 
customers? It seems that you already have the flexibility to 
make the additional grants to the corporation under the Act if 
they run into a situation where they need that extra money to 
make up the difference between the amount in the fund and the 
indemnity payments. 
 
I guess the bottom line question is, do you feel . . . or why do 
you feel you need even more flexibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well all this does really . . . the current 
Act doesn’t give us the flexibility that we need. The current Act 
states it’s a 50/50 sharing of funds between the producers and 
government. 
 
What the new Act will do will allow flexibility in that ratio so 
that, you know, it might be 60/40 or 65/35 or whatever. I mean 
it allows that flexibility rather than a straight 50/50 formula. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So given that we will 
accept for the time being the old dollar-for-dollar formula may 
be in fact outdated in the event of changes, then perhaps is the 
new formula . . . the new formula that’s in place, or proposed in 
the Bill, does that make it better? 
 
The new formula reads that the minister may: 
 

pay to the corporation an amount determined by the 
minister, having regard to the amount of premiums paid by 
insured persons in the fiscal year, the needs of the 
corporation, and the appropriate share of the costs of 
providing crop insurance, or any program of crop 
insurance, to be paid by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
Sir, why do you want the power all by yourself  I guess that’s 
the question  to determine the amount that you are going to 
pay to the corporation? I guess why not have that amount 
determined by an order in council, by the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council, that would require an order in council which would 
at least be published in the Saskatchewan Gazette? 
 
I guess here it just leaves the total responsibility to your 
department, to yourself. And I guess the question is, why not 
leave it to the Lieutenant Governor in Council? 
 
(1545) 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’ll give you an example, maybe to 
explain, first of all, the necessity of having the flexibility. We 
went through a process this winter of consultations with farmers 
to try to put together a new program that will be an agreement 
between Saskatchewan and the federal government for a 
five-year period, as was the old agreement. We’re doing the 
review as per the Act, and we will have a new agreement in 
place for 1997 crop year. 
 
In order to legitimize that agreement, we must have an order in 
council signed by May to say yes, that we agree to the terms and 
conditions of this agreement. So that’s why the OC (order in 
council) is necessary from myself, or the minister. 
 
On the other hand, when that agreement comes into place, it 
will have come into place through a process of consultation 
with farmers over this last winter. And we don’t know exactly 
what form the new program will take yet because there are still 
some options and we’re trying to work those through, and then 
we’re going to go through more consultations with farm groups 
because we want to make sure it’s as good as possible. 
 
Now in Manitoba, for example, they’ve gone to a new program 
this year, which has basically gone from the 50/50 formula to a 
program where the first 50 per cent coverage is basically 100 
per cent government with the exception of an administration 
fee. If we wanted to go to that extreme, this legislation would 
give us that flexibility. 
 
If we wanted to go to 90 per cent government and 10 per cent 
 like I said, any combination of percentages  we have to 
have the flexibility because we have to get the legislation in 
place this session. Because if we don’t get it in place this 
session and wait till we have the exact program laid out, it’s too 
late to have it for next session, for the next crop year. 
 
Because we have to have this new program out to the farmer, in 
their hands, by I would say, you know, early January or January 
sometime, or as soon as January, February, to make sure that 
they have time to understand the program so they can make 
their decisions for their seeding intentions that year. 
 
So that gives us the flexibility to have the Act ready for 
whatever the program might be. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one brief 
question. The appropriate share  and I appreciate that there 
are many variables that you would have to be faced with, or you 
would be faced with  how is the appropriate share decided 
upon? And who makes that final decision  yourself as the 
minister, or would it be a cabinet decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the process would be, as I laid out, 
that the final decision would be between the federal and 
provincial governments. We have to agree on what the program 
might be, so the federal government and the provincial 
government . . . and we would agree on that, based on the 
consultation process that we have been going through and will 
continue to go through until the final form of the program is 
ready. 
 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

And then after that agreement is signed, and of course it has to 
come to the cabinet for the decision to accept the agreement. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, I thank you very kindly for your 
responses to our questions, and to your officials as well. Thank 
you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you. To my right is Craig 
Dotson, deputy minister of Education; and to my left is Michael 
Littlewood, director of third-party grants and legislation. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good 
afternoon, Madam Minister, and to your officials. 
 
On the previous day when we were in discussion for Bill No. 5, 
we had a chance to I think cover probably three of the topics, or 
three of the sections that are proposed. I would like to start with 
section 208, and I understand that this section is being proposed 
as a clarification of procedures that directors have been 
following right now  clause no. 11, if I might refer you to 
that. Could you explain, Madam Minister, how this will change 
current practice and how it will improve . . . if it will improve 
current practice. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Chairperson, the court ruled in the 
Saskatchewan court . . . there was a Saskatchewan court ruling 
that indicated that the practice of requiring teachers to give to 
the board of education a postdated letter of resignation was 
contrary to the intent and spirit of the legislation. And that’s 
why we’re bringing in this amendment to the legislation. I think 
it’s fair that teachers, boards, and directors of education all 
agreed that new legislation was required in order to clarify the 
rules and ensure consistent, acceptable practices across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: .Thank you, Madam Minister. In terms of the 
practice that is being followed, I understand your concern 
around being able to do something that of course is allowed 
within the legal framework. Will this in any way affect 
decisions between potential superannuates and the board in 
terms of . . . and I’m sure of those situations where a teacher 
will decide that they will retire  superannuate, I’m sorry  
superannuate on the last day of the first term, in December just 
prior to the holidays, and yet they will continue to be a teacher 
for the following term, until June 30. And at that point, of 
course, they have ended their teaching career. Is this meant to 
enable this to work better, or will this cause more problems? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  This was not intended to deal with this 
issue, but I can tell you the minister does have a view of this 
issue. You’re talking about double-dipping, and it’s not a 
practice that our government encourages, where people receive 
a public pension plan, and then they receive income from a 
school division when that income is derived from taxpayers’ 
dollars. So in essence, you received a tax-supported pension 
plan, obviously with your own contributions, but you also 
received a tax-supported income, and that’s something that we 
would discourage. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. My colleagues 
have just indicated that I think I used the phrase “more better,” 
and I apologize for that. That’s terrible. That’s terrible. As I 
hear your response, Madam Minister, then I take it that this 
practice of introducing the amendment to section 208 will have 
no bearing on any of those kinds of agreements, if those 
agreements exist? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We know that those agreements exist. 
We discourage those type of agreements, but it’s not intended 
to deal with those sorts of arrangements. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Okay, the most controversial 
portion of this amendment, I think, is around the area of 
replacement teachers and substitute teachers and defining of 
contracts. What role did the Wiebe decision play in arriving at 
the amendment as you’ve proposed it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think it’s fair to say that the court 
decision led to this, to this amendment of the legislation. All of 
the stakeholders agreed that the legislation needed amending 
given the court decision. All of the stakeholders were involved 
in the process, but obviously we got to a point with the 
stakeholders that they could go no further in terms of 
agreement. And ultimately the department had to provide 
leadership, and the leadership is seen in this amendment to the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  In the judgement, has there been a specific 
time period? Your amendment is suggesting one year for a 
replacement contract. Is that within the recommendation of the 
judge who ruled on the Wiebe decision? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The courts don’t rule on what you 
should do. They tend to rule on what you can’t do. Obviously 
school divisions couldn’t continue the practices of hiring 
teachers on a temporary contract requesting a postdated letter of 
resignation. The end of the year would come, and then the 
teacher would be re-hired for another one year contract, and so 
on it went. 
 
And we had situations in the province where you might have a 
teacher in a temporary contract position for several years, and 
that’s what the court ruled against. It said, the court said, that 
this violated the intent and spirit of the legislation and 
consequently we now have this amendment. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Under the  



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

existing Act, there are terms that the minister has defined, or the 
minister uses terms to define the academic year and the school 
year. You’ve been asked questions here in the House of this 
matter regarding changes to the school year  the possibility of 
a four/five school day. 
 
Do you have the ability within the current Act to amend the 
length of the school year? The terms . . . I know there are pilot 
projects going on right now in terms of those that are starting in 
mid-August. I take it, by one of the sections, that you do have 
that ability. 
 
Do you also have that ability to rule on a four-day school week? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The current Act permits me to 
authorize or not authorize any proposals for a four-day school 
week. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Is there a date at which you must make that 
decision? Because I know also in the Act it refers to the fact 
that the board of education must, by May 1, indicate to the 
ratepayers and parents and students the expected beginning date 
and the expected ending date of the next school year. Is that 
also the May 1 deadline for yourself as the minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It follows that I would need to do that. 
We would need to have the proposal to us sometime before that 
and I would be in a position to make a decision as to altering 
the school year. 
 
And I think you’re getting to the Scenic Valley situation. And in 
that case, I did not receive the proposal in my office, I believe, 
until May 2, and by that time, the date had passed. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  In light of the budget as the government 
delivers it and in light of how boards of education plan their 
budgets, do you think that the May 1 date is too restrictive to 
yourself as the minister? Because if a board is attempting to be 
creative and to come up with new ideas and innovative school 
years, if their budget plans are during the months of March and 
April, probably right near the end of April, they have a lot of 
decisions to make, very critical decisions. 
 
And if they give you that proposal on . . . Let’s use Scenic 
Valley as the example here. That proposal was given to you on 
May 2; probably a proposal that needs to be looked at and tried. 
And I understand your comments of last week indicated that 
that was not on for ‘96-97 school year but it might be a 
consideration for ‘97-98. 
 
If the May 1 was a restrictive date, if that was a . . . if you had 
greater flexibility to allow school divisions to try new things, 
wouldn’t a date of, you know, June 30 be more applicable? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I understand that after we deal with this 
Bill that we’re going into estimates. And if I look at the 
amendments contained in The Education Act, we’re not dealing 
with variances to the school day/school year. So I would be 
quite prepared to enter into a dialogue with you in estimates. I 
would hope that we could stay focused on the amendments to 
the legislation. 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I was wondering whether 
you were going to propose an additional amendment to Bill No. 
5. And by your acknowledgement, I see that you’re not. So 
therefore, Scenic Valley is going to abide by the decision that 
May 1 was cut in stone and they missed it by one day. 
 
Let’s look at the replacement teacher contract. And I’m trying 
to understand clauses numbered . . . clause no. 9, which is 
section 198, specifically subsections (9) and (10). As I read 
these two sections  and I would ask your clarification  
when you see . . . when I see that the description is for a 
complete academic year and that there is a decision that has to 
be made by May 31, if the teacher who is on leave for that 
complete academic year has decided . . . or has been granted 
another full academic year of leave, then immediately that 
person who was the replacement teacher becomes a permanent 
teacher. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  In answer to the member’s question, he 
is correct that a teacher would have to be offered a permanent 
contract. But what he should understand is that a permanent 
contract does not mean tenure. Someone in a permanent 
contract situation can be terminated. Someone in a tenure 
situation, there’s a number of steps that one has to go through 
to terminate a permanent . . . a tenured position or a tenured 
person. 
 
So he’s correct, but there is a difference between a permanent 
contract and a person that has tenure. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Yes, I realize that, Madam Minister, and I 
would refer then to this person who is then non-tenured and is 
there for the second term and the person who was on leave for 
secondment, sabbatical, sick leave, whatever, that person then 
returns. The component for the teaching . . . the staff 
component is too large. One person has to be let go. And 
whether or not it be the new person  let’s assume that due to 
seniority it is  will there be now an obligation on behalf of 
the board to pay redundancy pay for the two years that the 
person has taught? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  My understanding is that if for some 
reason this person could not take another position, that there 
were no retirements or sick leave or maternity leave, which 
would be very unusual actually, then that person . . . but if there 
were none of those situations available — we can’t imagine that 
that would in fact happen — but if it couldn’t happen or it 
didn’t happen, then the person would be entitled to redundancy 
pay of five days for each year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, I think you’re very aware of 
school divisions that have made decisions just last year to cut 
three position or four positions or seven positions. And in rural 
Saskatchewan there are a number of teachers that are being let 
go due to redundancy. So that will be very common if indeed a 
person returns back to the employ, and that is a person who has 
been granted a leave. That’s going to be very common. 
 
So I think it’s going to be very expensive for boards in terms of 
making decisions about the numbers of teachers that they’re 
going to be letting go. Now that’s not a question, Madam  



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

Minister. 
 
The point that I want to make here is, I think that what you have 
introduced is something that of course was necessary, was 
necessary to prevent the seven- and eight-, nine-year temporary 
contracts. When I look at one year . . . And I’m going to use an 
example here that may help clarify this. 
 
If a school division has released a teacher to be seconded to the 
department, to go on a sabbatical, whatever reason, and it’s 
been granted for a full academic year, if they’re a rural school 
division, they’re looking at it a little different than what an 
urban school division does. Yes, right at the moment there are a 
number of teachers who are unemployed and are looking for 
work and there will probably be a number of people who apply 
for the position that a board has advertised, even though it’s a 
one-year term position. 
 
Now the person has been hired through a process, and he’s a 
first-year person. He’s not had any experience before and is 
hired by the board. At the end of the first year, prior to May 
31st, the department, in this case, who has seconded the teacher 
on leave, decides that they want to keep the teacher for a second 
year. So the board has to make a decision. 
 
Now as I understand you from your first answer, you have said 
that after one year the person becomes permanent. Okay. Not 
tenured, not tenured, but they are on continuous employ. So 
therefore the board has to make a decision. Is this teacher that 
they’ve had on replacement contract excellent, good, fair, poor? 
Because now if they keep the person for an additional year, at 
minimum it will cost them two years of redundancy, 10 days, or 
they will have to let somebody else go because they want to 
keep the teacher there. 
 
So the decision might be by the board, well this teacher is fair, 
not good enough to cut it with us, and therefore we’re going to 
release them. We’re going to release them because they just 
haven’t quite cut it. I think it’s very damaging to that beginning 
teacher. That teacher who has one year of experience is now 
going to be let go because the board is looking at the situation, 
and the director of education I’m sure is going to be evaluating 
the teacher. And they’re going to feel that that person doesn’t 
quite cut it so they’re going to let them go. And I think it’s very 
damaging to that beginning teacher. 
 
Do I have all of the chronological . . . is the chronological order 
of how things will happen correct as I’ve explained them so 
far? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well my response to the member’s 
question would be this, that in either scenario the teacher that 
was in that position, that replacement teacher position, would 
not be entitled to a board of reference. 
 
I think the other point I’d like to make is that in other areas of 
endeavour, if you are laid off by your employer for whatever 
reason, you’re entitled to pay for every year of service. That 
does happen under The Labour Standards Act. And in this case, 
I believe that they’re entitled to seven days of pay for every year 
of service. So in this case, at the end of the two-year  

period, if there was no position for that teacher, that beginning 
teacher, they’d be entitled to 10 days pay for that two years of 
service. 
 
In fact, they’re receiving a smaller amount of pay than someone 
who would be in another position under The Labour Standards 
Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, let’s look at a second 
scenario. And I think we’re probably now talking about a much 
larger school division that may have three teachers . . . three 
teachers have applied for leave for the full academic year. And 
the board has decided to let all three teachers . . . to grant all 
three requests. So the three positions  and I’ll just refer to 
them as A, B, and C  three replacement teachers are hired for 
positions, A, B, and C. At the end of the first year, both 
teachers A and B, the release teachers, are coming back; by 
May 31, there is a known fact that they are coming back. 
Teacher C, however, is the one that has requested a second year 
of leave. Evaluation of the three replacement teachers, all 
first-year teachers, has indicated that the best teacher was 
teacher A, the second best teacher was teacher B, and the third 
best was teacher C. 
 
By your amendment, it’s an automatic that teacher C gets the 
second replacement year. Is that correct? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  If teacher C is just not up to standard, 
teacher C can be let go. Teacher C can then ask to have a 
hearing with the board. Teacher C is entitled to a hearing with 
the board but teacher C is not entitled to a board of reference. 
The board would then be in a position to hire either teacher A 
or B for the second year of a temporary or not . . . a temporary 
contract, I guess we’d call it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, wouldn’t you see it as an 
advantage to beginning teachers to have the flexibility of a 
second year so that the board or the director of education could 
make that decision about the teacher in the second year? So that 
there isn’t an automatic situation that says, the person is 
permanent, the person is automatically granted a second year; 
that the replacement teacher would be evaluated in the second 
year. 
 
And I think as a previous teacher yourself, as a first-year 
teacher, you’re learning a whole new experience. Maybe you’ve 
made some mistakes, you’ve made some errors, but there is 
potential. 
 
The board of education and the director of education now are 
put in a very critical position to say yes, we’re just not quite 
happy and because this person is an automatic for the second 
year, we’re going to let them go. And we’ll, you know, face the 
music at the review. 
 
But in a second year, teachers will either cut it or not cut it. And 
I think what you’re asking here in the way of the amendment, I 
think, is going to put a burden on those first-year teachers who 
are fortunate to get a replacement contract. They will be under  



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

the gun from day one, hoping to get into a second-year contract. 
What is your comment on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I guess my comment would be this: 
that we had in this province absolutely wonderful teachers that 
were sitting in temporary positions for four or five or six or 
seven years. I’m really, really delighted that in the city of 
Saskatoon under the leadership of Pat Dickson, the director of 
education, I think, 70 people last year had their temporary 
contracts turned into permanent positions. 
 
These are young people that were trying to . . . were waiting on 
whether or not they should buy a house, whether or not they 
should have children, whether or not they should get married  
those kinds of things, sort of getting on with their lives. And I 
think if you look at what we’re trying to do here . . . is we’re 
trying to create a situation where boards of education apply 
consistent practices across the province so that we treat people 
fairly. 
 
And I’m of the view, Member, that with this legislation I think 
that boards of education have some clarity in the situation, and 
they’re now in a better position to apply the same practices to 
how they treat replacement teachers across the province. And I 
think that’s what these amendments are trying to do. Let’s get 
some consistency into the workplace for teachers who are 
sitting on replacement contracts. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And as I’ve 
indicated, a number of teachers who are in temporary contracts 
year after year need to have that stability, and I agree with you. 
I’m just worried about the beginning teacher here who isn’t 
going to be given a fair shake. I just want for clarification, 
before we move on, so that I can understand what you’re asking 
for in clause no. 10. 
 
The scenario that I would describe for you in clause no. 10 is 
that if a replacement teacher has been teaching for a board for 
one year and the person on leave returns  so in other words 
that contract is over  and three years from now there is 
another situation where a full academic year of leave has been 
granted, if the board hires this first replacement teacher, you 
know, that taught for that one complete year, is he or she an 
automatic permanent teacher because they have now been hired 
for a second year? 
 
In other words, it is a situation that is not consecutive, but it is a 
full year that will be now replaced by a full year a number of 
years down the road. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  My response to your question would be 
this: that if they were a replacement teacher for year one, and 
year three they were brought back as a replacement teacher, at 
the end of that third year, there’d been a skip in the middle. I’m 
using your scenario. They were a replacement teacher in year 
one. The teacher came back. They were out of the school 
division for a year. Then they came back the third year. 
 
At the end of the third year, which would in fact be their second 
year, if the school board wanted to terminate them, they could 
be terminated, and they would not be entitled to a board of  

reference. They would be entitled to a hearing with the board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we rise, report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48  An Act to Amend 
The Animal Identification Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 5. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To my right is 
Craig Dotson, deputy minister of Education. To my left is Ken 
Horsman, assistant deputy minister. Behind me is Mae Boa, 
executive director of finance and operations. Behind Mr. 
Dotson is Michael Littlewood, director of third-party funding 
and legislative services. And at the back is Gerry Sing Chin, 
manager of school grants; Margaret Ball, assistant director of 
facilities planning; and John McLaughlin, executive director of 
the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, and 
to your officials, welcome again. It’s been awhile, a few weeks. 
 
If I could have the assistance of a page, please. Excuse me, 
could I have the assistance of a page? I’d like to send across to 
you, Madam Minister, two photocopies of two documents. And 
I refer you to last session; I believe the date was April 15. And 
in Hansard you have indicated that, and I quote: 
 

You will remember, because I think you may have been 
president of the school trustees association, that the 
trustees did not sign the last agreement, and that this will 
not be the first time that the trustees may not be there to 
sign the collective agreement . . . 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

As you can see, I’ve sent across two documents to you that are 
photocopies of the signing pages of the contract for 1990-91, at 
which you will note that I was one of the four appointees by the 
trustees committee, and my signature is on that document. 
 
You will also note that the second document is for the contracts 
’92, ’93, and ’94, the document that was signed for those three 
years. And you will also note that there are four trustee 
representatives who I, as president, appointed to sit on that 
committee. And their signatures are on there as well. 
 
So your suggestion that the documents were not signed by me 
or by people representing the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) during my term as president are indeed 
false, and I would request that you clarify that. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I am at a disadvantage in terms of 
responding because I don’t know which day he’s referring to, 
and I’d like to see Hansard to see precisely what I said. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  With the assistance of a page, I will send 
across to you a document from Hansard of April 15, and I will 
await your reply. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What I will say to the member is that I 
made a mistake. I will not say it was a falsehood. There’s a 
difference. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  You’ve made the mistake . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh sure, sorry, except the fact that that is a 
mistake and that indeed those documents were signed. 
 
With the assistance of a page . . . There has been a situation 
where the stakeholders in this discussion, that you and I had 
regarding stakeholders and their involvement in education, is of 
great importance to me and I think to all people in education. 
 
The document that I’ve just sent to you, Madam Minister, is the 
photocopy of the 1980 agreement between the government and 
the teachers’ federation and the trustees, and you will note that 
the absence of the trustees, the signatures of the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association does not exist on that agreement. 
And I would like . . . if you could clarify that is the only 
agreement that the trustees have not signed as part of the group 
of stakeholders. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  My officials do not have the 
information here, but we believe that there have been other 
times when the trustees did not sign the collective agreement. 
 
But being the past-president of the SSTA, I’m sure Mr. Krawetz 
. . . or I’m sure the member will provide us with the 
information. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I’d be glad to, Madam Minister. The sheet 
that I have sent to you is the only time, since collective 
bargaining, bi-level bargaining has been in place whereby the 
trustees have not signed the collective agreement  up to this 
year. 

And I guess, Madam Minister, my question is leading to . . . do 
you see . . . I’ll back up. When that occurred in 1980, there was 
much divisiveness between government, trustees, teachers, and 
I think it took a while before wounds were healed and things 
got back on track. That was 1980. What we have again now this 
year is the fact that the trustees, as I understand  and you 
could clarify this  is that the trustees will not be signing the 
current agreement. And I’m not even sure what length that 
agreement is, whether it’s a two-year or a three-year. If you 
could clarify that as well . . . 
 
Do you see repercussions for the fact that the trustees will not 
be signing the current agreement? And how will your 
department be trying to work through this fact, as the minister 
of Education no doubt did in 1980? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Chair, it’s a two-year agreement. It 
ends as of, I believe, December, 1996. And obviously as 
Minister of Education, I’ve had many discussions with the 
trustees in the last two-and-a-half, three years and I know that I 
will continue to have discussions with the trustees. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  In light of the fact that the agreement expires 
in less than a year and that the trustees did not take part in the 
last part of the negotiations, what kind of plan will you be 
putting in place other than just discussions with them in trying 
to bring everybody back together? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We have had many discussions with 
the trustees over the past years. As recently as, I believe, last 
Friday, we had discussions with the trustees. And we will 
continue to have discussions with the trustees. In my view we 
have a good relationship with the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association and all of the trustees across the province. 
I think that it’s fair to say that trustees have welcomed the 
open-honesty position of the department and myself as minister. 
And I’m sure that we will continue to have that type of 
relationship in the months ahead. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, last time we were in estimates for Education, you 
indicated that you would have some information available for 
me regarding the school divisions or schools that had wellness 
centres and how they were working within the school systems. 
And there was, I believe, some other information that your 
officials had indicated that they would provide for me as we 
went along through estimates. If that’s not available today, that 
would be fine. I’d appreciate that, though, at the next time. 
 
And I would ask for one more document unless your officials 
have it today. I know Mr. Sing Chin might be the one that 
would supply this. Have all school divisions set their mill rate 
to this date . . . would be my first question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’re providing written answers to all 
of those questions, and they have not yet been delivered to my 
office. But when they have been, we’ll share them with the 
member. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Have all school divisions set their mill rate, 
Madam Minister? I know you were talking to your officials. My  



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

question was, have the school divisions set their mill rates. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think there were two parts to the 
member’s question, and the second part, the second answer to 
his question is yes, they have. They had to set it by April 30. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Would your department be able to provide a 
list of all the school divisions in terms of the current mill rate 
that has been set? And I know the chart that you prepare in 
terms of the . . . would you be able to supply that for me? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I can get that for the member. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much. I know my colleagues 
have a couple of questions. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you and again welcome to the 
minister and her officials. Just a few quick questions in 
reference to northern Saskatchewan within the northern 
administration district. What’s your total budget spent for 
northern Saskatchewan for your K to 12 system, as well for 
your adult education? Like, have you got the sources of income 
or costs . . . and to what agencies do you grant these monies to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m sorry that we were not able to hear 
your question. If you could speak up a little louder, it would be 
helpful. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the question I have is for 
northern Saskatchewan. I’m talking about the northern 
administration district line that we’re all familiar with. What’s 
the total cost of education to the province, and whom do you 
make these allocations to, and what are their responsibilities? 
 
I understand you have a separate K to 12 budget. You may have 
a separate adult education budget. You may have a separate 
training budget for the mining companies and may want some 
people employed in a certain field. If you could give me those 
breakdowns, I would appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We do not have a separate budget other 
than K to 12. We have a K to 12 budget. When the minister 
responsible for Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training is 
here, he would be able to answer your question in the context of 
adult education or post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I apologize for that error. I guess the second 
part of the question is, do you have a figure for the K to 12 
system in northern Saskatchewan as to what you spend each 
year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The school grant this year to the three 
northern school divisions is $27,026,432. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, I’d 
like to take a few minutes to look at the capital portion of your 
Education estimates. You’ve indicated under capital grants . . . 
and we had a couple of comments made the last time. You’ve 
indicated that your budget has increased to $11 million for 
‘96-97. Has there been a decision in terms of all of the B-1’s 
and moving up into B-2’s, etc. Have you spent the entire 

amount of money? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No, we’ve made no decisions yet. 
We’re in the process of doing so. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  In terms of the numbers of B-1’s, would you 
be able to indicate how many B-1’s you have before your 
department, before the facilities department, and what would be 
an estimate of the total amount of projects, if you were able to 
grant everything that was requested, the wish list. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We have three major projects, and then 
obviously there are a number of requests from school divisions, 
and we have not yet made a decision regarding those requests. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  In the budget address, Madam Minister, 
there’s an indication that for 1998-99 you will be achieving $7 
million worth of savings. Could you describe the plan in terms 
of what you see as the ability to save $7 million? Is it from 
within administration of the department? Is it within 
restructuring? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No, I mean there’s a couple 
possibilities. The school divisions receive grants from the 
province each year, and they also receive funding for . . . we 
have so much funding available for capital projects. So what we 
want to do is discuss the possibility of merging operating grants 
and capital to determine how we might be able to save an 
additional $7 million in the 1998-99 fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Up until this year, Madam Minister, the grant 
allocations to school divisions included a line item that was a 
salary component for the previous agreement. Does it still exist 
on this year’s grant, and if not, has there been additional monies 
provided? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As part of the 1992-94 collective 
agreement, we indicated that in 1994 we would show the salary 
component in terms of the spreadsheet given to school 
divisions. We also advise that that would no longer be shown in 
this fiscal year and that the money would be rolled into 
operating grants to school divisions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  As you’ve rolled that cost into school 
divisions, the adjustments will be handled in a different 
manner, I assume. Has there been a change in terms of the 
allocation factor for school divisions, the amount of money 
allocated? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  There’s no change in the amount of 
money that’s allocated to teachers’ salaries. It has just been 
rolled into operating grants to school divisions, and it’s no 
longer shown as a line item. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  You’ve indicated that the procedure that was 
in place was for the years . . . collective agreement ‘92, ‘93, 
‘94, and that’s now ended, and therefore it’s rolled in. You’ve 
also indicated that you are picking up the $2 million cost for the 
salaries for the current year, 1996. Will that amount show up as 
a line item in terms of additional monies for boards of 
education? 



May 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

(1645) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No, it will not, because we advised 
people in writing that we were no longer going to do that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  If you’re not showing that as a line item, then 
you’re suggesting that the grant as calculated for each board is 
automatically picking that up. When I look at the numbers that 
you’ve provided in terms of $2 million, you’re not really 
suggesting then that the $2 million that the boards will receive 
is going to be all for salary because the boards then will have 
additional costs. So if it’s not provided as a line item, it’s not 
additional monies. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Chairperson, the total grant . . . the 
grant to school boards went up by $2 million, an increase from 
353 million to 355 million. There was a $2 million increase for 
school divisions that came from the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, your officials, your official 
. . . one of your officials and I had an interesting discussion in 
Saskatoon a short while ago about this simplified grant formula: 
A minus B equals C, where of course C is the amount of grant 
that’s allocated, and B is the recognized revenue from school 
boards, and A was the recognized costs. 
 
And I’d like you to clarify that if indeed you are changing the 
grant by $2 million, as you’ve indicated, that there has been $2 
million provided more than was last year. And that is correct, if 
you look at your numbers from 353 to 355. And you and I have 
had the discussions about where the EDF (education 
development fund) 2 million went. But I agree with you that in 
terms of the actual foundation grant, it did increase by $2 
million. The amount that you’ve asked boards to contribute 
though in this formula  and again we’re talking about a 
simplified formula and it indeed has many other factors, as 
you’re aware of  when we’re saying that B, the amount that 
the school boards have to contribute, has been increased by $14 
million because the equalization factor or the computational 
mill rate, as it was once known as, has changed . . . 
 
So you have asked boards to contribute $14 million more. Is 
that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Chair, the way the formula works 
is that school divisions that have low assessment rely more so 
on the province for educational funding. School divisions with 
high assessments, and therefore a better ability to raise tax 
revenue, don’t rely as much on the province. This is a way to 
ensure that we have equity in education. 
 
I should tell you that we don’t want to do what Alberta has 
done where the province is collecting all of the property taxes, 
their school taxes, and then doing the redistribution. Our 
formula is such that we can look at each individual school 
division, their ability to generate revenue as a result of their 
assessment. If their revenue ability is low, then they receive 
more grants from the province. 
 
I guess in response to your question, our department would say 
that no, school boards are not expected to pick up an extra $14  

million. That is not the case. What is the case is that with the 
formula, we’re able to redistribute funding so that those school 
divisions that have a lower ability to raise revenue receive more 
funding from the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, as I understand it, the 
assessment of this province is about $7 billion. And when the 
equalization factor that you use in your grant formula is 
adjusted upwards from 66.4 mills to 68.4 mills, that’s a 
difference of 2 mills. With the assessment of the province, you 
are now saying that boards of education, in the formula, have to 
contribute 14 . . . almost $14 million more. Is that not fact? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think . . . and if the member would 
like a briefing from the department, we’d be quite prepared to 
explain the formula to you. I should tell you that it is not a 
simple formula. What it is, is it’s a distribution formula. It looks 
at a school division’s ability to pay. 
 
And there are some school divisions that, if you didn’t have this 
formula, there would not be equality in the level of education 
and programs that we have across the province. 
 
There are some school boards in fact in this province where 
they receive no money from the province because they have 
such a high assessment, because of the oil patch or whatever. In 
fact if the truth be known, they in fact owe us money, but we 
have not gone to that level where we’re requiring school boards 
that receive no money from the province to give us money so 
that we can redistribute that money. 
 
So this really, this formula, it’s complicated but it’s the fairest 
mechanism that we have been able to arrive at in the province, 
in that school divisions with very low assessment and therefore 
a mill raises very little revenue, they receive more money out of 
the pool, out of the operating grant, than school divisions that 
have a better ability to raise a lot of money from a mill. 
 
So I guess my point is that the formula is a distribution 
mechanism. It’s based on ability to pay for a quality education 
within your school division. Those school divisions that can 
raise more money receive less money from the province; those 
school divisions that have a smaller ability to raise money 
receive more money from the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Yes, I agree with you in terms of the intent of 
the formula and in terms of how the money is distributed. It is 
distributed through the equalization factor  that’s what 
equalizes it across the province. Agreed, okay. 
 
The question to you, Madam Minister, though is: on every 
printout that went through to every school division, did their 
equalization factor change by 2 mills? And in fact then, 
depending upon what 1 mill raised at that local division  
Canora School Division, $38,000 per mill; Saskatoon public, I 
believe 800-and-some thousand dollars  did not their amount 
of money that had to be raised, or recognized at the local level, 
was it not adjusted upwards by 2 mills? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: The member is correct, but I’d also like 
to point out that the recognized expenditures went up by 3.4 per  



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 1996 

cent. So we have to take that into consideration as he’s framing 
his argument to me. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  And we’ll move over to that side of the 
equation  the A part, okay. And I understand. I’ve listened to 
your officials many years ago. Maybe not these particular 
officials but others. When we look at A minus B equals C, the 
department does not start with A, it probably starts with C, 
which is the grant. And you’ve decided that this year you will 
have $355 million in the grant. 
 
An Hon. Member:  What’s wrong with that? 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  The member opposite says, what’s wrong 
with that. Well the problem is that it used to be at about $380 
million, so we have a little problem there. 
 
The other situation then is you’ve moved over to B and you’ve 
said, well what if the equalization factor changes by 2 mills; 
what will B increase by? And we’ve just concluded that indeed 
B has increased by about 14 million. So over on the A side, 
because now you’re staying at a balanced equation based on 
what you had recognized as expenditures in the previous year, 
you now have to increase those by at least 14 million. 
 
And as your member has indicated, or as one of your assistants 
has indicated, you in fact increased that by about 16 million 
because when you subtract the additional 16 minus the 
additional 14 that you’ve asked boards to contribute, you get an 
increase of $2 million  353 million to 355 million. 
 
My question to you, Madam Minister, is could you identify 
what kinds of things were increased on the A side to indeed 
recognize an additional $16 million worth of expenditure? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as I said to the member before, 
this is a distribution mechanism. As the member probably 
knows, there are some things that come out of the pool  the 
operating grant, money for kids with behavioural problems, 
money for special needs children, money for community 
schools, Indian and Metis education development programs, as 
well as world technology. So all of these enhancements to kids 
in the classroom come out of the $355 million that we have to 
spend on operating grants to school divisions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1735 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1736 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1736 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1736 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1736 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1736 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1736 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Scotty the Tyrannosaurus rex 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1736 
 Positive changes to Wascana Energy 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
 Spring Break ’96 Direct Seeding Demonstration 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
 AIDS Awareness Campaign 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
 Lumsden Lions Club Marks 35 Years 
  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1737 
 Wynyard Public Library Awarded Most Improved Branch for 1995 
  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
 Passing of Arthur Putz 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
 Saskatchewan Museum Week 
  Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Regina Health District Funding 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1738 
 Swift Current Care Centre 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1739 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1739 
 Government Information Systems 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1740 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1740 
 Long-term Care 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1740 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1741 
 Urban Crime Rates 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1742 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1742 
 Funding For Street Youth Outreach Programs 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1743 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1743 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Information Systems Partnership Agreement 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1743 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1744 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1744 



 

  Haverstock ...............................................................................................................................................................................1744 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 115  An Act to establish Regional Telephone Districts 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1744 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  The Speaker .............................................................................................................................................................................1745 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 80  An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1745 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1746 
 Bill No. 84  An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1747 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1747 
 Bill No. 85  An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1748 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1748 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1748 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 48  An Act to amend The Animal Identification Act 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1749 
  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1749, 1751 
  Osika ..............................................................................................................................................................................1750, 1752 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1752 
 Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1753 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1753 
 Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 
  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1755 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1755 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 48  An Act to Amend The Animal Identification Act 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1758 
 Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1758 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Education  Vote 5 
  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1758 
  Krawetz..........................................................................................................................................................................1758, 1760 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1760 
 


