













































March 15, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 307 

 March 15, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 

behalf of gravely concerned citizens from the province of 

Saskatchewan with respect to the Plains Health Centre. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

These people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Moose Jaw, from Regina, from Morse, and virtually all of 

southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 

petition signed by concerned citizens all throughout southern 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, 

most of them I see are from Moose Jaw; many from the 

Holdfast area; many in Assiniboia; Regina; and obviously from 

Regina Albert South constituency. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

of names from throughout Saskatchewan again regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina; they’re from Moose Jaw; they’re from North 

Battleford; they’re from Battleford as well; Mr. Speaker. 

They’re from all throughout Saskatchewan, and they’re quite 

concerned on this matter. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also present 

petitions and the names throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

numerous communities throughout southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 

petitions on behalf of people of Saskatchewan in regard to the  

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. The prayers reads 

as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. Assembly 

may be pleased to: (1) rescind the Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement and especially its mandatory union 

hiring hall formula; (2) prohibit the expansion of this 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement or other like 

agreements to other Saskatchewan Crown corporations or 

to other government departments and construction 

projects; and (3) prohibit the expansion of this agreement 

or other like agreements to other government-funded 

construction projects with local health districts, school 

boards, municipal governments, or other venture partners 

with the Saskatchewan government. 

 

The petitioners are primarily from the Kindersley area, and I 

would like to table that. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, North Battleford, Delmus, Battleford, Saskatoon, 

Moose Jaw, Marquis, just to name a few. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I’d 

like to add about another 500 names to the list of petitioners 

that I presented the other day with regards to the Cypress Lodge 

kitchen being moved to the Maple Creek Hospital kitchen, a 

local issue, and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to halt this absurd proposal 

before it is implemented. 

 

And of course these mostly come from the local area of Maple 

Creek and the surrounding community. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition from the people from Lloydminster, and I read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you. 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

immediately repeal the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding to the double-laning of Highway 

1; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of Bill to deal 

with the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) pay 

increase. The short title is An Act Ordering Implementation 

Negated by the Crown, but we prefer to refer to it by its initials, 

OINC. We feel OINC is an appropriate name for this Bill 

because the Premier and his colleagues have been squealing like 

pigs ever since we first raised this issue. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the member knows that it’s 

not in order to engage in debate when introducing the Bill. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Notice of questions, Mr. Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on Friday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

Regarding SaskPower Commercial: (1) how much was 

spent on travel and air fare expenses out of the country 

since the inception of the company; (2) how much was 

spent on lodging, meals, entertainment by SaskPower 

Commercial employees on company business since its 

inception of the company? 

 

And I give notice that I shall on Monday next ask the 

government the following question: 

 

Regarding SaskPower: (1) how many industrial class 

customers have negotiated rate reductions with the 

company since the government allowed it to go ahead with 

power rate increases on January 1 of this year; (2) what 

was the total value of those rate reductions? 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Friday next ask the government the following question: 

 

Regarding Mr. Donald Ching’s service as a director of 

SaskTel subsidiaries, LCL Cable and the East Midlands  

Cable Group of the United Kingdom: (1) did Mr. Ching 

receive all of the 25,000 pounds sterling that was annually 

paid to SaskTel by LCL or the East Midlands Cable Group 

for his services as a director; (2) if Mr. Ching received only 

a portion of this money, what was the specific annual 

amount; (3) how much did Mr. Ching receive for travelling 

and lodging expenses incurred in serving as a director 

while SaskTel owned the company; (4) were the fees or 

expenses paid done so on top or as a part of his base salary 

as CEO of the Crown Investments Corporation; (5) was 

Mr. Ching appointed to this position by his own authority 

as CEO of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) or was he appointed on the authority of 

someone else; (6) if so, what person made this 

appointment? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 

10 students from Scott Collegiate who are with us here today. 

They’re grade 9 students and are seated up in your gallery, and I 

want to welcome them here today. With them is their teacher, 

Sandra Bellegarde, and chaperon Brad Cyr. I know I look 

forward to meeting with you after and the discussion we’ll 

have, but first of all, we’ll probably wait and watch a lively 

question period before we meet for a drink. Thanks. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly eight individuals from the Duck Lake area who are 

seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are taking adult 

basic education and are here to view the activities of the 

Assembly. 

 

They are accompanied by two teachers, Pat Soiseth and Terry 

Booker. I’m not sure whether they are with them now or not; I 

don’t count 10 up in the gallery. I would ask everyone in the 

Assembly to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 

east gallery is a dear friend, Lou Coderre. Yesterday afternoon 

we honoured his uncle, Lionel Coderre, and it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 

Assembly a gentleman from Wynyard, Saskatchewan, who is a 

principal, quite a striking entrepreneur, and a gentleman who 

has run for the Saskatchewan Liberal Party as a candidate, a 

very committed Saskatchewan person. Please join with me in 

welcoming him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Condolences 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always sad when  



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

someone is killed in a traffic accident, and it’s even more tragic 

when that person is in the prime of his life. Such is the case 

with Jeff Mengel. I’m sorry to report he tragically lost his life in 

an accident on Saturday. I would ask that our sympathies from 

this Assembly go out to the Mengel family of Holdfast and ask 

that the MLA from Arm River pass along those sympathies to 

the Mengels, as friends and constituents. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

St. Patrick’s Day 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Around the year 

1647, Oliver Cromwell, the right-wing totalitarian Newt 

Gingrich of the day, kicked a number of troublemakers out of 

England into Ireland. Among those troublemakers asking for a 

fair distribution of the nation’s wealth were the Mulhollands, a 

family on my father’s side. That was the day I became a 

member of the NDP(New Democratic Party), Mr. Speaker. 

 

My Irish ancestors came to Canada along with thousands of 

other Irish, Scots, and English in a major wave of immigration 

that eventually changed Canada from a colony into a country, 

which is a long way around of saying that Sunday is St. 

Patrick’s Day, the national day of Ireland and the day people 

everywhere wish they had my legitimate claim to Irish roots. 

 

Interestingly, the day is more celebrated here than in Ireland, 

probably because the Irish in North America, like other peoples 

from other cultures, have suffered discrimination and therefore 

have a need to celebrate their uniqueness in the face of hostility. 

 

Today that hostility is gone, but we still celebrate the Irish 

legacy which has enriched our society  their wit, their 

brilliant and playful use of the language, their song and dance, 

and their legends. 

 

One legend says that St. Patrick himself suggested that at his 

death, to alleviate their sorrow, all Irish should take a small 

drop of something. So on St. Pat’s Day, I invite all of us to do 

the rounds and “wet the shamrock”. Erin go bragh. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Signing of Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure of informing 

the House this morning of the signing of a Treaty Land 

Entitlement Settlement Agreement, which took place yesterday 

at the Cowessess First Nation. 

 

On behalf of the province, the Hon. Joanne Crofford, Minister 

of Indian and Metis Affairs, signed an agreement with Chief 

Lionel Sparvier of the Cowessess First Nation, and the Hon. 

Ron Irwin, Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern 

Development. 

 

Over its 12-year life the agreement will provide just over 46.5 

million to the Cowessess First Nation, to purchase between 

53,000 and 189,000 acres of land. In addition, once these 

purchases are concluded, the Cowessess First Nation may use  

the remaining resources for economic development purposes. 

This agreement fulfils the obligation entered into in Treaty 4 in 

September 1874. This signing concludes a cooperative process 

among the provincial government, Saskatchewan first nations, 

and the federal government to fulfil the 120-year-old treaty 

obligation. 

 

As with the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement signed in 1992 

with 26 first nations, this settlement allows for the Cowessess 

First Nation to purchase land from willing sellers. This 

agreement fulfils provincial obligations and, perhaps more 

importantly, it provides the Cowessess First Nation with the 

resources necessary for future economic development that will 

benefit all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Before proceeding to the next private 

members’ statement, I do want to remind all members that it is 

improper to use proper names of members who are seated in 

this House, and that applies as well to private members’ 

statements. 

 

Saskatchewan Herb and Spice Association 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

often get a chance to spice up debate in this House, but today I 

will. 

 

Some innovative and entrepreneurial farmers in this province 

are developing a new export industry. They are growing herbs 

and spices and marketing them to Asia. Now this may sound 

like selling cedars to Lebanon or deep freezes to the North Pole, 

but Saskatchewan herbs are in demand. 

 

Brian Petracek, a producer near Gerald, Saskatchewan, has been 

growing spices and herbs for about nine years. He has seen the 

Saskatchewan Herb and Spice Association grow from 35 to 275 

members in the last few years, and he believes the industry is 

taking off. 

 

Saskatchewan herbs and spices are growing in demand because 

this market values natural products, and Saskatchewan is 

unpolluted compared to other places. Our climate is conducive 

to high quality products; the bacteria and fungal count is 

considerably lower than in European countries. Buyers of these 

products are willing to pay for quality. It is estimated that the 

herbs and spices could be a $100 million industry for 

Saskatchewan within a decade. 

 

I commend Mr. Brian Petracek and others in the Saskatchewan 

Herb and Spice Association who see a valuable opportunity. 

They are sharing their knowledge with others in order to build 

up this new industry, and spicing up our economy in the 

process.  

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

Saskatchewan Maintenance Enforcement Program 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday the Justice minister announced a new maintenance 

enforcement program that will improve client access to 

information. He explained that the new 24-hour access line will 

make it easier for clients to receive updates on their own files 

and to receive general information about the program. 

 

I’m extremely pleased that there is now a better mechanism in 

place to help Saskatchewan families relying on maintenance 

support. This system will make it easier to collect defunct 

payments and will in turn save Saskatchewan children from 

being punished by default payments. According to the minister, 

since the maintenance enforcement office opened 10 years ago, 

the default rate has been cut by 60 per cent. And I hope that this 

program will reduce default payments even more. Today I 

would ask the other members of this House to join me in 

recognizing the federal government for funding this important 

program solely for Saskatchewan families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Charity Auction in Lloydminster 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again the 

proceeds from an important auction in Lloydminster will be 

going to a good cause. Beginning at 4 o’clock tomorrow 

afternoon, the mid-west all-breed stallion service charity 

auction will begin at the Dick Jones pavilion. The money raised 

at the event will be donated to a local women’s shelter, Lloyd 

Interval Home. Last year the auction raised $5,400 for the Big 

Sisters and Big Brothers organization of Lloydminster. 

 

Sixteen stallions in 10 breeds will be on the auction block 

tomorrow, plus a painting from a local artist, Nola Buzuk. 

Some of the breeds up for auction include Standardbred, 

Appaloosa, Thoroughbred, Arabian, Quarter Horse, miniature, 

and hackney ponies. Mr. Speaker, these kinds of events 

demonstrate the values we cherish here in Saskatchewan  

cooperation and caring to those in need. 

 

Congratulations to all the organizers of the charity auction and a 

big thank-you to the individuals and groups who have donated 

their time and energy to help others. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Balanced Budget in Prince Edward Island 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like 

the House to commend the Liberal government of Prince 

Edward Island for having their second balanced budget in a 

row, as I see in the Leader-Post of today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is a positive budget, as we see it. There are surpluses again. 

And in fact they’ve done this without having tax increases, and 

they have in this budget had education increases, school 

increases, hospital increases. And I just at the same time would 

like to note that in fact while they were doing this, there was a 

great job creation program on the way. And I won’t quote the  

article, but I hope all members do read it today. And also in the 

article, it makes mention that some of this was achieved by 

working in cooperation with unions, Mr. Speaker, not in 

providing preference policies. 

 

And I want to congratulate the Premier, the Liberal Premier, 

Catherine Callbeck, a good friend of mine; and a very good and 

close personal friend of mine, Mr. Lynwood MacPherson, also 

a Liberal MLA from the province of PEI (Prince Edward 

Island) and thank him for the MacPherson plaid tie that he sent 

me recently and a nice letter from Catherine to my family. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mine Safety Award Presented to Tyson Mining Corporation 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Back here in 

Saskatchewan, I’m pleased to report that as a former safety 

officer and as a former miner, I know the importance of 

workplace safety. One only has to look at the workers’ 

compensation records or the Westray mine disaster to have that 

point made bluntly. 

 

We all know that the potash industry is doing very well in 

Saskatchewan. It is also winning awards for safety in the 

workplace. Yesterday the Hon. Minister of Labour was present 

for a special award ceremony in Esterhazy. Congratulations are 

in order for Tyson Mining Corporation, which operates at the 

IMC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation 

(Canada) Ltd.) K2 potash mine at Esterhazy, for being 

presented with an award for workplace safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the workers’ job is to control the massive flooding 

problems at the mine, at times under hazardous conditions. 

What is truly amazing is there has been no lost-time workplace 

accident at this mine for six years  a first for Saskatchewan 

and a first for Canada. 

 

The award is a tribute to the men and women employed by 

Tyson Mining at this potash mine. It serves as an example of a 

responsible corporation and responsible employees. They are all 

deserving of praise and respect. I congratulate them all and urge 

their continued vigilance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Wildlife Damage Compensation 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, during this week’s SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) convention 

delegates have spoken a great deal about the damage caused by 

elk and deer to standing crops, winter hay supplies, and 

property, particularly in eastern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in both Manitoba and Alberta, provincial crop 

insurance agencies have well-developed programs to limit and 

control damage and to provide quick and reasonable 

compensation. There appears to be a great deal of confusion 

regarding how this government is dealing with the problem. 



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

Would the Minister of the Environment explain if there is a 

compensation program in place or being established, and if so 

what the program consists of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the hon. member for the question. 

 

The member touts the great programs in Manitoba and Alberta 

and in actual fact they are very poor compared to what we have 

in Saskatchewan with regards to compensation. I believe the . . . 

one of the provinces provides $6,000 for compensation; we’ve 

spent over $325,000 and will continue to spend money until 

this bad winter ends. So we will continue to work with 

landowners in prevention programs. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  The minister compares to Manitoba and 

Alberta that our program is much better. I would like to check 

with some of the farmers out in rural Saskatchewan that are 

having problems, Mr. Speaker, and they might have a different 

opinion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan need and deserve a 

proper program, but they also need to know the details. Without 

some form of adequate compensation program, many farmers in 

this province will not have the money to seed this spring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one particular farmer, who just happens to reside 

in the minister’s constituency, has had 150 acres of lentils 

almost totally destroyed by wildlife. This farmer is unaware of 

any program that exists and will address his concerns. If such a 

program does exist, will the minister ensure that these details 

immediately get out to farmers who are eagerly awaiting a 

response? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again I thank 

the hon. member for the question. It is certainly no secret that 

this has been a very difficult winter for landowners. Last fall 

was wet, and there’s about 196,000 acres of crop out in the 

field, which has never happened before in this province. An 

early winter in November set in with lots of snow and cold 

weather which resulted in the animals congregating in 

unharvested crops and farm yards. 

 

And fortunately we do have a crop insurance program which 

will cover some of these losses, albeit not all of them. And 

again we are working with landowners to protect their 

haystacks and feed supplies. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, the province of Manitoba 

has looked at our prevention program as being very acceptable 

and positive and are wanting to copy it for future years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Forest Resource Management 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Environment  

minister tabled a new Act that will affect forestry companies 

doing business in our province. The minister stated that the new 

Act will make forestry companies pay part of the cost of 

managing the forestry ecosystems. We recognize that the 

forestry companies contribute to the Saskatchewan economy in 

terms of employment and taxation. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, my question: is this effort to double fees to 

forestry companies intended to create more profits for 

government, or is the money going to finance local 

co-management boards in forestry regions to work with forestry 

companies in the true management of all forestry resources? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

hon. member for the question. The announcement yesterday 

was viewed as positive by many people in the province. The 

press did indicate  the Star-Phoenix article  that the fees 

would be doubling. There is no truth to this at all. In fact there 

is no agreement on fees doubling. 

 

The CKRM, which had the facts much more credible in this 

go-around, Mr. Speaker, indicated, if you based our fees on 

what Manitoba and Alberta fees are, it would be double. But 

there are many other economic circumstances to take into 

consideration. But on a simple scale, ours are half the rate of 

Manitoba and Alberta. What we are prepared to do and have 

always been prepared to do is look at the fees with other 

jurisdictions, but more importantly, work with the forest 

industry in Saskatchewan. There is no doubling of fees; there is 

no commitment to that whatsoever. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, the government, in their press 

release again yesterday, stated the agreement will ensure that 

the treaty rights to hunt, fish, and trap are fully respected. In 

reference to the Metis and non-aboriginal population of the 

North, these people are also deeply concerned that the 

traditional gathering rights, such as picking berries, gathering 

firewood, and using forestry products for traditional medicines 

may now be threatened. 

 

Will the Minister guarantee that traditional gathering rights of 

all people in the North will not be affected by this new Act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again I thank 

the hon. member for the question. Section 17 of the Act clearly 

states that anybody living in Saskatchewan, aboriginal or 

otherwise, can go and pick berries or collect firewood for their 

own personal use or for their family. So we have 

accommodated that, and that is one of many amendments that 

we’ve made to the White Paper a year ago to accommodate the 

people’s concerns and interest. Our goal is to work with 

everybody here in the province, from the people living in the 

North to the forest companies. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, the people of the North have 

many concerns with regard to economic and environmental 

situations in the North. Among these concerns are the state of 

our parks, the tourism opportunities, and the environment in our 

areas. 

 

This new Act will be generating more money for the 

government, and the northern people want to know how this 

new money will be spent and if they’ll benefit from it. 

 

Will the minister responsible for the Environment please tell 

this House that a portion of this new money coming in as a 

result of this Act will be put towards northern parks and tourism 

as well as environmental protection in the North and simply not 

be put in the government’s General Revenue Fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again I thank 

the hon. member for the question. And certainly we are 

committed to providing as healthy environment and responsible 

resource management as we can for all people in Saskatchewan 

and including the people in the North. And again we are 

prepared to work with the local people in the North through 

co-management boards which will create job opportunities. 

We’re committed to a representative areas network which will 

protect some of the areas, environmentally sensitive areas, the 

hon. member refers to. 

 

So yes, I can assure the hon. member that we are committed to 

working with people in the North on environmental issues, on 

job issues, and on economic issues, and health and other things. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Statistics Availability 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a question 

to the Minister of Health or his designate. 

 

Mr. Minister, a year ago I asked the former Health minister for 

statistics regarding patients who were dead on arrival. 

Specifically I wanted to know how many people died en route 

to a hospital as well as how many were pronounced dead at the 

scene. 

 

Our caucus wanted some tangible means of measuring how 

well health reform is working in our province and DOA (dead 

on arrival) stats would certainly be one measure. I was told at 

that time, Mr. Speaker, that these statistics were not available 

and I would like to table the letter from the Health minister that 

I received denying my request. 

 

Mr. Minister, I was surprised to find out these statistics were in 

fact available and that two reporters received them through 

freedom of information. Mr. Minister, why weren’t these 

statistics provided when they were requested last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, in reference to the 

member’s question and comment about the health care delivery  

system in Saskatchewan and how we should measure that, Mr. 

Speaker, we are being measured by a variety of means, not the 

least of which is the experience of Saskatchewan people. And 

across the province people have experienced the health care 

system providing better benefits to them now than before the 

initiation of health reform. 

 

In terms of dead on arrival statistics, Mr. Speaker, it is a very 

complicated I think as the member will understand  it is a 

very complicated process to assess this kind of statistical 

information. That information has been processed now by the 

Department of Health and is available. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, obviously 

you didn’t listen very carefully at the SARM meeting the other 

day and many people across this province would certainly 

dispute your claims of how well the health system is working. 

 

Mr. Minister, I realize that some sixty-some thousand people 

travel in ambulances every year and an increase of five people 

dying en route to hospitals isn’t a significant increase. It is, 

however, significant that the number of individuals pronounced 

DOA at the scene rose by nearly 200. 

 

Mr. Minister, we need these same numbers prior to 1993 to be 

able to compare the before and after of your government’s 

health reforms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why aren’t those same statistics 

available prior to your closing of 52 rural hospitals? Or am I 

going to find out later that they were available. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the member will know  

as we had this discussion I recall in estimates last year  the 

difficulty of establishing precisely dead on arrival statistics. The 

difficulty, Mr. Speaker, as members will recognize, is that 

individuals may be injured and become a fatality at the scene of 

an accident, they may become a fatality on course to emergency 

treatment, but they will not be described as dead on arrival until 

arrival at a hospital. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what the member will also know, that across 

Saskatchewan today emergency services in fact have improved 

 have improved significantly since 1991. We have today, Mr. 

Speaker, in Saskatchewan an entire network of first responders 

that are able to respond immediately, or as close to immediately 

as is possible, to an emergency situation. We have the longest-

standing and the best-serving air ambulance system in all the 

world, Mr. Speaker, and we have improved ambulance services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Vehicle Damage Compensation 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my question is to the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, 

everyone knows Saskatchewan highways are in a mess. Now 

even your department is starting to acknowledge this by sending 

out compensation cheques to people whose cars were  



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

damaged simply by driving on your numbered cow paths, 

formerly known as highways. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is the policy regarding compensation for 

people who experience vehicle damage caused by the terrible 

highway conditions, how does one apply, and how are you 

advertising this policy so that Saskatchewan people know it’s 

available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you. To the member opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell him that problems with 

compensation and problems that people receive from a highway 

situation is done in the normal process of going through the 

department to find out if in fact there was some responsibility 

by the department. 

 

But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, is 

that we have a federal government here that has changed the 

Crow payment, that is allowing railways to abandon the rail 

lines. We have companies that are consolidating their elevator 

system. And it’s certainly changing the traffic on our road 

system. And it is causing concern, and we’re working very 

close with rural municipalities, with other stakeholders, on 

partnership agreements in fact to improve our highway 

situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Speaker, the minister blaming the 

federal government for everything that his government has done 

is simply a joke. It was the member from Rosetown who 

wanted to turn Saskatchewan’s highways into gravel paths 

before the federal government’s budgets came down. 

 

Mr. Minister, a constituent of mine recently received a cheque 

for $385 for damage to his tire rims simply from driving on 

Highway 318. I’m sure there are many other people who have 

experienced similar damage to their vehicles across this 

province. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is the total amount your department has paid 

out in compensation claims of this nature, and what is the total 

amount of outstanding claims against your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, I 

want to first say that in a situation where there is damage, like I 

said earlier, that certainly the normal process is to go through 

the Department of Highways to see if in fact there is some 

liability on our part. 

 

But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that those members 

opposite in the previous administration spent money like 

drunken sailors. We’ve got $850 million worth of interest that 

we have to pay each and every year. Certainly that affects what 

we can spend on roads. 

 

And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, is they did sell most of the 

Highways equipment, and we are working as best we can. And 

in fact our Highways crews, Mr. Speaker, do a very, very good 

job with what . . . with the circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Economic Development 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very evident that 

rural Saskatchewan does not get much attention paid to it by the 

present government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I refer again to an internal memo from this 

government, surfaced earlier this week, confirming what our 

local leaders have known for some time  that this government 

has little if any commitment to our rural communities. This 

memo from the Economic Development minister to cabinet 

states, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

There was and still is no intention to provide a grand 

strategy for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Economic Development 

explain how he can, on one hand, state publicly that rural 

Saskatchewan is a priority when behind closed doors he is 

indicating exactly the opposite? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the 

Opposition would care to read the balance of the memo or get 

someone to read it to him, what he would find out is that in the 

government there are many things happening, working in rural 

Saskatchewan. And if you read the second page of the memo, 

and I challenge you to get up and read the eight or ten points on 

the second page that say clearly that rather than have a grand 

strategy, as you refer to it in the memo, we have chosen to leave 

specific programs within departments and agencies of 

government. 

 

You should be honest and fair if you’re going to lead the 

official opposition. And I challenge you to read the second page 

of the document, the eight points or so that talk about what we 

are doing in rural Saskatchewan  regional economic 

development authorities, the Partnership for Renewal which 

focused very clearly on rural Saskatchewan, all of the work that 

is done in Ag 2000. 

 

Now if you were being honest, sir, you will get up and I 

challenge you to read the eight or ten points that talk 

specifically on the second page of that memo of what we are 

doing in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Given again the 

actions of this government since coming to power in 1991, the 

fact that they have very little concern for rural Saskatchewan 

has been clearly demonstrated. One need only to look back at 

this government’s decision to close 52 rural hospitals, to find a 

very clear example. This government’s decision to close the 

Plains Health Centre, which serves the people of southern 

Saskatchewan, continually reaffirms this belief as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Economic Development  



314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

explain why, when it is the duty of this government to represent 

all Saskatchewan residents, their priorities begin and end at the 

city limits of Regina and Saskatoon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member need only 

go into rural Saskatchewan. And I challenge him to go to places 

like St. Brieux where Bourgault Industries is employing 

hundreds of people manufacturing air seeders for export around 

the world. Go to Watrous and look at the vast increase in the 

number of hog production facilities up in that small area, where 

farmers have gotten together to build large hog plants. Go to 

Biggar where Prairie Malt is expanding to produce malt to ship 

across the world; new contracts being signed in Brazil. Go to 

Meadow Lake; go to Maple Creek; go to Estevan  

everywhere I go I find people excited about rural Saskatchewan. 

 

You are so involved in gloom and doom for political purposes 

that you can’t get your head out of the sand. As the 

communities out there prepare for the next century, the Liberal 

Party is obviously wanting to go back to the days of Ross 

Thatcher or the days of Grant Devine with grandiose schemes 

where government is going to drive the economy. It doesn’t 

work; never did and never will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people that we talk 

to in rural Saskatchewan are those people that are being denied 

monies. And there are other examples to illustrate how our rural 

people rate with this government: the decision to retroactively 

cancel GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts of 

farmers; the removal of $188 million from the GRIP surplus to 

help achieve the balanced budget; and most recently this 

government’s failure to live up to a promise not to collect GRIP 

wind-up bills. 

 

Will the Minister of Economic Development explain in this 

House why he and his government has such contempt for rural 

people, the very backbone of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the facts stand 

in stark contrast to what the member is saying. Look a the 

number of members from rural Saskatchewan who are 

represented in your caucus versus the number represented from 

the NDP. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are not stupid, as you are letting 

on to be. They know that the economic development policy of 

this government from 1991 to 1995 are paying dividends. 

 

But let me tell you about your own member, Anita Bergman, 

who campaigned against, for political reasons, campaigned 

against closing the Plains hospital, and when she got elected to 

the board voted in favour of closing it. 

 

I want to tell you that you should be honest. I know why you 

don’t know what is going on in rural Saskatchewan because the 

member from Cypress, or the member from Shaunavon  from 

Wood River  went to try to do some consultations before the 

session in rural Saskatchewan. They had one meeting; three  

people showed up. So I know why you don’t know what’s 

going on in rural Saskatchewan. But come with us and we will 

show you where economic development is taking place in many 

communities. Quit the gloom and doom; join us, and move on 

to the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, laying the blame on health boards 

once again is not really what should be done. The government 

controls the purse-strings for health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one could also make the case that this government 

has little regard for the people of rural Saskatchewan by 

highlighting their decision to close SaskPower district offices 

and Crop Insurance offices, their threats to revert rural 

highways to gravel and close highway maintenance depots. Or 

there are the other broken promises, such as that involving the 

10 per cent VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues which was to 

go back to the communities, to the communities that could very 

well use those monies to determine the needs and look after the 

needs that they have as a result of millions and millions of 

dollars that go back to this government from VLT revenues. 

 

Will the Minister of Economic Development commit to 

working with our rural leaders to develop a proper and 

meaningful strategy that will ensure a future for our families in 

rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Again, Mr. Speaker, if the member 

were attending any of the consultation meetings in rural 

Saskatchewan he would know that Partnership for Growth was 

very much based on rural people’s input into that document. 

Even your own member, the critic for Economic Development, 

met with our department to have input into that document and 

gave us some good ideas that you will find included in our 

concept of regional economic development authorities. So we 

did consult. We consulted with your own caucus. And if there 

are more things you have to offer in a concrete, constructive 

way, bring them forward and we’ll look at adding them to the 

list. But don’t sit there and argue that everything is gloom and 

doom. 

 

Look, so you lost the election by campaigning against the 

closure of the Plains hospital and the cancellation of GRIP. 

Everyone knows you lost the election campaigning on that. Get 

over it. Leap over that hurdle and move on to the new world. 

Anita Bergman has done that. She campaigned against closing 

the Plains hospital, lost, and then realized to get on the agenda. 

Why don’t you and the Liberal Party quit worrying, the way the 

member for Wood River is, that . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Next question. Order. 

Next question. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, when people in rural 

Saskatchewan endeavour to create an opportunity for hundreds 

of jobs, such as was happening in my constituency in Melville, 

the co-generation that would have created hundreds of jobs  



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

without any investment of taxpayers’ dollars, and yet the 

government opposite, being coached by the president of 

SaskPower, refused to allow that kind of a project to go ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all indicators point to the NDP government 

continuing to take a big stick to rural Saskatchewan now, 

through forced amalgamation of municipal governments. They 

are hinting at doing the same thing to our school system. One 

can only hope that it is not at the same level of carelessness and 

disregard as they displayed with health reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition believes the future of this 

province depends on a strong urban and rural presence, a 

commitment certainly not shared by the Economic 

Development minister or his government. 

 

Will the minister explain when the people of rural 

Saskatchewan can expect this government to quit playing 

politics and get down to work on their behalf? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure who is 

writing your questions, but you might want to think about 

getting someone other than the member for Wood River to 

write your questions. But I want to say this, that your 

co-generation plant that you talk about was based on burning 

tires. And I believe that you’ll accept that that was the proposal 

that you’re talking about. 

 

The fact of the matter is that there is not enough tires in 

Saskatchewan, on an annual basis, to produce more than two 

megawatts of power. What do you propose? That you grab tires 

off tourists as they run through the province off the 

Trans-Canada Highway to fire your co-generation plant? It 

won’t work. 

 

Get on the program. Get with some of the things that the 

regional economic development authorities in your area are 

doing. They’ve got good ideas  good ideas. Work with them. 

Work with the small business loans program. Work with the 

community bonds, sir. Don’t be so negative, negative, negative. 

Get on the program. Work with your local communities out 

there. There’s lots happening. Only the Liberals seem to be left 

out of that agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker:  We’re not at orders of the day yet. I’ll 

recognize you when we get there. 

 

Before orders of the day, I’ll recognize . . . The member for 

Last Mountain-Touchwood has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

members. I want to, Mr. Speaker, ask the members of the 

Legislative Assembly to join with me today to . . . a Member of 

Parliament seated behind the bar, Mr. Simon De Jong, the 

member for Regina-Qu’Appelle. I want to welcome him here 

today and ask all member to join with me in welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I hereby table the answer to question 

no. 8. If I could have the assistance of a page. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 8 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I hereby table the answer to question 

no. 9. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 9 is tabled. 

 

I would like to make a statement about question no. 10. It has 

come to my attention that part (3) of written question no. 10 

asks for information for over a four-year period. 

 

As written questions must be answered in five days, they must 

ask for information for only one year in each question. 

Therefore part (3) will be deleted if this item is dealt with as a 

question. If it is converted to a return, then it is in order to 

request information covering more than one year to be returned 

to the House. 

 

The Speaker has not heard what the intention of the 

Government House Leader is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We will be converting the question. 

 

The Speaker:  No. 10 is converted to motions for return 

(debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 7  An Act to repeal The Industrial 

Incentive Program Act 

 

The Chair:  I’ll ask the minister to introduce his officials, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Here to my left is Donna Johnson. 

Donna is the manager of financial services; and to my right, 

Dave McQuinn who’s the acting assistant deputy minister. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome the  



316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

officials that are here today to assist us in this matter. And I’d 

like to speak to that Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Tory administration announced The 

Industrial Incentive Program Act in the spring of 1984, they 

were determined it would generate permanent jobs and 

long-term investment. That administration’s reasoning was that 

for any manufacturing or processing company that invested 

$30,000 and created one new job, the government would donate 

$7,500 to a maximum of 25 per cent. That administration talked 

about long-term investment. As a safeguard, companies weren’t 

given the money until the new jobs were in place for a year. 

According to the minister at that time, the Hon. Eric Berntson, 

and I quote: 

 

This kind of program provides a valuable incentive to 

business, and at the same time ensures the incentive is 

directed at the creation of permanent jobs and long-term 

investment. 

 

The minister also claimed: 

 

. . . the Industrial Incentives Program not only spurs the 

Saskatchewan company to start acting on its expansion 

plans, by giving relief on early costs of expansion, but also 

keeps Saskatchewan as a province competitive with other 

provinces when it comes to attracting businesses to move 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those were pretty big words. Those words were 

meant to bring hope to the Saskatchewan economy. Although 

this province is definitely in dire need of improvements to its 

economic climate, this Act obviously did not work. Look at this 

province, now 12 years later; we are still suffering from job 

losses on a weekly basis. We are still struggling in vain trying to 

convince companies to set up shop in Saskatchewan. We are 

losing our young people because there are no opportunities 

here. The Act obviously didn’t work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when that Tory administration introduced the Act, 

it claimed that positive changes would continue well into the 

future. Again I quote the Hon. Mr. Berntson: 

 

We must raise Saskatchewan’s profile and then keep it 

high. It’s a long-term task, Mr. Speaker; it’s a long-term 

investment. But only through such a strategy of 

commitment will we build the economic future that the 

people of Saskatchewan want and (truly) deserve. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree with his words even if his actions 

didn’t live up to his expectations. The people of Saskatchewan 

truly do want and deserve a bright economic future. 

 

From my understanding, Mr. Speaker, this Act set aside $12 

million to help businesses. I also understand that it was a 

program with a one-year time limit, and that applications had to 

have been received by March 31, 1985. Even back then there 

were problems. 

 

In the next session of the legislature the main section of the Act, 

section 5, had to be rewritten to clarify the eligibility criteria for  

the program. This is particularly ironic because Mr. Berntson 

acclaimed this program for its simplicity. And again I quote: 

 

. . . we are continuing this approach by making sure that 

new programs achieve their objectives without a mass of 

red tape. Simplicity, directness, open consultation, ease of 

understanding  these are our goals, (Mr. Speaker), and 

they are applied to the Industrial Incentives Program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program was introduced well before my time 

in this legislature. Therefore I cannot dispute the motives 

behind the Tory administration in introducing the industrial 

incentives program. What I can dispute though is whether it’s 

achieved its goals for the long-term good of this province. And 

I guess the simple answer to this is no, it has not. 

 

And so today we must clean up the mistakes made by that past 

Tory administration. The Liberal caucus support the Act to 

repeal the industrial incentives program. But before I close, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to make one point very clear. The 

business climate in this province is suffering. It is suffocating 

under the present government’s policies and the high costs of 

doing business in Saskatchewan. 

 

The old Act was not the answer, but I truly hope, Mr. Speaker, I 

truly hope we will see other improvements that will turn the 

economy back to the businesses and that our economy in this 

great province will once again begin to thrive. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Deputy 

Chair. Mr. Minister, I’d also like to welcome your officials here 

today. 

 

And just a few comments on the Act in so far as repealing The 

Industrial Incentives Program Act. And as my colleague has 

stated, that no doubt it being just one more former Conservative 

Act that, you know, many of their programs didn’t work, many 

of their ideas were either expensive or had no clear direction. 

And we can accept that. And if in fact, as you have told us 

before, that there’s no need to have this Act, then we would 

support that. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, if I could have you just give us a . . . 

tell the House today, you know, an idea where you’re going. If 

in fact you’re going to cancel one incentive, what are your plans 

to have something to replace it? Perhaps not in the form of an 

Act, but can you give us some idea before we start repealing 

some incentives that the province perhaps did have to work 

with, where you’re taking this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member asks what 

is the economic strategy for the province. He’s obviously aware 

that this Bill, which was introduced just before the 1986 

election and used really only in the run-up period, I think many 

people saw it for what it was  a political Bill that was a cover 

to give out a bunch of money in the run-up to 1986 election. 

 



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

When we came to government the program hadn’t been used 

for a number of years, and we didn’t use it. So therefore the Bill 

is simply not necessary, and with the approval of the House will 

be repealed. 

 

I’m not going to get into a long debate about the economic 

development program of the government because this really is 

not the place to do it. We’ll do that in estimates when we do the 

estimates of the department. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I don’t mind taking a little bit of time just 

to outline to the member that when we came to government we 

went through a long process of consultation with business 

people, with the cooperative movement, and with labour people 

throughout the province. We probably had 80 or 90 meetings in 

the run-up to the publishing of Partnership for Renewal, which 

was very, very well accepted by the business community. The 

then president of the chamber, Mel Watson, referred to 

Partnership for Renewal as the Bible for economic 

development in the province. 

 

And of course it would be difficult for anyone to say that the 

Sask Chamber of Commerce is somehow tied to the New 

Democratic Party. But yet they saw Partnership for Renewal as 

a very, very important document, and with good reason, 

because they were instrumental in putting the document 

together. 

 

The same is true of the replacement, Partnership for Growth. 

We held, I believe, 50 meetings across the province. They were 

well attended. And many of the things that you see in 

Partnership for Growth came directly from the community. The 

idea of a greater emphasis on entrepreneurial skills training in 

the school system, which is a theme of Partnership for Growth, 

came directly from the community. 

 

The idea of a trade development corporation, which we will be 

announcing and you will see the full-fledged corporation 

coming into being very soon, which will see the department’s 

economic development unit on trade moving out of the 

department to a free-standing corporation which will be jointly 

managed by business and government  the first of its kind in 

Canada, based on a model in some ways that exists in Hong 

Kong  came as well from traders who need support from an 

agency because they just don’t have the money from many 

small and medium-sized manufacturers to punch their product 

into the world market. 

 

So the concepts that we have . . . And I say again  to make 

sure that you understand grandiose schemes versus just 

plodding away and getting things done the way we have done 

traditionally in Saskatchewan  we’ve had grandiose schemes 

before and that’s why that expression. If that’s what you’re 

promoting, is you want to get some grandiose scheme, the 

people of Saskatchewan will reject that. They don’t want 

grandiose schemes because that’s what they had during the 

1980s with the Devine government. 

 

You heard all the grandiose schemes  the GigaText, they 

were going to be able to translate languages using computers. 

That was a grandiose scheme. Burning tires to make power  

plants all over the province. They were going to have five or six 

of them. There isn’t enough tires in the province to build one. 

But these are the kind of grandiose schemes that we don't need. 

 

What we need are regional economic development authorities 

which are a concept again from the ground up. The people want 

them. And they’re doing great things in places like Rosetown 

and places like Nipawin, Prince Albert, and Saskatoon. Where 

they are up and running, they are doing a great job. I believe 

government then comes in, both federal and provincial, jointly 

 not separately, but jointly  to assist the local communities 

and local entrepreneurs and business people. 

 

The idea somehow that government is going to lead this charge 

in economic development defies what business people are 

telling us. Governments shouldn’t do that. What they should do 

though is have proper regulatory and legislative agendas. This is 

why it’s important to get rid of this Bill because it is just an idle 

piece of legislation that sits on the books. 

 

So that’s my idea of economic development. I don’t think it is a 

grandiose scheme. I think it’s based on principle that comes 

from the farmers and neighbours that I know around the 

province. It’s their ideas. It’s the chamber of commerce. It’s my 

friends at the Wheat Pool who have written their notes, what 

they want us to do with cooperatives. 

 

And for that reason, I’d urge you to get into it. Study the 

document because it is based in sound principles. And if there 

are things that aren’t in that document that you would like to 

see and personally have that would work, I’m more than willing 

to sit with you, get the ideas, put them in the next document, 

and give you credit for putting them in. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

afraid that perhaps the minister here today is encouraging more 

debate than what he would like and what this Bill should 

deserve. But I think some of the response that the minister gave 

also warrants further response. 

 

If he would like us to, I guess as official opposition, to move 

along a little quicker on some of his Bills, then he should have 

moved along a little quicker in his response and not get into the 

grandiose schemes of our party when he’s actually talking about 

some of the grandiose schemes of only a couple a throne 

speeches ago, when it was the Premier of that government that 

stood up on co-generation projects; and that Economic 

Development minister was the one who fully supported and 

talked at great length of how good, sound programs, policies 

built around co-generation, built around the burning of tires to 

create electricity, garbage to create electricity . . . Well, Mr. 

Minister, you can shake your head, but I recall some of your 

speeches in this House on co-generation. 

 

And in fact if it wasn’t for Jack Messer, the president who 

reeled you guys in, if you’re taking a position that’s contrary 

now, it’s because of Jack Messer. It’s not because somehow 

you decided that you have a new economic development 

program out there. So don’t take cheap shots at us when in fact 

it was your government that really initiated it. 

 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

Now as I said earlier, this Bill is getting far more than it 

deserves. Of course it was a bad Tory idea, as many of the Tory 

ideas of the past were. And in fact I even see some of the 

Conservatives over here nodding their head in agreement. 

 

But in fact, let’s not carry this on longer than what it needs to 

be other than to say that some of these things that you’re calling 

grandiose schemes, when you put them out in a context of 

what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan, perhaps the . . . you 

know, burning of garbage so that it would reduce the need for 

landfill sites. And with that you perhaps get a co-generation 

operation, and the steam from that would heat a greenhouse or 

an operation that would supplement a farm income out there. I 

don’t see that as a grandiose scheme. 

 

At times, Mr. Minister, some of these things will just make 

good sense to do. And so now we’re hoping that you don’t go 

too far the other way just because Jack Messer reeled you in a 

little bit. We don’t want you to go too far the other way and say, 

well we’re not going to do anything for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s really all we were getting at. We accept why you 

want to repeal this and we’re going to fully support that, and 

it’s going to go through here in a matter of a few minutes. But 

let’s not get carried away and try, you know, get a lengthier 

debate than necessary here. 

 

What the people want are just common sense ideas, common 

sense programs and policies. Sometimes that will mean 

boosting an area of the province a little bit. Sometimes it means 

getting out of the way of business, doing something with 

regulations. 

 

And so that’s all my first question, Mr. Minister, was, was in 

fact are you going to come down with a Bill to replace this? 

And really I don’t need an answer. I can see you nodding your 

head, and that’s fine. And perhaps if you give an answer, it’s 

going to drag out the debate today. 

 

But what I will say, in closing, from the Liberal Party’s point of 

view, is that we would hope that you don’t follow in the shoes 

of the Progressive Conservatives. As you can see, the voting 

public of Saskatchewan dealt with that party when they 

continued to abuse the public as they did. But we hope, Mr. 

Minister, that you, getting closer to an election, also won’t 

perhaps get a little bit carried away with some new-found 

monies. 

 

And not to say you did that last spring when I was seeing two or 

three news releases coming across my desk every couple of 

days where yourself, Economic Development minister, was 

handing out money to different businesses throughout the 

province. You know, let’s always keep things in perspective. 

Let’s just be common sense, and of course we can let this one 

go through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Just to pick up on one theme that 

the member raised, and that is co-generation. I want to make it 

very clear that the reason that we’re not building co-generation 

plants in Saskatchewan  and when I refer to co-generation  

here, I’m mainly talking about co-generation as it would apply 

to co-generation as in association with the pulp mill at Millar 

Western or possibly at some of the pipeline facilities in 

Saskatchewan where they do make economic sense  is 

because we don’t need the power. 

 

One of the things that the previous administration did that 

didn’t make any economic sense was to build power plants to 

create jobs. You build power plants because you need power, 

not to create jobs. And the whole idea that you . . . the argument 

that they gave leading up to the 1982 election is that they 

wanted to build a nuclear power plant in Saskatchewan which 

would have cost close to $1 billion, even though we had 400 

megawatts of power too much. 

 

Their argument was, well we’ll export it. There was no market 

for it. They hadn’t done the analysis to know that Manitoba had 

a surplus of power. Alberta had a surplus of power, and to the 

south of us there was a surplus. There was no place to sell 

power from a nuclear power plant. Therefore we would have 

had an extra billion dollars in debt. We would have created 

some jobs while the plant was being built. But the main thing 

about building power plants is, don’t build them before you 

need the power. 

 

I would argue that when we do need power for the next phase, 

co-generation . . . not burning tires, I don’t think, because I 

haven’t found anyone who can give me an economic strategy 

where there is a bottom line on burning tires. But I think 

co-generation probably is the next phase of power, in 

conjunction with some of our industrial plants that now exist or 

new ones that are being planned. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And that of 

course was much more to the point. And not to say that the day 

is going to be spent beating up on former administrations 

because we all remember what their campaign promises were, 

that they would place a factory in every town, at one point. 

 

And all we’re saying as a Liberal caucus is . . . You know, even 

the people in rural Saskatchewan aren’t saying let’s place a 

factory in every town. And it cost them dearly. But we are 

saying, sometimes you don’t have to have these grandiose 

schemes to think about maybe leaving a hospital or a school in 

some towns. Like let’s not completely forget about rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Chair, we are supporting the Bill. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was just delayed 

for a second to wanting to hear the comments from the Liberal 

member which of course obviously are important. And we 

should be considering these matters even though they are set on 

the side sometimes. 

 

I want to discuss, Mr. Chairman, with the minister, the Bill that 

he’s proposing which of course he is wanting to eliminate some 

redundant legislation of the past. 

 

Most certainly, Minister, we are supportive of the government 

in its attempt to clean up the books of the province. Most  



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

certainly if there are Acts in place that are no longer being used 

and have no particular function, they should be scrapped and 

taken off the books and simplify the process of legislation and 

ruling our province and our people. 

 

However when you take a title that suggests such an important 

area and you eliminate it and you’re talking about industrial 

incentive programs, the title itself suggests not every kind of 

business, not every kind of job creation in the world; it suggests 

a particular phase, a particular unit of activity  that particular 

unit of activity, of course, being in the industrial sector. 

 

(1115) 

 

I’m quite sure that at the time that this incentive program was 

put into place, it was probably consistent with programs that 

were in place in other jurisdictions and perhaps had some merit. 

 

All of us probably have looked at the past and studied the past 

knowing that the past becomes the future, and we all have to 

realize that the circle of life and the cycle of life goes round and 

round, the reality being then that we have come to realize that 

throwing money from government coffers, taxpayers’ money, 

into incentive programs very rarely results in long-term, 

sustainable job creation. 

 

I’m glad to hear that the minister has realized this and found 

this out. But there has to be a very realistic look at how do you 

solve the problem today that they tried to solve back in those 

days with this particular program. 

 

Now you’ve talked about the fact that this program obviously 

didn’t work because the past administration had quit using it. 

And you yourself, by your own words, say that you have never 

used it. Obviously the plan had to fail if nobody was willing to 

use the plan or offer the money or the incentives that were 

there. So it was a plan that was destined for destruction then, 

probably right from the beginning, and to eliminate it is 

perfectly sensible. 

 

On the other hand, we must take a look then, at what you’re 

going to replace this with. Where will you find the way to 

create jobs for our people in Saskatchewan? You say that 

you’ve got all kinds of little projects going on and yet the 

numbers, the minister, show us quite a different story. 

 

We see in Alberta, as I pointed out to you the other day, 

103,000 jobs have been created in Alberta during the same 

period of time that you were able to create 3,000 jobs in 

Saskatchewan. That is a dismal failure, sir. And that dismal 

failure, sir, is one that we must address here today. What are 

you going to replace this Bill with? What are you going to do to 

provide an incentive for this problem to get up and get started? 

 

You fail to recognize the fundamental problem that we have in 

this problem, which is that no business will come to 

Saskatchewan with your kind of programs. They won’t come 

with the old incentive program of $7,000, or 25 per cent of 

$30,000 invested. That obviously was a failure. They won’t 

come for that, and they won’t come for anything that you’re 

offering either. 

Because you’ve got the playing-field so out of balance in this 

province that nobody in their right mind would every come here 

to do business when they take a little bit of a study and spend 

$10 on phone calls to phone Alberta and Manitoba and find out 

that they can do business in either one those provinces many 

times more profitably than they can in Saskatchewan, simply 

because of the playing-field that you have distorted with your 

system and with your determination to allow the big unions to 

become the political powermongers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Workers’ Compensation Board Act, The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act, the union-preference tendering policy 

that you now extend too  just a blatant, outright preference 

tendering policy in this province, Mr. Minister  the Trade 

Union Act, all of these things have provided for an unlevel 

playing-field; not necessarily always wrong, but at the wrong 

timing in history because you’ve put us out of sync with our 

neighbours. 

 

And that is why Saskatchewan is not going ahead. It’s why your 

government will fail to create jobs. Because you are determined 

to ignore the reality that without a playing-field that is level, 

businesses will not come to this province because you can’t 

hold a gun to their heads and force them to come here. Joseph 

Stalin doesn’t live in Canada and he’s not in Saskatchewan, and 

they will go to Alberta and they will go to Manitoba and they 

will go to the United States, and they will not come to 

Saskatchewan because they’re too smart to come here. 

 

You have got to smarten up and put into place a piece of 

legislation that will allow that playing-field to become level and 

allow people to do business in Saskatchewan and to create jobs 

on a long-term, sustainable basis. And you haven’t done that. 

 

The only thing you’ve done is create a great educational system 

that was followed up over the past 20 years that allows us to 

educate our kids so that they can compete well in the rest of the 

world and get their jobs somewhere else. 

 

The only people I’ve heard of coming back to Saskatchewan 

lately are the people that you people manage somehow to work 

into a bigger and expanding role in government services. That’s 

the only place we’re expanding job creation in this province, is 

hiring political favouritism through the families and the friends 

of the people that elected you and who sit in your own very 

seats. 

 

My friends, we certainly are not going to oppose getting rid of 

this redundant legislation, but we challenge you today to take a 

hard look at those things that will create jobs. And when the 

minister stands up here and wastes the taxpayers’ money 

bantering around ideas about how some past program didn’t 

work and allows the Liberals to get into the debate and waste 

even more time yattering on about how co-generation might be 

the thing of the future or might not, when they’ve gone out and 

destroyed programs like the windmill powering program that 

should have been at Eastend, Saskatchewan . . . fair ball. 

 

It might not have made money, but why did you charge all of  



320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

the tendering people thousands of dollars worth of investment 

in order to give you those tenders and then pull the rug out from 

under their feet and not allow the program to go ahead? Why 

did you draw them into that kind of thing? Is that the way you 

attract business to this province, by alienating everyone around 

you? By making them your personal enemies? 

 

Personal enemies. I’ve had people phone me on that project, 

telling me how much they thought you were unfair, how much 

they believed that you would be honest dealers and honest 

brokers in the business community. And you allowed them to 

make their tenders and then promised them that another month 

or two down the road you’ll consider it, and egged them on, 

induced them, seduced them into spending more money so that 

they could provide you with the facts and figures of how these 

programs will work, and then you don’t allow the tenders and 

you pull the rug from under them. 

 

And do you think that the rest of the business world isn’t 

watching? Do you think that the people in the United States and 

in Alberta and in Ontario that might come to Saskatchewan 

haven’t taken note of how you treated these people? Do you 

think for one minute that anybody will ever trust you and come 

to this province again? 

 

It is time that this government woke up to the reality that word 

of mouth goes around very quickly. And a bad business 

atmosphere is something that will result in people not coming 

here. And you’re not only going to have to create a level 

playing-field; now you have to create an ability for people to 

once again trust the governments of Saskatchewan. And they 

can’t do that under your administration. So for the next three 

years, we are destined to the doom and the failure of no job 

creation in Saskatchewan, because they cannot and will not 

trust this government. 

 

You talk about things like nuclear energy as being the most 

obscene thing you’ve ever heard of. You talk about the inability 

of people to be able to sell power. And you talk about the 

silliness, the silliness of saying a statement like, you don’t 

produce power until you need it. Give me a break. If you waited 

until every city in the United States had a brown-out and 

Vancouver was black and there was no power, I’m sure you 

would be very popular. 

 

Now come on, fellows. This is serious stuff. You produce 

power before people’s needs. That’s why you do studies, that’s 

why you hire consultants. That’s why you send people to 

California to find out if there is a sale for a product. 

 

What do you think we do with our beef in this province? The 

Liberal member I think might have raised cows once. Did you 

raise that beef because you already knew there was a market or 

did you go out there and get that market? Obviously you waited 

for somebody else to do it for you. 

 

The truth of the matter is that you go out and get markets, you 

seduce those markets by showing people that you can produce a 

product and that you have a guarantee that you will be able to 

deliver it. 

 

Power is no different than beef or wheat. If you can’t produce 

it, you can’t sell it. And if you don’t have a willingness to 

produce it, you might as well forget about looking for the 

market. There is a lot of places where that power could be and 

will be for sale. Only one example, Mr. Minister, and I’m not 

going to use any more, because it is redundant to waste our time 

talking to you on this day when we have to get rid of this Bill. 

But the day that you put in some legislation that will actually 

create jobs, we then will be here to help you to cultivate that 

legislation and to build it into a meaningful piece of work that 

will provide jobs for the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, with leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce to this 

Assembly, through you, a number of students from the 

Glenavon School, actually 30 students, grade 11, and students 

who are attending here this morning. They are accompanied by 

their teachers, Mr. Paul Van Betuw, and I hope I pronounced 

that fairly close, and Jim, I believe it’s, Grela, if I’ve got it in 

front of me properly. 

 

I’m looking forward to meeting with the students. I’d like the 

members of the Assembly to welcome the students that are here 

this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 7 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I do want to respond to the member 

opposite when he talks about the role of government and his 

attack on the members of our administration. And I guess what 

makes me a little bit sad is the first time we get in a chance to 

have a debate in this session, the first time after the election, it’s 

the same old tired defence of the Devine administration and 

what they did back in the 1980s. 

 

The defence of nuclear power. And even the former leader of 

the Liberal Party wanted to build a nuclear reactor. And I just 

can’t for the life of me understand why, when you’re 14 or $15 

billion in debt, you’re idea is to build a power plant of any type 

 coal-fired, gas-fired, nuclear-fired, hydro  why would your 

choice be of spending another billion dollars to build a power 

plant, when you have 450 megawatts of surplus supply already. 

Now he says well, because you just keep building it and 

somebody will buy it. Well that’s exactly the reason we got to 

$15 billion in debt. 



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

We had a telephone manufacturing company that that 

administration set up in Melville called Trinitel, I think it was. 

And they built telephones. And they filled Quonsets full of 

telephones. And when we came to government they hadn’t yet 

sold one telephone. But every inch of the factory was full of 

telephones, and the people had invested money. The community 

had invested money in this grandiose scheme to build 

telephones. They believed that if you build telephones 

somebody would buy them. 

 

They simply don’t understand how the market-place works. 

You have to have the market, you have to have the market. . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . well you say you do, but the 

business people obviously don’t believe you because they saw 

what you did with Trinitel and GigaText and High R Doors and 

Supercart; Joytec, the automatic golf game. All of those things 

added to the debt because you didn’t do the marketing right; 

you didn’t know that there was a market for the product. 

 

And so there’s very much more to economic development than 

simply building and manufacturing. If you don’t have sales for 

that product you better be very, very careful about investing, 

especially taxpayers’ dollars. And that’s why the private sector 

is so careful, and want to establish a trade development 

corporation that will go out and find the markets and then build 

their plants into the market. And if you’re still back on that 

track, that all you have to do is build a product and somebody’s 

going to buy it, you haven’t learned, you haven’t learned 

anything. 

 

And maybe there’s a reason that you’re at five members in the 

House. I had hoped that that would have taught you a lesson. 

But what I find disturbing today is the same old, tired rhetoric 

of defence for what went on in the 1980s. 

 

And we can spend all day here defending and attacking. I mean 

this is simply a Bill to repeal a piece of legislation that hasn’t 

been used for about seven or eight years, which I think we all 

agree with, getting rid of red tape, which is what this is. We 

don’t need a piece of legislation on the books. But if we want to 

debate the record of the Conservative Party, I’ve got till 1 

o’clock, so we can carry on. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1130) 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7  An Act to repeal The Industrial  

Incentive Program Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 13  An Act to amend The Department of  

Social Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of The Department of Social 

Services Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

The amendment I address today has to do with the way that 

personal information concerning clients is handled by Social 

Services departmental staff. I’m sure the House will appreciate 

the seriousness of information that comes to the department 

staff each and every day. 

 

Staff deal with matters which are extremely sensitive and very 

often personal. Clients can expect, and should be able to expect, 

to trust that the information will be treated with great care. 

Department staff take an oath when joining the Department of 

Social Services that they will not “disclose or make known any 

matter or thing which comes to my knowledge by reason of 

such employment” without due authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 18(1) of The Department of Social 

Services Act has been in place for almost 30 years. The 

provision requires ministerial consent be obtained prior to 

disclosing personal information to anyone. Clients have no 

access to their files without consent even though they 

themselves have provided some of the information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the years there has been pressure from 

members of the public for improved access to information held 

by public agencies, particularly government departments. You 

will recall, Mr. Speaker, we introduced The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act in 1992. On the one 

hand, our government wanted to reduce barriers and ensure that 

accessible information was readily available to the public. On 

the other hand, we felt strongly that we had an obligation to 

maintain confidentiality for personal information. 

 

While The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 

Act is in place, so too is the confidentiality provision in The 

Department of Social Services Act. Department staff have been 

restricted by The Department of Social Services Act from 

therefore fully utilizing the spirit and intent of the new freedom 

of information legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am before you therefore today to resolve this 

dilemma by simply amending The Department of Social 

Services Act. Department staff will be able to use the 

provisions of The Freedom of Information and Privacy Act to 

release information on client files in some circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you and all members that this 

action will in no way compromise the department’s 

commitment to maintaining confidentiality. I can assure the 

House today that department staff will not be disclosing 

sensitive and personal details concerning clients’ lives. For 

example, The Freedom of Information and Protection of  



322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

Privacy Act prohibits access to adoption, child protection, 

children services, foster care, and young offenders’ material. 

 

There are other restrictions in the legislation which limit the 

release of information to third parties as well. The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act has been 

implemented throughout government following proclamation. 

There are now well-developed policies and procedures in place 

for disposing information. And so, Mr. Speaker, I am confident 

that we, as a government, will be able to assure department 

clients that the amendment I am discussing today will not 

jeopardize their confidentiality and yet will make access of their 

own information much easier. 

 

Now following the amendment, department staff will be 

permitted to share information with adult clients more easily 

and with less administrative process. Those clients will be able 

to utilize the full spirit and intent of The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act, which was the 

intention of our government when we passed that legislation in 

1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore move second reading of an Act to 

amend The Department of Social Services Amendment Act, 

1996. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

minister’s opening comments on the Bill that he’s brought 

forward, but until we have a chance to consult with third party 

groups and others that will be affected by this legislation, I now 

move adjournment of debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 14  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan  

Income Plan Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am again 

pleased to rise today in the House to move second reading of 

The Saskatchewan Income Plan Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you well know, Saskatchewan seniors are a 

very dynamic and growing part of our province. There are today 

about 142,000 seniors in Saskatchewan, aged 65 and over, or 

about 14 per cent of our total population. The number of older 

seniors, those age 85 and over, is also increasing rapidly. And it 

is important to note, I think, Mr. Speaker, that the large majority 

of Saskatchewan seniors live independently in their own homes, 

apartments, or residences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of our government meet frequently with 

seniors to talk about their priorities, issues and concerns. And 

we hear from seniors that their priorities are maintaining their 

independence, being involved in decisions that affect them, and 

being seen and understood as an integral and very valuable part 

of our community and society. 

 

In recent times, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that our 

government has been able to accomplish working with seniors 

and to support the more vulnerable of our seniors have included 

increasing benefits under the Saskatchewan Income Plan. We  

have been able to protect a lower, prescription-drug-plan 

deductible for low income seniors covering nearly half of all 

seniors in our province. We’ve been able to develop the special 

support program to assist seniors with an income of less than 

50,000 who have high drug costs. We’ve implemented a 

number of social, health, and educational tenant-based activities 

to help seniors remain independent and in their own 

communities. 

 

We believe, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has developed the 

most comprehensive and people-sensitive approach to 

community based health care in Canada. To build on our health 

care reform, new funds were provided in 1995-96 to expand 

home care services, including nursing, personal care 

homemaking. As a result of these initiatives and others, more 

seniors have been able to remain independent in their own 

homes and communities. And earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, in 

this House the Minister of Justice introduced some very 

important legislation in The Direct Sellers Act in consumer 

protection which has a particular interest to seniors and 

protecting their interests. 

 

We’ve always believed that the involvement of seniors in 

decision making is a priority of our government. Seniors’ 

organizations and individual seniors regularly meet with cabinet 

and with caucus committees as well as individual MLAs. As the 

Minister responsible for Seniors, I am frequently meeting with 

seniors and their organizations. I had a very helpful meeting this 

week, earlier this week, with Senior Power here of Regina  

50 or 60 seniors with many innovative and thoughtful ideas. 

 

One of the issues that has affected seniors and has been of 

concern to seniors has been the whole matter of elder abuse. As 

you will know, Mr. Speaker, our government enacted the 

legislation, The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, as one step 

towards providing victims’ protection. As well, the Department 

of Social Services just last spring released a document entitled 

Guidelines for the Development of Protocols  
Community-Based Responses to the Abuse and Neglect of Older 

People. And that document is being worked on and through 

with a group in Saskatoon and we look forward to further 

developments from them. 

 

Our government has also made a commitment to help seniors by 

providing some financial assistance for sport, recreational, and 

cultural activities through the Sask Lotto, through Sask 

Lotteries. And indeed through programs like this and working 

closely with seniors and their organizations, we believe that 

seniors are maintaining their role as an integral part of our 

society and communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the amendment before us today, this 

amendment arises again from discussions that we’ve had with 

seniors across the province. And here we are working with the 

seniors of Saskatchewan and with our federal counterparts at 

the federal government level to essentially transfer 

responsibility for the delivery of the provincial seniors’ 

supplement program, namely the Saskatchewan Income Plan, 

for delivery to the federal government. 

 

Each month in our province 20,500 seniors receive the  



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

supplement, and rather, Mr. Speaker, than each of these seniors 

receiving two separate monthly cheques, one from the province 

and one from the federal government, we will propose through 

this amendment to consolidate those into one cheque which 

would include the Old Age Security pension, the guaranteed 

income supplement, and the Saskatchewan Income Plan. This 

would have the ability to eliminate some administrative 

duplication in processing both a provincial and federal benefit 

to the very same households and the very same seniors. 

 

We believe this be a very practical approach, as eligibility for 

the provincial supplement is based on the federal supplement 

application. There’s no application involved with the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan; payments are simply based on the 

amount of federal supplement that seniors receive. And as well, 

the transfer and change will cause no disruption of services. 

Rather the seniors will continue to maintain and receive the 

same very efficient and effective service. 

 

This is an idea that has come to us from seniors. It provides 

administrative efficiencies, savings, and its initiative is an 

example of our attention to respond to those concerns raised by 

seniors and a commitment to the fiscal responsibility to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Income Plan Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

really delighted to hear that the minister is consulting widely 

with seniors across the province, because I think that’s a very 

important process. But I hope that the consultation process also 

involves more than a simple one-way attempt at dialogue. 

Dialogue is a two-way thing which involves using the fact that 

God gave us two ears and only one mouth, and this government 

seems to have got it backwards. And what we do is way more 

talking . . . or you do, is way more talking than listening. 

 

I’ve heard seniors all across this province, but more particularly 

in my constituency, express a great number of concerns about 

their attitude about looking into the future and the concerns that 

they really have. And the minister is absolutely right, that 

they’re very integral in terms of not only the future of our 

province, but they have been largely responsible for creating the 

past work in the province that have brought us this far. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, our caucus and the opposition is also 

widely consulting with seniors to address the issues that are 

really important to them. That process is not complete, Mr. 

Speaker, and therefore I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The Child and  

Family Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise today again to move second reading of The Child and 

Family Services Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have just focused some of our comments and  

thought on the seniors of our province. This now focuses our 

comment and thought on the children of our province. And very 

often many of us have said we see our children as our most 

precious resource. They are in many ways our inspiration. They 

are our conscience. They are our future. If the children of our 

province are to grow up to be healthy, functioning, and 

contributing members of our society, we need as a society to 

attempt to ensure their lives are healthy, that those lives of those 

children are free from neglect and abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is that most families, the vast majority of 

families in our society, are healthy and provide a protective and 

supportive environment for children to grow up in. There are 

however a few families and parents, for a number of reasons are 

unable to provide this kind of healthy environment for their 

children. And it is our task as members of this society to 

support these families to become healthy and functional and to 

protect those children from harm and neglect. And although it is 

preferable to assist families to help themselves develop a better 

environment for their children, sometimes individuals and the 

government must step in to ensure the safety of children. 

 

In our province, child protection services are provided by the 

Department of Social Services under the authority of The Child 

and Family Services Act. According to this Act, every person 

who has reasonable grounds to believe that a child is in need of 

protection must report this to a police officer or to a child 

protection worker at either an Indian child and family service 

agency or in my department. 

 

Right now the Act says that no action will lie against the person 

reporting unless that individual makes the report maliciously or 

without grounds. Mr. Speaker, to further ensure the safety of 

children, we are hereby proposing to strengthen that section of 

the Act. We want to be sure that individuals making valid 

reports are ensured of maximum protection from action being 

taken against them. 

 

The amendment will mean that permission from Court of 

Queen’s Bench will be required before any legal action can be 

started against the individual reporting. That permission will 

only be given if an applicant can provide evidence which 

establishes that the person made the report maliciously or 

without reasonable grounds. Any legal action started without 

the permission of the court would be considered void. This, Mr. 

Speaker, will prevent the person who reasonably reports child 

abuse from incurring unnecessary legal expenses. 

 

The changes we’re making to this Act will further strengthen 

our child protection services and help to ensure the safety and 

protection of Saskatchewan children and our citizens. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Child 

and Family Services Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 

thank the minister for giving us a few brief comments on the 

Bill that he’s brought forward for second reading. However, 

until once again we talk to some third party and consult with 

affected groups, we would like to adjourn debate on this Bill at 

this time. 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 16  An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to speak on second reading of The Highway Traffic 

Amendment Act. 

 

This Bill makes several amendments to The Highway Traffic 

Act. These amendments, for the most part, are of a 

housekeeping nature. These amendments result from our staff 

reviewing The Highway Traffic Act as a prelude to its 

translation into French. I think it’s appropriate that we are 

including The Highway Traffic Act in our translation efforts so 

French-speaking residents can better understand our traffic law. 

 

The amendments include an update on traffic control devices 

and rules of the road. This amendment brings the Act up to date 

with new traffic signs, signals, markings, and the use of flares. 

 

Another amendment improves our current dangerous goods 

legislation. It deals with transporting dangerous goods in bulk 

or liquid form. The amendments give us flexibility in assessing 

new types of agricultural equipment, as to whether or not it 

should be registered and carry insurance to operate on roads. 

 

As I indicated earlier, these amendments basically bring the 

traffic Act up to date prior to its translation into French. I will 

be circulating the draft agricultural implements regulations to 

stakeholders prior to asking my cabinet colleagues to finalize 

them. Should the Assembly be sitting, I will table these 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this, I move second reading of The Highway 

Traffic Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on 

the surface — I appreciate the minister standing in for the real 

Highways minister — but on the surface it does appear to be a 

somewhat innocent and, you know, progressive and proactive 

Bill. However once again, until we can consult with affected 

parties, we will want to adjourn debate on the Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 23  An Act to amend The Archives Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Bill No. 23, The Archives Amendment Act, 1996, provides 

changes to The Archives Act, 1945, which are intended to 

increase the effectiveness of the Saskatchewan Archives Board. 

These changes will enable the board to function more 

efficiently in fulfilling its mandate to preserve the documentary 

heritage of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to ensuring that 

the documentary heritage of the province is properly acquired, 

preserved, arranged, described, and made available to the 

public. The legislation governing the provincial archives dates  

from 1945, when the archives was established, and has not seen 

any major amendments since that time. The amendments 

represent the first step in a review of archives’ legislation and 

mandate which will be conducted over the next two years. 

 

The current composition of the board reflects the early role of 

the University of Saskatchewan in supporting the formation of a 

public records office for the province. However the mandate 

and scope of the archives has changed substantially since that 

time. The proposed amendments expand representation on the 

board beyond government and the two universities in order to 

reflect a more diversified client base. To ensure consistency 

with other government boards, the payment of honoraria will be 

instituted under the proposed amendments. 

 

As well we are considering the appointment of an officer of the 

Legislative Assembly. It is felt that this will enhance the 

accountability and transparency of the process. Amendments 

will also limit board appointments to no more than two 

consecutive terms, to ensure continuity, while at the same time 

allowing for broader participation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of changes have been made to provide 

greater accountability by the Saskatchewan Archives Board to 

government. Under the proposed amendments, all board 

members, including the board Chair, will be appointed by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

The two universities will however each be asked to submit one 

nomination for their designated board position. The 

responsibilities of the board will be more clearly defined and 

the board will be required to submit an annual report, including 

an audited financial statement, to the legislature. 

 

Other changes have been made to the Act which broaden the 

ability of the board to enter into agreements with service 

providers beyond the two universities in the operations of its 

offices and administrative affairs. Such agreements will require 

approval of the minister. These agreements will not affect the 

daily operations of the archives or agreements made with 

donors or users of the archives. 

 

A definition has been added for restricted records and 

documents. A provision to restrict access and use of such 

documents has also been added. This addresses the need to 

ensure the integrity and security of confidential records held by 

the archives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, Bill No. 23, 

An Act to amend the Archives Act. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

minister’s opening remarks in regard to amending The Archives 

Act. And from our point of view, and from our caucus, none of 

us were around in 1945 in this House as some of the members 

opposite perhaps were. And also the fact that some of the . . . 

there’s made mention of appointments to boards and their 

record as far as appointments to boards hasn’t been all that 

good. 



March 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

And so that way at this time I’d like to move adjournment of 

debate on this Bill until we have time to review it. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of 

Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Optometry 

and Ophthalmic Dispensers Professions Amendment Act, 1996. 

This Act will amend the two existing statutes  The Optometry 

Act and The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act. Two issues will be 

addressed. 

 

First, this Bill will allow optometrists to prescribe and use a 

range of topical drugs to treat the various eye conditions. 

Second, it will allow ophthalmic dispensers to prescribe and 

issue contact lenses based on the visual assessment performed 

by an optometrist or a physician. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment permitting optometrists to 

prescribe and use some topical drugs to treat various eye 

conditions is based on a close review of the issue over the past 

two years. It has also involved extensive consultations with 

stakeholders. Optometrists will be required to meet the 

necessary additional training and examination requirements 

before they’re allowed to treat patients with drugs. Even then, 

optometrists will be required to adhere to certain restrictions 

which will be detailed in the by-laws. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this change will provide the option for the public 

to be treated by their optometrists for some eye conditions. 

Essentially the optometrist’s skills will be more fully utilized. 

This is expected to be of particular benefit to those in rural 

areas where access to an ophthalmologist is limited and where 

family practitioners do not always have the necessary diagnostic 

equipment to assess some eye conditions. 

 

The second major change, Mr. Speaker, is an amendment which 

will facilitate the release of contact lens prescriptions by 

optometrists to consumers. At the present time, the optometrists 

may refuse to release contact lens prescriptions to their clients. 

As a result, the consumer may not have a choice as to where 

they can go to purchase their contact lens. 

 

(1200) 

 

Optometrists and qualified physicians will still be responsible 

for assessing the acuity of people’s eyesight. However, the 

consumer will now have the choice as to whether they want 

their optometrists or their ophthalmologic dispenser to dispense 

the contact lens. With this choice, consumers in Saskatchewan 

will now be able to shop around for the best price. The 

amendment is required to facilitate this option. 

 

By-laws pursuant to the optometrists and ophthalmic dispensers 

legislation will need to be amended. The Saskatchewan 

Association of Optometrists, The Saskatchewan Ophthalmic 

Dispensers Association, and the Saskatchewan Health are 

currently consulting on the necessary by-law amendments. 

Simply put, this Bill will assist in better meeting consumers 

needs with respect to eye-care services in Saskatchewan. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Optometry and Ophthalmic Dispensers Professions Amendment 

Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We appreciate the 

House Leader’s comments but until we can see our way clear to 

support this, I would like to move adjournment. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 27  An Act respecting Architects 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I rise to move second reading of The Architects Act. The 

Architects Act reflects general government policy regarding 

professional legislation using guidelines provided by the 

Department of Justice. The majority of the sections of this Bill 

are standard sections that appear in all professional legislation. 

 

The proposed legislation is supported by the Saskatchewan 

Association of Architects, the interior designers association of 

Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan association of professional 

engineers. While the Act is non-controversial and originates 

outside of government, I will briefly cover its intent. 

 

In respect to the background, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Architects was one of the first professions in Saskatchewan to 

receive self-governing legislation. The last significant revision 

to The Architects Act occurred in 1968. It is generally 

acknowledged that the current Act needs extensive change, 

particularly in the areas of by-laws, of meetings, and discipline 

of its members. Because amendments of this existing Act are 

extensive, it is proposed that the new Act be passed. The new 

Act has been drafted in accordance with the current legislative 

language and format. 

 

The four key provisions of the changes include: a new 

definition of the practice of architecture to clarify more 

precisely what it is that architects do. For example, the terms 

architect and registered architect have now been removed since 

they have the same meaning as the term “member”. The 

definition for “building” and “practice of architecture” have 

been revised to clarify the meaning of these terms to ensure 

their consistency. 

 

In respect to public appointees, current legislative standards 

require that two councillors to the association be public 

appointees. The architects have provided that one of the 

appointed councillors must be a member of the faculty of the 

University of Saskatchewan or the University of Regina. This 

provision has been carried over from the current Act. 

 

Registration of members: The Architects Act recognizes two 

kinds of students  those who have graduated from the 

university program and those students who have completed an 

apprenticeship program. The council may register as members 

persons who have graduated from an approved school of 

architecture, who have worked at least three years under the  



326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 1996 

direction of a member, or who have passed an examination for 

admission as members. 

 

The proposed Act increases the current work period from two 

years to three in accordance with the current Canadian and 

American standards and as required by the current reciprocity 

agreements. 

 

With respect to the protection of title, the current Act affords 

protection to the abbreviations of RA, which means registered 

architect, and the proposed Act also affords protection for the 

abbreviations of SAA, which means Saskatchewan Association 

of Architects. These changes are being made because the 

Saskatchewan Association of Architects has decided to follow 

other provincial architectural associations in recognizing 

members by their provincial association letters. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, The Architects Act, 1996 will 

clarify the management and regulation of this very important 

profession. 

 

I am pleased today, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of 

The Architects Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

minister’s remarks in regards to the Bill that he’s brought 

forward. However there are a few concerns. 

 

Firstly in his comments, I notice that . . . I took note that he 

made mention that it reflects general government policy, which 

was a real concern to us given some of the policies that the 

government has caught themselves flat-footed on. 

 

And also the concern that we’re not sure how similar this is to 

the Act that governs engineers, because of the problems that 

we’ve known with the leader of the Conservative caucus, who 

as a welder thought he was an engineer. And we want to make 

sure that this isn’t going to happen again. 

 

So at this time I’d like to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Jess:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Speaker, in the 

west gallery are three councillors from the RM (rural 

municipality) of Douglas, no. 436. And I would like to ask them 

to stand up as I introduce them: Mr. Alfred Combres, Mr. 

Wayne Rafuse, and Mr. Dale Anderson. 

 

These rather young looking men have over 35 years of 

community service between them in the RM council of my own  

home, RM of Douglas. And I would ask everyone in the 

Chamber to join with me in welcoming these gentlemen. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:08 p.m. 

 

 



 

 


