













































June 3, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2115 

 June 3, 1996 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m continuing 

where I was at about two hours ago, and relating, as I said I 

would, some of the things that are happening in my 

constituency that relate to the motion that’s here and the need to 

maintain the time for discussion, because with 118-plus pieces 

of legislation we need a lot of time for that discussion. 

 

And just around 5 o’clock, I was introducing my section on 

highways and I’d like to briefly go through the various 

communities and some of the difficulties that are there. I did 

mention the acceleration/deceleration situation that’s there and I 

also passed on an oblique compliment to the Department of 

Highways for the twinning it to Warman and Martensville, and 

I see it was picked up. However, I think the attention to 

twinning needs to be carried on because the last series of 

fatalities that have happened have happened on the sections that 

aren’t twinned in my constituency, and then moving over into 

the Shellbrook-Spiritwood area, I think the last two fatalities 

were in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood area that were there. 

 

The situations that develop in a number of these communities 

 and probably the ones I’m thinking of specifically would be 

the Osler, the Hague, the Rosthern, the Duck Lake ones  in 

those three situations the communities are situated on a curve 

situation so the traffic coming through there is only slowed 

down in the community of Hague. In the other communities 

they’re going through at full highway speeds and being on a 

curved situation has created accidents in all of those 

communities. Two of them also have some dips that are there. 

In my own town, we’ve lost a number of people to that plus we 

have a few people in wheelchairs, just because of those 

dangerous situations that exist. 

 

A little situation that’s coming along, that’s going to exacerbate 

this whole thing, is the fact that our highway patrol section of 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) will probably be 

moved into the cities and that will mean that they’ll be handing 

out the speeding tickets and all those sorts of things not too far 

from the doughnut shops. And these small communities don’t 

have doughnut shops so we won’t get very much patrolling in 

that particular area. 

 

A few of these towns are going to have a definite road and 

pothole problem, and I’m thinking of two or three towns in 

particular. One is Dalmeny, which is situated off of the 

highways, and all the grain that moves into those elevators  

because Dalmeny has quite a large elevator  and out as well 

has to go on lightly oiled surfaces. And those are things that we 

need to discuss and we need to have the time here. And that’s 

why that motion is of critical situation tonight. 

 

Laird is another community that is off the highway and will 

have some of those problems with the roadway as well. 

Highway 312, which is an east-west road, was upgraded but the 

upgraded hasn’t been finished. And in very short order, I’m 

sure, the large trucks that are coming through there will have 

that part hammered out in a very serious manner. In fact, as I 

did have some . . . one senior gentleman talked to me on 

Saturday about that very same issue, and said he’d gone through 

a particular pothole, his car had bottomed out, he was actually 

concerned that he might have almost lost control of his car. And 

that’s going on what we would call a numbered highway. 

 

Two other issues that  and maybe three  that I’d like to deal 

with tonight that relate to the need for more discussion than 

what we’re being allowed, because of this particular motion that 

we have in front of us today. 

 

I think we need a full and comprehensive discussion on the 

funding for Christian Counselling. It is one of those counselling 

services that has initiated in Saskatchewan an excellent system 

of handling adoptions. And those are situations that are filled 

with a lot of emotion and a lot of concern for the adoptive 

parents, for the birth mother, and then later on for the adopted 

child as well when they start looking for their parents. 

 

And the way that Christian Counselling has worked, they have 

set up a model system, and it’s too bad that we take the 

organization that has created a model system and take their 

funding away and then try and get bureaucrats to operate that, 

who may not have quite the same concern, attention, for that as 

the people that organized Christian Counselling originally. And 

I think we need to look at that, revisit that discussion and make 

sure the decisions that are made here are the kinds of decisions 

that the people back in our constituencies are interested in. 

 

The other item . . . and on this one, it seems at this point that the 

House is fairly united but I think we need more discussion and 

more direction on this, is the situation of the gun control. And 

we’ve had some good speakers from all parties speak on that 

issue. And as I said, I think we’re fairly united on that, but I 

think we need to find out not just the fact that we’re united in 

our opposition to that Bill, but exactly what direction we’re 

going to go in our objection as a province to that Bill. And I 

think on that one is where we need the discussion of the House. 

We need that particular time that has been taken away from us 

on this particular issue. 

 

The last issue that I’d like to deal with this evening is the 

concept that I think . . . it’s a new initiative, relatively new as 

far as government’s concerned, and that’s the whole direction 

that we’ve taken in our province with regards to gambling. It 

was a new area and we moved into different aspects with it. We 

had very little experience. The information that we did have on 

that was going to be information that we gathered from outside 

and some of that information may have been good, some may 

not have been. We’ve now initiated it. 

 

There seems to be a fair bit of money coming in and there’s no 

shortage of directions as to where that money can go. But what  

  



2116 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

we need to look at very closely when we deal with this whole 

area of gambling  and maybe more specifically even, VLTs 

(video lottery terminal)  is how are we going to deal with the 

families that are hurting because of addictions that are taking 

place. 

 

And for that one there is a hot line. There is counselling 

services available. But having a hot line and having counselling 

services is a long way from taking someone who has a problem 

and getting that problem out of his life, restoring his business 

which he may have lost  and that’s virtually impossible to do 

 restoring the person’s family which may be impossible to do. 

What are we going to do with those kinds of things? 

 

Are we as legislators going to say we take no responsibility for 

what has gone wrong here? I don’t think we want to do that. We 

need to spend more time in this particular House looking at 

dealing with that aspect of the gambling situation in such a way 

that we can go back to our constituents, each one of us, hold our 

heads up high, and say we know there’s a problem but the 

solutions we’ve put in place are such that we are confident we 

can deal with every difficult situation and bring it to a solution 

that we can all live with, our consciences, our neighbours, and 

those particular families. 

 

And on that one I know we need a lot more time. 

 

We’ve allotted very little time to that particular issue and this 

motion really cuts all time off of that completely. And we need 

to look at that very closely. Along with that and the funding and 

where it goes is an aspect. We know that the municipalities, 

both rural and urban, were hoping to have some money out of 

that. They are not getting any of the money out of it. 

 

And I know they’re upset. It’s caused a financial shortfall for 

them. And that is something we need to look at as well. But that 

is not as big a problem as the lives that we’ve done some 

damage to. And I think, as I said earlier, the items I want to deal 

with specifically were the education one  I mentioned those 

 especially when looking at options that school boards have 

for dealing with the shortfall of the funding. 

 

We talked about the Christian Counselling one, the highways. I 

spent quite a bit of time on the hospitals and the health care 

situation that’s out there and the concerns that are there that we 

have to deal with. Money can’t be found but solutions can often 

be found. And maybe a different allotment of finances needs to 

be looked at. So I strongly support the objection that there is to 

limiting the discussion in this particular House. 

 

And with that I will turn it over to our next speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I concur 

with the objection on the motion in terms of the attempt by the 

government to limit the amount of good discussion on issues 

that pertain to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think the effort we are trying to undertake here is basically an 

effort and a message that it’s very important that we quit the 

gamesmanship. We all became involved with politics for the 

one purpose of serving the people, and I’m very disillusioned  

and disheartened to see the type of effort we must put into 

playing the games that are necessary to prove our point. I think 

on both the issue of the hours and the procedures and the 

processes, I think we’re doing a disservice to the Saskatchewan 

people because not only are we wasting certainly valuable time 

here, but you’re certainly wasting a lot of the people’s time as 

well. 

 

I think some of the issues, if I may, Mr. Speaker, talk about why 

I think it’s important that we start doing the business that we’re 

all elected to do. There is a number of problems in northern 

Saskatchewan that deal with why government must change their 

system, and why they must change the different ways of serving 

the people. I’ve said it on countless occasions, Mr. Speaker, that 

northern Saskatchewan is largely a wasteland of opportunity. 

Many northern people are not being involved with the 

development of northern Saskatchewan. In every sense they 

could certainly be involved more. 

 

(1915) 

 

And these are some of the issues I believe we should be 

speaking about in relationship to being a member of the 

Legislative Assembly and being involved with government. I 

want to basically explain what I think the government should be 

doing in terms of its system and why this motion isn’t fair to the 

people that we serve. Take, for example, the small community 

in northern Saskatchewan called Camsell Portage. We speak on 

many occasions of how the people of the small community of 

40 people are able to do a tremendous job in managing their 

dollars. They have a small council there that looks at every way, 

every possible means, in which they could serve their residents. 

And whether it’s four people or 40 people, I think Camsell 

Portage epitomizes the spirit and the cooperation of people in 

Saskatchewan, and that government themselves must really 

begin to realize that the Saskatchewan people are indeed able to 

meet any challenges as long as you provide them with the tools 

and the freedom necessary to gain the best of both worlds. 

 

And we head a little east of Camsell Portage, Mr. Speaker, and 

we come up to the old boom town in the early ‘70s of Uranium 

City. Uranium City, at one time, had a population of 3,500 

people, and now we have just over 200 people left in Uranium 

City. And again this shows that government must again have to 

re-energize and re-priorize their efforts as to how we could best 

serve northern Saskatchewan, the people, and the communities. 

 

And I remember in 1990, I . . . or ’89 . . . I’m sorry, ’79, I 

travelled up to Uranium City to work there as an expediter. And 

just being fresh out of school, I didn’t realize what an expediter 

was. I thought I’d be in charge of this massive operation and 

here an expediter is a fancy name for gofer. 

 

You basically had to call in these exploration camps and see 

what they wanted, whether they wanted food or extra pair of 

boots, cigarettes, or fuel, or core boxes. And the reason why I’m 

explaining this, Mr. Speaker, is that again to understand how we 

can serve people we must understand the dynamics of industry, 

and a bit of this nature, or most of this nature, really is contrary 

to what people are trying to do out there. 

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2117 

And again I go back to Uranium City, and I worked there every 

day of the week, Sunday’s included. There were some pretty 

rough Sunday’s, I admit, but we had to go there every day and 

check. 

 

And the amazing thing about Uranium City, Mr. Speaker, is that 

in its heyday you’d see vehicles and planes and everything just 

be buzzing around the community. And I mentioned the 

population figure of 3,500 people, and you could just see in the 

middle of practically nowhere, it’s this huge city. It had a 

fantastic airport; it had a mayor and council; it had a beautiful 

rink; and it was basically a city. 

 

And when I first got to Uranium City we looked at . . . I was 

kind of in awe of what was out there. And of course, as you 

know, there was various changes in the way the one company 

operated in terms of how the Uranium City was built, is that 

during the early ‘80s there was a change in the way the uranium 

was being developed. There was richer deposits elsewhere and 

all of a sudden the Uranium City deposit was less attractive. But 

to see a city gradually and slowly die, such as Uranium City, 

with very little government support, and very little government 

help, really had a devastating effect on me as a young person. 

 

And one day, walking down the street, you meet 50 vehicles, 

and they do all . . . you know of course of a booming economy. 

And the next day . . . a couple of years later, you go back there 

and you see there’s two or three street lights working, and you 

walk two blocks down the downtown core and you can’t hear a 

sound at 10 o’clock at night. You can hear a dog barking in a 

distance. And it’s really a stark contrast of the boom times of 

Uranium City versus the downfall of Uranium City. 

 

And that’s our whole point as government, is we must never let 

a Uranium City happen ever again. There are a lot of lives that 

were destroyed as a result of some of the policies instituted and 

that ultimately led to the death of Uranium City. And both 

provincial and certainly federal governments could have done 

more. 

 

In essence, there was a lot of poor planning as well on the part 

of shutting down the mine. The year I was there they were 

doing a massive renovation and construction of buildings to 

accommodate new workers coming into Uranium City. And had 

we taken the time maybe then to really study the impacts of 

this, instead of wasting time on motions of this nature, then 

perhaps as government we could have saved Uranium City in 

some way, shape, or form. 

 

So as a result, when you see all the expansion and all the money 

and all the costs and the incredible infrastructure that was 

developed in Uranium City, all that went to waste, Mr. Speaker. 

And again, you know, when you see Uranium City in its heyday 

of the early or the late ‘70s, and then you go back there in the 

late ‘80s and you see beautiful buildings  just fantastically 

beautiful buildings  all torn apart; the huge investment and 

the huge losses that people took as a result of the mine shutting 

down was just incredible. The pressure of walking into that 

community after it became somewhat of a ghost town was just 

enormous, especially if you learned to  

appreciate Uranium City when it was really moving. 

 

And there’s all kinds of stories of what people lost, of the 

personal losses and the business losses. There’s even a story of 

one of the hotel owners had a nice offer to buy his hotel, and he 

said no, that he wanted to keep it. And a few months later the 

mine announced its closure, and as a result this guy of course 

also lost his hotel. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a thousand stories of how 

governments failed Uranium City, and how that we shouldn’t 

make efforts of wasting our time on motions of this nature. 

 

Having spent four months in Uranium City I got to know quite 

a few people there. And some of the people that were there 

prior to the mine coming in, which were the native people, 

many of the 200-and-some that did stay on in Uranium City 

after losing 3,300 people, are now back, I guess you could say, 

in charge of Uranium City. And they have a chairperson of a 

local advisory council and they have a committee and they have 

a small contingent of business people there. 

 

There’s a gentleman up there has been up there for many, many 

years. He runs Holland’s Motel. And Mr. Holland has seen 

Uranium City in its heyday and he’s seen the decline of 

Uranium City. Yet I have nothing but respect for the man 

because he continues working in the place that he loves and the 

business that he owns. 

 

And if one were to go up to Uranium City to do business there, 

then the only place that they have at this point in time is 

Holland’s Motel. And certainly I think we should show extra 

tribute and extra special recognition of the efforts of people like 

Mr. Holland that stayed on and showed resolve to try and keep 

his hopes and his dreams and his business alive. 

 

And you know these are some of the people and some of the 

stories that must be told in the Legislative Assembly because 

these are the impacted people  the people whose lives have 

been drastically, adversely affected by governments that were 

not committed to them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the important, crucial part about Camsell 

Portage and Uranium City is in the fact that in these 

communities live Saskatchewan people. These people are very 

much part of our province. They are very much part of the 

province as you and I are. So the important thing to remember 

in any of our deliberations is the fact that these are 

Saskatchewan people and they deserve Saskatchewan’s respect. 

 

A couple of the issues facing Uranium City, Mr. Speaker, and 

we elaborated on this time and time again, is basically two 

things. One is the supply of food and gas and all the necessities 

of life. I understand that barge service that would usually come 

into Lake Athabasca to drop off supplies for the winter to some 

of these communities will be discontinued, Mr. Speaker, within 

several years. From what I can understand the Canadian Coast 

Guard will no longer be travelling into these communities to be 

dropping off their food and their supplies to stock them up for 

winter. And you look at the cost of a litre of gas being at $1.17 

per litre, you know, and you can see the incredible  

  



2118 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

transportation costs. It’s just phenomenal the amount of 

challenge that a business community and people in general have 

to face. 

 

Just a bit of history, Mr. Speaker, again of how we’ve failed 

places like Uranium City is usually in the summertime they 

come up the . . . Fort McMurray has a river that goes up to Lake 

Athabasca on the Alberta side and the Canadian . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I’ve been listening very 

carefully to the remarks of the hon. member for Athabasca, and 

I’m having a difficult time appreciating his remarks and their 

relationship to the motion which is before the House. I know 

the hon. member for Athabasca will want to make his remarks 

relevant to the motion, and I’ll ask him to remind the House of 

the relevance of his remarks to the motion before us. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the 

relevance here, Mr. Speaker, is . . . the point is, I’m trying to 

give the historical perspective of how governments have failed 

people of the north-west by going through silly motions and 

silly efforts of this nature, while at the same time ignoring the 

real issues. We feel that we have to get into the issues, and 

something of this nature doesn’t help the process. And when we 

talk about the process of serving people, these are the issues. 

We want to talk about these Bills, we want to talk about these 

issues, and we need the time. That’s the key thing here, and this 

is the whole relevance. 

 

And I go back to the Uranium City situation. Had we taken the 

time, Mr. Speaker, had we taken the time to talk about these 

things very thoroughly, then we would be able to be in a 

position to understand what these northern communities really 

want. And that’s the whole process that we speak about here. 

And the key thing here, Mr. Speaker, if we take the time to 

understand, if we take the time to really begin to realize how we 

are not serving people, then that certainly is not doing justice if 

we don’t do it properly. 

 

So I need to explain the necessary logic behind taking the time 

to understand the issues that I speak about. And heading back to 

the Uranium City issue, at this point in time, had we taken the 

time to really understand how the Fort McMurray river system 

that used to allow the Canadian Coast Guard to go up there 

every year . . . and they’d have to dredge the river of course to 

allow the big ships to go through and to drop off the supplies to 

the Uranium City community and the other communities in that 

area. 

 

Had we taken the time then we would have had a long-term 

plan that would have allowed for a road to be constructed to 

serve these northern communities. Again I go back to the point, 

is why is the Canadian Coast Guard spending millions of 

dollars putting supplies up to these northern communities when 

many, many years ago, had we taken the time to properly assess 

the situation, we would have had a road up there. 

 

So in that sense, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of relevance into the 

intent of the motion and the effect we’re having when we’re not 

taking the time to talk about these issues. 

 

Now again, from what I can gather, many years ago the 

provincial government was made an offer to contribute so many 

millions of dollars to the construction of a road. Canadian Coast 

Guard did offer some settlement to try and get a road built, but 

at that time during the Tory years, the Tories again forgot about 

the North and looked at the North as a place for the rich and 

powerful to come in and extract all the resources. 

 

Now had the Tories taken the time, Mr. Speaker, had they made 

the effort to really understand the issues that I’m trying to make 

the House understand tonight, they would have known that in 

the long run, doing a cost/benefit analysis, that this road to 

Uranium City, Stony Rapids, and Fond-du-Lac would have 

been the perfect solution to the many problems. 

 

(1930) 

 

Now because we’re rushing through this process, we’re not 

taking the time to understand, we’re faced with a deadline  

1997. Many of these northern communities will no longer be 

served. What happens to the 3,000 people in that region? How 

will they be served? Are you going to fly in the supplies, which 

is a very expensive proposition? Or are you going to continue to 

hope that somebody comes up with a magical solution to this 

problem. 

 

1997 is the deadline, Mr. Speaker, in which we have to find a 

resolution to the long-standing problem of a dependable, 

cost-efficient method of transferring goods and supplies to the 

far northern communities, and have we got a dependable and 

cost-efficient system that could help the economies of these 

communities as well. 

 

And Uranium City is like any other town in Saskatchewan. The 

only problem that they have is that way up North. And that’s 

the whole thing about being up North, is many times you feel 

that you’re not part of the province. 

 

Again you look at the . . . just going further east, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re all familiar with Uranium City and the devastating effects 

of the shut-down and all the problems that they had over the 

years, and the hurt and the suffering and the confusion endured 

by many, many fine people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we go on down to the community of Fond-du-Lac. It’s 

actually, I would say  I wouldn’t say a stone’s throw from 

Uranium City, but it’s certainly within quick flying distance of 

Uranium City. And it’s of course being . . . it’s an Indian 

reserve. It’s being administered by a band chief and band 

council. And just recently they had a woman chief elected to the 

post of the top chief job in that particular community. 

 

Caroline Isadore was elected chief of the Fond-du-Lac Indian 

band. And I talked to Caroline a few weeks ago and I tell her, 

make you take the time, Mr. Speaker, you take the time to go 

through your government business as a first nations government 

to really try and serve the people. The people know when 

they’re being toyed with, so it’s quite important that we take the 

time to understand. 

 

And Fond-du-Lac is much like the other communities in the  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2119 

area. They feel that they’re being under-served. There’s no 

proper representation in terms of their business concerns, in 

terms of their social concerns, and their economic concerns, and 

certainly from their political concerns. And we’re trying to 

change that. 

 

The big thing with Fond-du-Lac, if you look at the situation as 

it is, is they have a number of people on the north shore of Lake 

Athabasca that certainly have dreams and aspirations. As 

yourself and I have for our children, they have for theirs. And 

I’m most aware that many of the parents are taking the time to 

study the decisions that will impact on their children’s lives 

and, of course, the environment around their community. 

 

And the community of Fond-du-Lac is a really well-kept, 

well-maintained community. The former chief, and of course 

the new chief as well, have done a tremendous job in instilling 

pride in people. They’ve taken the time to really clean up the 

community. There’s nice services. There’s nice buildings. The 

people are really friendly. Again I remind you these are 

Saskatchewan people. And when you go there, Mr. Speaker, 

you really get a brand-new impression and you get a fresh 

perspective of what pride can certainly do for a community and 

for its residents. 

 

And Fond-du-Lac again, of course, wants to be heavily 

involved with the economy of the North. We talk about the 

mining sector and the mining industry. Many of the band 

membership really wants to see economic development happen 

in the North and see the development of our resources. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not likely to happen very quickly but 

certainly, at their insistence, I think government should take the 

time to really understand their aspirations and to really 

understand their predicament, to respect the particular situation 

that they may be in. 

 

So certainly I can’t say enough about Fond-du-Lac. 

Fond-du-Lac has been a good example of how a northern 

community has fought the odds and has instilled a lot of pride 

in their people. And, Mr. Speaker, I remind you that it’s in spite 

of some of these social and economic problems that they have 

suffered and went through for many years. And it just shows 

that the Saskatchewan spirit is alive and well and that 

communities like Fond-du-Lac are able to respond to the 

challenges of the 1990s. 

 

I guess to the chief, Caroline Isadore, and her band council out 

there, their number one priority is to be treated with respect and 

to be treated fairly, and to be consulted on any changes 

affecting their band membership and certainly their region. And 

like anybody else, they are most certainly concerned about the 

situation of the supplying of these northern communities for the 

goods and services. There’s certainly concern about the 

situation with the challenges of developing a business. 

 

And one good example is: suppose you want to set up a 

contracting business and, you know, do some either renovations 

to your house, or to do other people’s houses, and to construct a 

house. Imagine the tremendous cost, Mr. Speaker, of 

transferring . . . 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  I’ll ask the hon. member to put his point of 

order. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened with interest 

to the member’s discourse on problems in northern 

Saskatchewan, in great detail about the situation in Uranium 

City and now in Fond-du-Lac, but none of it seems to be related 

to the motion that’s before us. And that is my point of order. 

 

The Speaker:  I’ve been listening to the words of the hon. 

member for Athabasca and I certainly take with its honourable 

intention the point of order raised by the hon. member for 

Regina Victoria. It is my view that the hon. member for 

Athabasca has made reference to the subject he’s dealing with 

in the context of the amendment  or I’m sorry  of the 

motion which is before the House and the point of order is not 

well taken. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, contrary to 

popular opinion, I think had we taken the time, Mr. Speaker, 

and continued taking the time . . . this is the perfect example of 

how we must sit through the effort of educating legislatures in 

terms of what’s happening. So I thank you for your ruling. We 

must take the time . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. Now the hon. member 

for Athabasca knows that it’s not appropriate to comment on 

the ruling of the Speaker. And I’ll simply ask him to carry on 

his debate without commenting on the rulings of the Chair. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again going back 

to Fond-du-Lac and I was talking about construction. You look 

at the situation, and had we taken the time to really assess the 

impacts of . . . or the potential of anybody getting involved with 

any business venture, what’s the first thing that comes to mind, 

Mr. Speaker, for everybody? It’s not incorporation, 

incorporating a company. No, it’s not even finding labourers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the biggest challenge now facing these 

communities and every resident of Fond-du-Lac and all the far 

northern communities is the cost of transporting all the goods 

and services that you need. 

 

Now I’ll give you an example I’ve used on many, many 

occasions. And be it a litre of gas being $1.17, or a quart of 

milk being a really high amount. There’s no way that you can 

develop an economy with those type of costs. 

 

So we have to take the time to assess, Mr. Speaker, to assess the 

challenges facing these northern Saskatchewan communities, 

especially the far northern Saskatchewan communities, in really 

addressing the economic development challenges. So we have 

to make the effort of recognizing the time factor. 

 

So I can’t say much about Fond-du-Lac in terms of certainly 

what the future holds. But I know the vision and the attempt and 

the effort of not only the band chief and the band council  

  



2120 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

but the people themselves in addressing the social and 

economic challenges of living in an isolated community that 

Saskatchewan has not taken the time to recognize and to 

support. 

 

And so I really think that, you know, this opportunity will 

provide us with the audience to explain the aspirations and the 

shortcomings that many of these northern communities 

currently suffer under. 

 

Now we’ll go a little further east, Mr. Speaker, to the fourth 

community in the far northern part of my constituency, which is 

Stony Rapids. Mr. Speaker, recently I was up in Stony Rapids 

opening up an airport, an extension that was put in to 

accommodate the heavy traffic that’s going to be, of course, 

landing at the airstrip. They’ve got a beautiful airport in Stony 

Rapids. They’ve got several companies operating in Stony 

Rapids. They have different people with different business 

plans in Stony Rapids. They have RCMP services in Stony 

Rapids. 

 

But the amazing thing is, Mr. Speaker, is we did not take the 

time nor did we make the effort to really understand what Stony 

Rapids wanted for many, many years. What they wanted was 

the same basic, essential things that you and I take for granted, 

Mr. Speaker, every day. Stony Rapids wanted water and sewer 

for their residents. 

 

The key thing here when you talk about health, Mr. Speaker, is 

no proper service of clean water. Clean, healthy water and a 

safe disposal of sewage is not an opportunity that Stony Rapids 

people enjoy. And this day and age of 1996, isn’t it time that we 

took the time to make an effort, a concerted effort, to go to 

Stony Rapids and say, why can’t we provide this community 

with the basic service of water and sewer? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I make the same point again. These are 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people that really want to 

be recognized and supported and respected by their 

government. 

 

Again the council and mayor in Stony Rapids have more than 

adequately advised government of their concern. Time and time 

again they’ve told them: take the time to come up here; take the 

time to plan; take the time to even put in this system, even if it 

takes you three or four years; but for crying out loud, give us 

the basic, essential service that the rest of the Saskatchewan 

people enjoy, which is safe running water and sewer services. 

 

And of course being in the far northern communities a lot of 

times their voices have not been heard. And how many more 

years must we scream at the top of our lungs, Mr. Speaker, to 

tell the government that Stony Rapids needs water and sewer? 

They need to be treated the same way and in the same fashion 

as the rest of the Saskatchewan . . . and the population. And we 

know that we look at the number of companies and the industry 

in northern Saskatchewan and the millions that they make. 

Certainly Stony Rapids, being a relatively small community of 

300 people, why can’t we provide water and sewer service to 

these people in spite of the money that is being made in 

northern Saskatchewan? 

So Stony Rapids, for the 1970s, for the 1980s, and now for the 

1990s are again calling on governments to provide them with 

basic water and sewer service  a service that we all enjoy. So 

I certainly urge the government to take the time to not only hear 

this message but to do the planning and to ultimately provide 

Stony Rapids with their one dream and one aspiration, of 

having water and sewer. 

 

I think the issues of economic and social development as well, 

Stony Rapids is looking at. And I share a couple of points with 

you, Mr. Speaker. In reference to a potential contractor in the 

far North, where he’s made mention that . . . he’s listed a couple 

of challenges that they’ve had in trying to set up his business. 

And we will certainly locate that for you. 

 

But he mentions that to get a case of shingles transported from 

Prince Albert into Stony Rapids to do a house costs more for 

the transportation of the shingles than the actual shingles 

themselves. So being in his particular business, how’s he 

supposed to give an adequate bid to get this work done? 

 

So again what happens is these companies from down South 

come in there and they do all the work and all the construction. 

And this government should be ashamed that they can’t put 

people in at the local level of Stony Rapids in charge of 

renovating and constructing houses, and by supporting them by 

putting some kind of subsidy in place so that people like the one 

I mention here can actually have an equal business opportunity. 

Had we taken the opportunity and the time, Mr. Speaker, to 

really study the challenges again  I speak about establishing 

some kind of employment opportunity for the people of Stony 

Rapids  then maybe today, 1996, we wouldn’t have this 

reoccurring problem. 

 

But none the less, Mr. Speaker, the Stony Rapids issue is not 

going to go away. And if somebody asks what the Stony Rapids 

need, Stony Rapids needs water and sewer. So take the time to 

understand them, take the time to hear their concern, and take 

the time for planning the installation of basic water and sewer to 

the Saskatchewan people that we are all supposed to be 

committed to serve. 

 

(1945) 

 

And going a little further east, we’re going to Black Lake. And 

Black Lake of course is also being administered by a band 

council and band chief. And Donald Sayazie I believe is the 

chief up there. And when I was up there visiting last, Mr. 

Speaker, they had a beautiful band hall  beautiful band hall. 

It’s just a tremendous opportunity and I guess a tremendous 

show of how the northern people can really, you know, build 

their future. 

 

And like the other communities I mentioned, some of the big 

issues facing the community of Black Lake is the adequate 

supply of goods and services. And the Indian band  with all 

credit going to the Black Lake Indian Band  they are working 

very, very hard to provide basic water and sewer services to 

their residents. 

 

They’re working very, very hard to show what a good northern  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2121 

government could do if they have the opportunity by building a 

beautiful structure  a beautiful band hall  which is a tribute 

to their people. It’s an example of what they could be as 

opposed to an example of what they were, which was a 

powerless people that could not change the future for their 

children. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, because of the band settlements and the 

agreements and the treaty land process . . . treaty entitlement 

process rather, we’re seeing that the band council and the chief 

of the Black Lake Indian nations is certainly realizing that he’s 

got to serve his people. He’s taken the time and they’re taking 

the time and making the effort to really make a difference 

economically and socially. 

 

So to that end, I couldn’t say anything more about the Black 

Lake people except to say that they’re one of the largest 

communities in the far northern collection of communities. 

They’ve got the same concerns of adequate supply of goods and 

services, the huge cost of some of the basic essentials like food 

and fuel and power. It’s just a tremendous challenge living up 

there. 

 

But again I go to the point from every man, woman, and child 

within the Black Lake community  these are Saskatchewan 

people that we’re forgetting. And I know the provincial 

governments have their fingers crossed when it comes to places 

like the Black Lake community where they want the first 

nations to do the best job they can because that takes them off 

the hook. And they say, well gee whiz, you guys are getting all 

this money. Do good for it and supply water and sewer, do your 

economic planning, your social planning, provide all the 

facilities, and because you’re in Saskatchewan we’re really 

behind you, we support you. But in essence, Mr. Speaker, they 

just have their fingers crossed hoping that Black Lake can do all 

this with no cost to the Saskatchewan government. 

 

So really we have to take the time to appreciate and understand 

what the first nations are doing in communities like Black Lake. 

And I think eventually this government will be forced to 

recognize that these northern Saskatchewan communities, 

especially Black Lake, will certainly rise up to the challenge of 

making them accountable to assist in the efforts of serving these 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to kind of summarize what’s been happening 

in the far North . . . and many of these communities are only 80, 

90 kilometres from the Northwest Territories border. Camsell 

Portage, 40 people, a lot of dreams, a lot of aspirations, good, 

solid managers, and a fine bunch of friendly people. 

 

Uranium City, they’ve seen their highs and their lows. They’ve 

taken the time to really begin to try and develop a future for 

their community and we’ve recently had discussions with them 

where they’re urging the provincial government to take the time 

to try and help them attract a new gold mine to that community, 

a gold mine that could provide 150 to 200 jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s a junior mining company. I feel the government needs to do 

more to attract this company. 

 

So the biggest problems I know . . . some of the problems with  

this mining company is of course the cost. The same problem 

all these communities have been harping about for years is the 

cost of transporting goods and services such as fuel and food 

and power and on and on and on. Again Uranium City’s proud 

past. So whether you’re in Camsell Portage or Uranium City or 

Fond-du-Lac or Stony Rapids or Black Lake, take the time to 

understand what these communities are facing: the high food 

prices, the huge cost of getting fuel and goods and services up 

there to develop an economy, the particular problems they’re 

having with isolation, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that in 1997 the 

barge service will be discontinued. So how are you going to 

provide goods and services to these five Saskatchewan towns? 

Are we going to hope that somebody again magically appears to 

solve the problem? Well no, they aren’t going to magically 

appear. 

 

So I’m urging the provincial government to get heavily 

involved in the discussions and in the negotiations and to take 

the time to do a thorough impact study on how we can serve 

these communities as we serve any other Saskatchewan 

communities in a fair and consistent manner, and get to the 

bottom of the problem and find a successful resolution to the 

very issues that these northern communities have spoken about 

in reference to transportation of goods and services and energy 

and supplies. 

 

So whether you live in Camsell Portage or Uranium City or 

Fond-du-Lac or Stony Rapids or Black Lake, I urge every 

member of this Assembly to go out there and spend two or three 

days or two or three weeks, to sit down and talk to the people 

 

There’s beautiful country out there. Take the time to understand 

their problems; take the time to really understand their dreams 

and hear their aspirations. Take the time to recognize their 

accomplishments. And take the time to plan a future for them 

together, provincial government and the far northern 

communities, so that their children have a future, Mr. Speaker. 

So whether you’re in Camsell Portage, Uranium City, 

Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids, or Black Lake, the far North has 

waited long enough. So I urge the government to take the time 

to understand these issues. 

 

So to continue jogging down the map here, Mr. Speaker, and 

highlighting some of the other communities that we need to 

take time to understand, and we go to a small community just 

north of La Loche. It’s a small community called Descharme 

Lake. And they have a mayor, Ivan Janvier, and Mr. Janvier has 

been doing a tremendous job. He’s a young, serious man that’s 

taken the time, again, to see the effects of the provincial 

economy on his small community. 

 

And I really admire his stamina, Mr. Speaker, and his resolve, 

again, to try and get involved with the province, get services 

and get respect and get support for his community. That’s what 

government is supposed to do. They’re supposed to serve the 

people of Saskatchewan’s best interests. And Mr. Janvier and 

the people that he serves in Descharme Lake certainly are 

waiting for the government to come along and give them 

successful support. And whether it’s developing opportunity in 

terms of tourism or the fishing industry, then Descharme Lake  

  



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

is like any other community to have aspirations and dreams. 

 

So I urge the provincial government to take the time to really 

begin to understand what communities like Descharme Lake 

aspire to become. They aspire to become a self-sufficient, proud 

people that can develop employment opportunities and a future 

for their children. They have high hopes and dreams for their 

children much like you and I do. 

 

And just a little bit of history, Mr. Speaker. The first five years 

of my life I spent in Descharme Lake. I was born in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and my father and mother and the family were 

living in Descharme Lake. And my father was a bush pilot 

transporting fish from the northern lakes into La Loche and 

Buffalo. So we lived out in Descharme Lake. And I’m proud to 

say that Descharme Lake was my home town. And I guess my 

mayor resigned, Ivan Janvier, but when we were there it was 

just a fantastic place to be in. The best memories of my 

childhood was living in Descharme Lake amongst my family 

and amongst the people of Descharme Lake. 

 

I guess the other community as we go  I’ll just jump over La 

Loche here for a minute, Mr. Speaker  I’ll go to Garson Lake. 

And here, Mr. Speaker, I’m trying to get the government to take 

the time to talk about Garson Lake. And one of the Highways 

ministers, several years ago, was . . . We spoke about Garson 

Lake, and we asked them to take the time to study the impacts 

and the supports and the effects that could happen if we make 

the Garson Lake road happen. 

 

This is a community of 100 people in Garson Lake that want to 

be connected to the rest of the province. And no, Garson Lake 

is not in the far northern communities. No, they’re not 

thousands of miles or hundreds of kilometres away from any 

community. Mr. Speaker, Garson Lake is probably only 40 

kilometres from La Loche  40 kilometres. And I made a point 

earlier about this Highways minister that said we are not going 

to make a road to a northern Alberta town. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Garson Lake is in Saskatchewan. 

 

So the point is that had he taken the time to come up there and 

understood the issue, then he would have known Garson Lake is 

a Saskatchewan town that’s near the Alberta border. And La 

Loche  the community has been fighting and supporting the 

efforts of the mayor out there, Donald Laprise, of Garson Lake. 

He’s been fighting for years along with his father, George, to 

get a highway built into Garson Lake. 

 

In fact I made a reference earlier in my member’s statement just 

. . . three years ago they finally got power in that community. 

The power that you and I . . . electricity that you and I enjoy. 

They finally got that three years ago. And so again this is a 

Saskatchewan community, with Saskatchewan people in there, 

that just most recently got power service. 

 

And the third point we raise is in reference to the Garson Lake 

road; they’ve been fighting for this. And what’s the importance 

of the Garson Lake road? What’s so important for the 

provincial government to build a road to Garson Lake? Well 

number one, again, I’m going back to the point, these are 

Saskatchewan people. Number two is there’s always been the  

effort of the entire west side to support a Garson Lake, La 

Loche, Fort McMurray road so they could kind of get the 

tourism industry and the oil industry and all the employment 

opportunities to start flowing towards northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s the relevance from an economic perspective, Mr. 

Speaker, of why the north-west communities really want to see 

a Garson Lake-Fort McMurray-La Loche connection, because 

this is their dreams they’ve been working on many, many years. 

And I think it’s high time the government take the time to 

understand this, to really understand the impacts and the effect, 

the positive effects, that could happen if we have Garson Lake 

connected to the province and on to Fort McMurray. 

 

The other point, in reference to Garson Lake, Mr. Speaker, is 

you look at the oil industry in northern Alberta and the recent 

announcement that the Prime Minister is out there signing 

major agreements with the oil industry. And earlier estimates 

go, Mr. Speaker, that this particular deal in the industry near 

and around Fort McMurray pegged the potential cost of $4 

billion, Mr. Speaker. That’s $4 billion and that’s in northern 

Alberta, and we know that the natural gas and the oil do not end 

at the border, Mr. Speaker. Obviously natural gas and oil 

probably extends into Saskatchewan, and I think the key thing 

here is that Garson Lake recognizes that, La Loche recognized 

that, and even Fort McMurray recognizes that there’s an 

incredible amount of potential here for natural gas and 

explorations. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my earlier point about the 

open and accountable government. When I asked the 

government the following question which was answered by the 

hon. member from Cumberland, and I asked, have any permits 

been allowed for exploration of natural gas in the northern 

administration district, and he said, yes, a large part of the area 

between Meadow Lake Provincial Park and the Primrose Air 

Weapons Range is covered by oil and gas exploration permits 

and leases. 

 

What does that say, Mr. Speaker? That goes back to the earlier 

point that the people of La Loche and Garson Lake have been 

saying for many, many years  put a road in there to help 

develop natural gas and perhaps oil exploration for the entire 

region. 

 

And again we go and ask which companies are involved? Is it 

one company or is it two company? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

have you know there’s one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, 

eight companies, Mr. Speaker, with exploration permits all 

throughout that region. So we have not one company taking an 

awful chance at trying to find natural gas or oil and taking the 

time to assess the industry; we have eight. So we have eight 

companies in the region. Obviously these companies must know 

something’s up. 

 

(2000) 

 

So Garson Lake, in its very huge efforts of getting the 

government to understand and to take the time to build a road 

into Garson Lake and on to Fort McMurray so you have a Fort 

McMurray-Garson Lake-La Loche connection that will not only  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

help out with tourism but it’s also going to help out with natural 

gas, it’s going to help out with employment opportunity, it’s 

going to help out with forestry. 

 

And who needs the employment, Mr. Speaker? The 

Saskatchewan people and that region. And we have to take the 

time to understand communities like La Loche who suffer from 

a 70 to 80 to 90 per cent unemployment rate. They need the 

employment opportunities associated with this Garson Lake 

road. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we look at a small community of Garson 

Lake. What significant impact can a small road, a 30 or 40 

kilometre piece of road, have on the Saskatchewan economy? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s right here in black and white. If that 

road comes through, the opportunities can indeed flow from a 

$4 billion industry located in Fort McMurray into Garson Lake 

and onto La Loche and onto Buffalo Narrows and onto Beauval, 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, and so on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a tremendous economic opportunity 

here. We know that there’s gas exploration happening. Eight 

companies are involved. The community wants a road in there. 

There’s a booming industry next door. So really, why can’t they 

put that in place? And this is the reason why, Mr. Speaker, we 

must take the time to hear the people of Garson Lake and to 

hear the people of La Loche when they say, give us this road. 

Take the time, government, to give us this road. 

 

And the last time that the community did come in here, Mr. 

Speaker, to ask for support, they didn’t ask for support of $10 

billion or $4 million. That’s not what they asked for, Mr. 

Speaker. What the community of La Loche and Garson Lake 

come to the government for, Mr. Speaker, is they urge them, 

take the time, take the time to understand what the costs are. 

 

And what we want to do, Mr. Government, is we want you to 

put in training dollars so they can train the people of La Loche 

and the people of Garson Lake  through a welfare reform 

program or through training dollars  on how to operate heavy 

equipment. And this heavy equipment training that they’ll get, 

they’ll build a road. 

 

It’s not going to cost you millions and millions, Mr. 

Government; it’s going to cost you guys a small amount. And 

then you’re going to be potentially tapping into a $4 billion 

industry, Mr. Speaker. For what? For the simple act and for a 

simple request from the people of La Loche and Garson Lake to 

use training dollars for training people in heavy equipment to 

build that road. 

 

It’s not asking for millions. All they asked, Mr. Speaker, was 

$250,000 a year for three years. And of course the same old 

tune  it’s the federal Liberals in Ottawa. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that has some bearing and some 

significance. But sooner or later that excuse and that strategy 

will dry out. And it’s quickly drying out because people of the 

North  Garson Lake and La Loche  these are very 

intelligent people. They know what’s going on. But they must 

go through the motions of pretending that they don’t know,  

because for the longest time they’re asking for support, for a 

government that’s supposed to serve, not dictate to people. 

 

So Garson Lake, and the request for a road, can have 

tremendous economic opportunity. Not just for Garson Lake, 

and La Loche, and the people of the north-west, but for the 

whole, entire province. And, Mr. Speaker, I urge the 

government to take the time to understand this issue because 

this is only a 30 kilometre stretch  not 300  30 kilometres. 

 

And so on behalf of the mayor, Donald Laprise, and the many 

fine people in this community, I urge the government to take 

the time to understand; and I urge the government to take the 

time to go there and do a proper assessment of where the road 

should go; and I urge that the government to take the time to 

understand what exactly people are asking for  to recycle 

welfare dollars, and to use training dollars to train their own 

people, so they can build that road on their own. 

 

And if that isn’t a win-win situation, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 

what is. That’s a win-win situation and I can’t understand for 

the life of me why the Saskatchewan government will not take 

the time to study the impacts of this. Is there a larger agenda out 

there? We don’t know. 

 

So Garson Lake, again I commend them for their fight and their 

will to have this road become a reality. And it goes back to if 

you can’t understand the logistics of serving your own people 

by providing them access to the Saskatchewan road system, 

then at the very least, from the economic perspective, support 

that. So Garson Lake is certainly hoping this government has a 

change of heart and really begins to understand what is needed 

out there. 

 

So going on to La Loche, Mr. Speaker. We’ve all heard the 

negative aspects of that community time and time again. La 

Loche’s situation with the hospital that we spoke about, it was 

featured in the Star-Phoenix article. And this is the largest 

community in the North, Mr. Speaker, the largest village. It has 

a population of roughly 3,000 to 3,500 people  3,000 to 3,500 

people on a small plot of land. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what are some of the concerns of La Loche? 

Plenty. Social development, housing, and the economic 

development. Right now, Mr. Speaker, the mayor of . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I’ve been listening for 

quite some time, very carefully, to the words of the hon. 

member for Athabasca and I’m having a great deal of difficulty 

getting the direct relationship between the remarks that he’s 

bringing to debate and the motion that is before the Assembly. 

 

And I will ask the hon. member to give the direct relationship 

between the words that he’s bringing, the ideas he’s bringing, 

and the precise motion that is before the Assembly. I know the 

hon. member will want to be relevant in his debate and I’ll ask 

him to direct his remarks in that way. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I go 

back to the points of the purpose of governing is we have to 

take the time to understand these issues. And this opportunity  

  



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

allows me that time to explain to us why we are wasting time, 

and wasting people of Saskatchewan’s time, by going through 

motions of this nature. 

 

The intent of the motion here is to obviously stall the whole 

process. As MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

we’re here to serve the people  not play games and not try to 

outmanoeuvre each other. So if we’re doing that, we’re doing a 

disservice. We’re doing a disservice to not taking the time to 

understand these issues. We should have motions here every 

day to understand the effects of health care, to understand the 

effects of a non-thinking economic strategy. We should have to 

have the . . . study the effects and take the time to look at social 

problems in northern Saskatchewan and many communities. 

 

So if we’d take the time, Mr. Speaker, instead of going through 

silly motions of this nature trying to prove our point. We are 

doing a disservice to Saskatchewan people. So I’m taking the 

time now to explain to the government why we’re missing the 

boat on this issue, why we must not play these types of games 

at the expense of the Saskatchewan constituencies. 

 

And certainly as MLA for the Athabasca constituency I’m not 

going to waste my time. I’m going to make sure that this 

Assembly is aware of the concerns of the people and that a 

motion of this nature certainly does not harm that process. 

 

Now you talk about overkill, Mr. Speaker. I’ll continue on. I 

think the key thing here, Mr. Speaker, back to La Loche. The 

funny thing is too many times the people of La Loche have 

been struggling and fighting for one thing. They’ve been asking 

the government to finance a drug and alcohol rehabilitation 

centre. 

 

For many months and for many years, a group of concerned 

people that got together and met and met and met. And they 

knew if they took the time to understand community 

development and the problems associated with alcohol and drug 

abuse within that community, that they’ll be doing a service to 

their people. 

 

And months after months after months of negotiations and 

meeting, they asked, we need a rehabilitation centre, a proper 

facility to really serve the people. You have to take the time to 

understand our problems. We need to have these counsellors in 

here. We need to have social development issues raised and we 

also have to make sure that we take the time to help our people. 

 

So after years and years and years of that, the government kept 

on saying: we have no money; we have no money; we have no 

money; we have no money. And, Mr. Speaker, in the middle of 

that “we-have-no-money tune” the provincial government built 

a brand-new Liquor Board store  brand-new, state-of-the-art. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we haven’t got the time, we haven’t got 

the money, at the very least we should understand one thing  

we shouldn’t perpetuate problems or complicate the process 

that many local people . . . or what they’re trying to do. 

 

What is totally, totally beyond me, Mr. Speaker, is we did not 

take the time to understand. What is more important for the  

community of La Loche? Was it a brand-new Liquor Board 

store or was it a drug and alcohol abuse centre, something the 

people are calling for? 

 

So what do we do, Mr. Speaker? What do we do, Mr. Speaker? 

We sit down and we ask the people, well how do you feel about 

it? And we say, what else can we do? We shrug our shoulders 

and we said, well we wish somebody had taken the time to 

listen. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I asked the government to take the time to 

put in a brand-new alcohol and drug abuse centre and the 

support programs that people of La Loche have asked for for 

many years. And I asked the community to challenge the 

government to provide that for them so they’re able to help 

themselves. They have the counsellors locally but they haven’t 

got the system in which they can operate under. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I asked the government, in terms of La 

Loche, to help a ladies group in town that are also fighting for a 

shelter for women and children. As a result of some of the 

social problems, the big losers are the women and children. So 

this group of women are taking the time to try and urge the 

governments to do something to help them locally. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to take the time to understand what 

these people need and what these people want. And for the life 

of me be able to find the money for a brand-new police station 

and brand-new Liquor Board store, why can’t you find the 

money for a brand-new drug and alcohol abuse centre, and why 

can you find the money for a women and child’s shelter? 

 

So our priorities are a bit mixed up, Mr. Speaker, and the reason 

why they’re mixed up is we have not taken the time to 

understand the North. So I challenge every socialist in this 

building to understand La Loche’s predicament. They’re not 

asking for hundreds of millions of dollars again; they’re asking 

to be treated with decency and they’re asking to be given some 

control over their lives. And they’re asking to be heard and 

they’re urging the government to take the time to understand 

their particular problems. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again La Loche, we touch on another issue 

here in terms of taking the time. Well the people of La Loche 

have taken many, many years. Their patience has been there for 

government for many years. They have taken the time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And one time they put in  what?  16, 17 trailers together 

and they said, we will call this a hospital on a temporary basis. 

Temporary basis. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s now 1996 and this 

temporary hospital is still serving the people of that particular 

community. La Loche has still got the trailers as a hospital. And 

I think that’s a monument to the fact that the government has 

not taken the time to really go out there and assess what is being 

done to these people. 

 

And the amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, is the people of La Loche 

have not backed down. They have continued to pressure the 

government for that. And the way things . . . and the amazing 

thing that I find is that in spite of our very efforts to try and get  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

this issue highlighted, and Eisler’s column done that, I got a few 

calls from a few people saying, that was a good effort that you 

done, Buckley, to highlight this particular problem, but gee 

whiz, we wish it wasn’t so negative. 

 

What that tells me, Mr. Speaker, is in spite of all the 

indifference that these people have suffered from the 

government, they still have a tremendous amount of pride, not 

only in themselves but in their children and their community. 

They did not want to be portrayed any more as a bad 

community. 

 

So what does that say to you, Mr. Speaker? That says to you 

that the people at this particular community, La Loche people, 

are fighting for their very existence every day and they’re not 

going to change their mind when it comes to taking on a 

government that will not change the system that they currently 

dictate to for the people of the North. 

 

So what do we have here? We have a need for a new hospital. 

And I ask the government to take their time to listen to that. La 

Loche needs a new hospital. And they’re not asking for a $50 

million facility; they’re asking for a facility that would serve 

their people. A decent one. Treat them with decency and 

respect. 

 

(2015) 

 

And the final thing when it comes to that particular health issue, 

Mr. Speaker, is that you can go to that building there and you 

could talk to the nurses and to the doctors, and this is a system 

that’s just being overrun with problems. And have these people 

quit? No, they haven’t, Mr. Speaker. The resolve of the La 

Loche people to handle their social problems is something that 

we should all look at as a fine example of the Saskatchewan 

spirit that exists in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And let me tell you, the people of La Loche are not going to 

quit. They’re going to continue pursuing this matter and they 

are going to continue fighting for a decent health care facility. 

They’re going to continue fighting for a shelter for their women 

and their children. They’re going to continue fighting for an 

alcohol and drug abuse centre. And to top it all off, they’re 

going to continue fighting for the Garson Lake road. They’re 

going to continue fighting for employment opportunity, 

economic opportunity, and social development at its very 

highest sense. And you cannot stop them, Mr. Speaker. So if I 

was the government I’d get on the bandwagon and benefit from 

the energy of the people of this particular community, because 

they can show you what determination, pride, and planning is 

all about. 

 

So I guess the other factor when you talk about La Loche is, the 

two bright lights in that particular community, Mr. Speaker, are 

the two schools: Dene High School and the Ducharme 

Elementary School. And these two schools, Mr. Speaker, are 

the shining and saving light of that particular community. They 

have over a thousand students  over 1,000 students  

registered in those two schools. And it’s the teachers, it’s the 

teachers, Mr. Speaker, and the staff of these schools that are 

going to really make a significant effort to the social  

development of that community. 

 

And I can’t say anything better about the staff, Mr. Speaker. 

When you go in there you can sense a pride amongst the 

students. You can see the value that they have for their school 

and the respect they have for their staff. And this is a 

tremendous job. 

 

The staff and the teachers of both the elementary school, 

Ducharme Elementary School, and the Dene High School are 

the one group of people that are really doing extra hard work to 

save the people of this particular community. They’re the ones 

that are working hand in hand with the local leaders to come up 

with a successful resolution to the many years of problems that 

this community has suffered from  many years. 

 

I’m not going to argue all night. The problems are there. Check 

the facts. I always say, the point I make is check the facts, Mr. 

Speaker, and you will see the amount of problems that are there. 

These are facts and nobody can argue with facts. If the facts are 

there, then there’s something wrong somewhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again I go back to the educational effort of the people of La 

Loche  3,500 people  they’re pinning their hopes and their 

dreams and their aspirations on educating their young people. 

So 5 to 10 to 15 years from now when these young people are 

in charge of the community, all the problems that they’ve 

encountered in the past and to this day will be something that’s 

marked in the history books, because these people are going to 

come out motivated, educated, and tired of waiting. 

 

So that’s my message to government, is you do not take these 

people for granted any more. They’re not going to sit back and 

continue taking the type of treatment that they’ve taken for 

many, many years. Patience is wearing thin. 

 

So La Loche again, they’re fully support of the Garson Lake 

road. They see employment opportunity there. They’ve trained 

many heavy-equipment workers to work at various mine sites, 

and they want to build this road by training other people and get 

them off welfare and give them employment opportunity and 

give them back their pride and their drive and their ambition. 

That’s what it’s all about, Mr. Speaker. It’s about developing a 

proud, disciplined, smart people and that’s what La Loche 

wants for their people and they’ll get that. If it doesn’t come 

sooner, it’ll certainly come. 

 

Now I’ll just go, I’ll jump a little towards to the La Loche 

Indian Reserve, Mr. Speaker. The Clearwater Dene Nation is 

being governed by Chief Roy Cheecham and his band 

councillors, and there’s another example of the determination, 

Mr. Speaker, of the first nations group. The Clearwater Dene 

Nation is doing a whole pile of work, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

getting heavily involved with economic development; they’re 

getting heavily involved with social development; they’re 

getting heavily involved with educational planning and housing 

construction; and they’re really taking charge of their lives, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But really you ask the question, is how are they managing to do  

  



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

that, and yet La Loche next door actually, you know, hasn’t 

done comparably well? Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Dene first nations are in charge of their own 

financing. This is an Indian reserve and they get federal funding 

to do that. But more so, the federal funding is under their 

control. 

 

The difference between the Clearwater Dene Nation and the 

northern village of La Loche is that the village does not control 

their funding, does not control anything but their small amount 

of municipal allocation, while the Dene first nations control all 

the funding. 

 

So you can see the contrast is that these two groups of people 

that share the same town  one is successful, the other wants to 

be successful  it’s simply because the only difference is one 

is in charge of its financing and the other is just a creature of 

government. 

 

So the point is that the Clearwater Dene Nation is actually 

teaching many people in Saskatchewan  certainly have taught 

me  how to run government and how to serve your people. 

And in fact the Clearwater Dene Nation can probably teach the 

provincial government a heck of a lot more of serving people 

than they can teach anybody else in this province. 

 

So I ask the provincial government to go to listen to some of the 

chiefs in the north-west and to Chief Roy Cheecham at the 

Clearwater Dene Nation on how to govern and how to serve 

people; and he can certainly share a lot of insight and can give 

you guys a lot of valuable lessons. So the people of the 

Clearwater Dene Nation can certainly teach this provincial 

government about service to people. 

 

So we’ll just continue travelling along down Highway 155, Mr. 

Speaker, and asking the government to take the time, which I’m 

making them do this evening, to understand what the issues are 

in each of these communities. 

 

Turnor Lake. Turnor Lake is a community of about 1,200 

people, and these 1,200 people, they’re much like the rest of the 

northern communities. They want to take the time to also 

develop an economy. And their big issue, Turnor Lake’s big 

issue at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that they 

want 30 kilometres of road fixed. This year a 4X4 truck 

couldn’t make it through to a town of 1,200 people. And this is 

only 30 kilometres. 

 

And I’d like to share a story of one of the councillors there, 

Louis Morin, he’s an elder. And Louis has told many people, 

the government should have taken the time to listen to us. They 

should have taken the time to listen to us. We asked for a road 

to connect our community because there’s a lot of people there 

that have health problems; there’s many people that travel out 

for groceries and for fuel; and there’s many things that they 

need from the outside world. 

 

And they asked, 30 kilometres to be fixed up. And year after 

year, government after government has told the people of 

Turnor Lake, you’re on the list to get this road fixed. But 1996 

they finally realized that you can’t travel on a list. And Mr.  

Morin certainly pointed that thing out very eloquently. 

 

So I ask the people here, when we talk about highways we’re 

not talking about 5,000 kilometres of road; we’re talking about 

30-kilometre stretches, 40-kilometre stretches, and 

60-kilometres stretches that for years have been promised by 

this government and has never been delivered. 

 

And furthermore they make the effort, the communities make 

the effort. Like, Turnor Lake has said many times, give us 

something; give us even a grader that we can control here 

locally so we can send the grader man out there to at least do 

some work on the road. Give us a little bit more gravel, please, 

you know. And they’ve even said, give us a training program; 

we’ll train some guys here too, the same process that La Loche 

is doing. And then we’ll build our own road. But for crying out 

loud, do something. 

 

So when we get up here and we talk about the Turnor Lake 

road, the press doesn’t take notice of it. The people in the 

House just sit back and they say, okay. So what do we do now, 

Mr. Speaker? Now we’re taking the time to explain why Turnor 

Lake road needs to be fixed, so everybody in this House could 

understand that. 

 

So when you have an entire community of 1,200 people that 

have been isolated and the road has not been fixed for years, 

what do we say? Well, let them be patient, you know, we’re in 

debt here. The federal government cut us back. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the time for excuses is over. They’ve been 

promised a road and that promise should be delivered. And I 

urge you, Mr. Speaker, to take the time yourself to instruct as 

many people as you can in your lifetime to go there and listen to 

some of the concerns. 

 

So the issue of housing and employment and social 

development and the road  similar issues, Mr. Speaker, of 

many northern communities. And Turnor Lake is like no other 

community. They are the ones that have been calling for a 

decent road, they’ve been calling for decent housing, they’ve 

been calling for opportunity to participate in industries 

operating in their backyards, and they’ve been asking for 

respect. But time after time after time, promises have been 

broken and nobody’s listening or hearing the concerns of people 

of Turnor Lake. But, Mr. Speaker, tonight we’re taking the time 

to tell them, to explain to them, so they can go back and say, oh, 

we didn’t know; we didn’t know. Hansard will show that they 

did know. And when you make a promise, it’s a promise you 

should keep. 

 

Okay, then we’ll go a little further, Mr. Speaker. We’ll go to the 

community of Patuanak, and Patuanak is also a Dene 

community of roughly 1,200 people. There’s 200-and-some 

people being governed by a mayor and council. It’s a hamlet. 

And the neighbouring English River First Nation Reserve has 

about 1,000 people. And the mayor there is Ernest Laliberte and 

the chief there is Archie Campbell. Both the mayor and chief 

have been working very, very hard to serve their people and 

these two individuals, along with their councils, are taking the 

time to try and come up with some exciting and innovative  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

ways to better serve their people. 

 

And take a wild guess, Mr. Speaker, what some of the concerns 

are. And it may sound like a real echo in here, but we have to 

take time to listen. The concerns of Patuanak are a) a new road; 

b) employment opportunities; c) social development; and d) 

respect. Mr. Speaker, another group of 1,200 people on the 

Patuanak community are isolated because of their road. The 

Patuanak road has been having so many problems over so many 

years that in the springtime for three or four weeks at a time, 

traffic can’t get through. Five or six wash-outs, no problem. But 

do we listen as a province? No, we don’t. Time after time, year 

after year, we make promises, promises that we don’t keep. 

 

So how much more longer do we have to continue banging that 

drum, Mr. Speaker? How many more times must we urge the 

government to listen to the people of Patuanak and get that road 

fixed? Give them decent housing and help them with social and 

economic planning so they have a bright future for themselves 

and their children. This is the overwhelming message from 

many northern communities. So Patuanak is like no other 

community. They have their needs and I think it’s time the 

government started taking the time and meeting those needs. 

After 10, 20, 25 years, don’t you think we should change our 

approach, Mr. Speaker? Don’t you think we should have an 

approach of respect for the northern communities? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Patuanak again, many, many years ago they 

had a very exciting hockey team. The Patuanak Pats won many, 

many tournaments throughout Saskatchewan. And they had 

three players on that team that had some junior hockey 

experience. In fact one of the players played for the East Coast 

Hockey League. And on a per capita basis, Patuanak’s probably 

put out the best hockey players in the North-west  hockey 

players like Abe Apesis, like Moe Apesis, like August George 

Sr., August George Jr. All these players that come out and they 

made it in the big leagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they never made it to the NHL (National Hockey 

League), but had they had the proper support  and they 

certainly had the ability  they would’ve made it. And had the 

government taken time to even support social development, 

cultural awareness, and sport programs, these people would’ve 

been in the NHL and you would’ve seen less problems now. 

 

So had you taken the time to support such teams as the 

Patuanak Pats and communities like Patuanak . . . you know, 

you just don’t realize the potential of people out there. 

 

And again I go back to my earlier points. These are 

Saskatchewan people. They’re not way out in the boondocks 

like some hill-billies we’re not going to pay attention to. 

They’re Saskatchewan people. They belong to Saskatchewan. 

They belong to this Assembly. They vote for provincial 

elections. They also vote for federal elections. So for crying out 

loud, treat these people like Saskatchewan residents . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  They count as much as anyone else. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Because they count as much as anybody else. 

Thank you very much, hon. member from Humboldt. 

 

So we look at the other aspect of Patuanak. We have the 

English River First Nation. And they just recently signed their 

own policing force. They’re doing some work with educational 

programs, they’re looking at health care. They’re really playing 

a very positive role with their people. 

 

Chief Archie Campbell and his councillors are doing a 

tremendous job. They’re really trying their very best to change 

things, to better the opportunities that the residents of Patuanak 

face. 

 

And you look at all the issues that we speak about. People like 

our chief, Archie Campbell, and all his councillors, they have 

also went through a lot of tough times in their life, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve seen the indifference of government and they’ve seen 

the fact that roads to their communities don’t receive high 

priority. So they know that and they realize that. So I urge the 

government again to respect these people and take the time to 

go visit them and understand their issues. 

 

And again, 1,200 people have a lot of dreams, have a lot of 

aspirations, a lot of plans, but again, they feel very ignored by 

this government when the very simple issue of building a 

decent road that can connect them to the rest of the province has 

been an ongoing problem, and in 1996 the problem has not been 

fixed. 

 

So Patuanak needs a road; Patuanak needs respect; Patuanak 

needs to be consulted. So we’re asking and urging the 

government to take the time to listen. 

 

Now we’ll just jump across and head west now, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ll go into two communities: Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill. Now these two communities are also managed or 

administered by mayors and councillors. And the big problem 

. . . I’ll tell you again, Mr. Speaker, what their problem is. They 

need a decent road, Mr. Speaker. They need some decent 

housing and they need social and economic development. 

 

That’s what they asked for, these small communities. There’s 

about 200 people in each of the communities, and again they’re 

asking for decent roads; they’re asking for a say in the forestry; 

they’re asking for some support in developing a fishing 

industry; tourism opportunity; forestry opportunity. 

 

And does this government hear them? No. And what kind of 

road do they want, Mr. Speaker? Again, it’s not 200 kilometres 

or 400 kilometres, Mr. Speaker; this is a 60 kilometre stretch  

60 kilometres. This is what the people of Michel Village and St. 

George’s Hill have been asking. 

 

And there’s many taxi operators and people that drive on these 

roads and they really wreck their vehicles. And they ask 

governments time and time again: we pay our licence fees; we 

buy our plates; we pay taxes. We do our part for the 

Saskatchewan economy. We provide a service; we create our 

own employment; we provide transportation for our people. So 

why can’t we get our government to fix up this road? Why is it  

  



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

that our issues and our priorities are way off? Why haven’t they 

heard us? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the government has heard them but they 

continue to ignore them. And again, you go there and ask St. 

George’s Hill and Michel Village, ask them what they want. 

Number one, a road, a decent road to connect us to the main 

highway. Give us a decent road. That’s what they’re saying, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then the housing situation comes into effect and the social 

and economic development planning. But they don’t want 

government coming there and trying to control everything and 

do everything for them. They want to have some control and 

power over their own lives. But they want the basic thing of 

infrastructure, which is roads and housing, and they want the 

basic service and opportunity associated with economic and 

social development planning. 

 

So Michel Village and St. George’s Hill, again they’re being 

administered by a mayor and council and they’re certainly 

doing all they can to help their local people. But again, I’ll give 

you some prices of these small communities. Their annual 

budget, Mr. Speaker, the annual budget of some of these 

hamlets in northern Saskatchewan to collect garbage, to 

maintain the streets, provide street lights, provide recreation 

facility funding, provide a recreation director, hold council 

meetings  the annual budgets of some of these communities 

like Michel Village and St. George’s Hill and the hamlet of 

Patuanak and Descharme Lake  some of them are as low as 

30,000. The highest I believe is 50,000. So what kind of 

community can you run with $50,000, Mr. Speaker? You can’t 

build one house for $50,000 and you can’t fix up 1 kilometre of 

road for $50,000. 

 

So the real question is: how do they expect these mayors and 

these councillors to change the system that they live under and 

change the system for the betterment of their people with such a 

small amount of money? Fifty thousand dollars, Mr. Speaker; 

that is basically what they get to work with. And I think it’s a 

crying shame that they are expected to fulfil all their 

community’s needs with not one iota or level of support for 

extra financing from the province. 

 

So St. George’s Hill and Michel Village, the road issue is 

something that’s been terribly pressing. And yet forestry is 

happening all around them. We have natural gas and 

exploration happening all around them. We have the mining 

sector that’s happening all around the North. And yet the basic, 

essential needs of 3 per cent of the provincial population we 

can’t meet. 

 

What kind of government are we? Where’s our compassion and 

where’s our commitment to northern Saskatchewan? You and I 

know where they went. They went out the window. So the 

apathy that is being suffered right now, that the government is 

suffering from right now towards the North, has got to stop. It’s 

got to end. We’ve been patient with you, been working with 

you, been trying to impress upon you our needs. But once again 

they fall on deaf ears. 

 

So how much more can we expect the northern Saskatchewan 

people and the communities to take? Like any other 

community, Mr. Speaker, Michel Village, St. George’s Hill, 

have children in them. And these children represent the future 

of their communities, and they are doing that on a $50,000 

budget as a community. So you tell me how much chance and 

how much opportunity that they have to develop a better future. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this government take the 

time to go there and sit down with these Saskatchewan people 

and say, what can we do to help? What can you guys do to 

become partners with us in developing a brand-new 

Saskatchewan so the spirit of Saskatchewan can also work in 

northern communities? 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, you just don’t know the dreams and 

the aspirations and the abilities of some of the mayors and the 

councillors and the people like the communities of Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill. Henry Laplante and Emilian 

Desjarlais are the mayors of both these small communities and 

they also have their councillors as well. 

 

Located next to the northern hamlets of Michel and St. 

George’s Hill is the Indian reserve of Dillon, and I believe it’s 

called the Birch Narrows First Nation and it’s being governed 

by Chief Elmer Campbell and his band of councillors. 

 

Again the first nations government, Mr. Speaker, is doing a 

heck of lot more for their treaty membership than Michel 

Village and St. George’s Hill could ever hope to do. For one 

specific reason  is that they have control over their funding. 

 

They have control over their decision-making ability. And 

people like Chief Elmer Campbell at the Birch Narrows First 

Nation, in Dillon, is a good example of how the young people 

that have become educated, they come back to these northern 

communities, and have taken over control of these communities 

so that they can develop a future on their own. Governments 

can’t do that for them. What they ask for is, they ask for support 

of government, and they ask for respect of government, and 

they ask to be consulted by government. 

 

And Dillon’s the same boat. They’re supporting Michel Village 

and St. George’s Hill and have called for a decent road. 

Because many people on medical emergencies, on taxi trips, or 

just generally going out to visit neighbouring communities, 

have to go through some terrible roads. And another 1,200 

Saskatchewan people are being isolated because this 

government did not take the time, through this legislature, to try 

and understand what the issues and the concerns are. 

 

So just to quickly recap. You look at the 60 kilometres for the 

Dillon road, the 30 kilometres for the Garson Lake road, the 30 

kilometres for the Turnor Lake road, and the 80 kilometres for 

the Patuanak road, if you connected those 4 towns, Mr. 

Speaker, those 4 communities, you’re in essence connecting 

4,000 people to the rest of the province with decent roads  

4,000 men, women, and children. 

 

And this is why every day that I have the opportunity to bring 

up northern roads, I do. Because this is no small issue, Mr.  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

Speaker; this has been ongoing issue and these are real 

problems. So when I bring them up the press doesn’t pick it up, 

the government doesn’t respond, and then their issues get put 

away for another day. 

 

So this is the reason why, Mr. Speaker, going through silly 

motions of this nature, we are forced, literally forced, to play 

games that don’t get anybody anywhere. Much like you, and 

much like most members of this House, I tire of this process. If 

we can get together and show the people as legislators . . . then 

why go through the motions of pretending to govern. 

 

So we must pick the time, Mr. Speaker, to understand how to 

serve our people better. And whether it’s Patuanak, or Michel, 

or St. George’s Hill, or Stony Rapids, today you know what 

those issues are. And they’re only one-third finished. 

 

I guess in the . . . as you go further south down the road from 

Michel and Dillon, we’ll hit . . . not south, sorry, we’re heading 

east. We’ll come to the community of Buffalo Narrows. And 

Buffalo Narrows is probably one of the larger communities in 

the north-west. The people of the whole region got together and 

supported Buffalo Narrows and established the North West 

Credit Union which is a banking service to serve the whole 

area. 

 

And Buffalo Narrows has approximately 14 to 1500 people. It’s 

a vibrant economy. It’s being governed by Mayor Bobby 

Woods, and a council of six people. And Mayor Woods and the 

council have been doing a tremendous amount of work, Mr. 

Speaker. They have been beautifying the community; they’ve 

been talking about social development; they’ve been talking 

about economic development. They’ve hired a worker to look at 

the economic opportunities associated with the Buffalo Narrows 

area and the north-west in general. And they’re doing their very 

best. They’re doing their very best with the limited amount of 

dollars that they have, that the government gives them control 

over, to try and develop an economy at the community level. 

 

So the question we have here, is how does Mayor Woods and 

the council of Buffalo Narrows do it? It’s because they have the 

drive and the ambition and the pride in themselves to say, well 

this is what we are given, a meagre amount of money. We’re 

going to do the best we can with this money to develop the best 

attitude at the community level. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, they have needs as well, even though 

they’re in the middle of the main highway. They have 

employment problems. They have social development plans 

that they want to see done. And this is where we go back to the 

earlier statement, is that if you give Buffalo Narrows more 

support, more financial support to do economic planning and 

social development planning, then you will see that this 

community indeed has the intelligence to go a long ways. They 

have somewhat of an economy, Mr. Speaker, that can really 

begin to develop and build if you take away the restrictions and 

you support the local community, much more so than you have 

been supporting them from this date. 

 

So I think when we look at the whole community development  

scenario, Buffalo Narrows is a shining example of how well a 

community can get organized if it’s got a good, solid leader; it’s 

got good, solid councillors; it’s got a plan; it’s got some kind of 

economy developing; and that it can get the support and the 

efforts of government to really support what they want to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Buffalo Narrows is home of formerly the 

Westside Community College. And it was here in 1982 that 

somebody took the time to put together a program to teach 

people on television and radio production. And I was one of the 

fortunate candidates that took this TV and radio production, and 

I went to travel into Buffalo Narrows. 

 

And we stayed there with many other people. At this time . . . at 

this point in time it’s called the Westside Community College. 

And the Westside Community College more or less served the 

region. 

 

And Buffalo Narrows was a fine host community. They had . . . 

they put up some of the instructors, and they brought students in 

from outside, and they tried to bring training to the west side as 

best as they could. And there have been many, many students in 

the Westside Community College that has benefited from 

Buffalo Narrows’ hospitality and Buffalo Narrows’ efforts at 

treating the young people throughout the North. 

 

And what happens today, Mr. Speaker? We have a government 

that goes in there, and after many years of griping, we build . . . 

the government builds a new training institution, a centre that 

will house students and classrooms, accommodate the students. 

But, Mr. Speaker, while the building is a nice, nice, brand-new 

building  and both federal and provincial government should 

be thanked for that, you know  and certainly the community 

had a lot of work and effort to get that thing built . . . What’s the 

next step, Mr. Speaker? The next step is financing for training. 

They have a nice building there, but if you don’t have the 

appropriate budgets and the appropriate financing for that 

building, then what’s the use of having the building? 

 

(2045) 

 

So therefore there you go again, you did not consult. You 

should have sat down with the community and say, what can we 

do to address these problems. Let us take the time to sit down 

with you guys. Whatever it takes us, one day, two days, three 

weeks, or three months, let us find a way to change things 

around so that the Westside Community College can be 

re-established. The Westside Community College can then 

really begin to benefit the north-west as it did for many years. 

And the Westside Community College can stay in Buffalo 

Narrows and serve the whole, entire region. That’s what they 

should have done. 

 

But again we did not understand the impacts or we did not 

understand that the transition of the training dollar . . . We did 

not take the time. And this is the reason why, today, Buffalo 

Narrows . . . if I had any of my wish, if I had any opportunity to 

wish what I would have, I would say they should have never, 

ever amalgamated the Westside Community College with the 

Northlands Career College out of La Ronge . . . (inaudible) . . . 

$300-and-some-thousand building or just for a canoe. 

  



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

And I don’t know how many millions that facility cost, and how 

many more years it had taken to build the one in Buffalo 

Narrows. Now the question that I have is, how much of the 

Westside Community College budget was taken out of Buffalo 

Narrows and put in La Ronge to centre the Northlands Career 

College in La Ronge. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have no problem with the community of 

La Ronge, but they should not advance, nor should they benefit, 

at the Westside Community College expense or the people or 

the community of Buffalo Narrows. There’s no bloody way 

they should have benefited from that. And this is where it goes, 

Mr. Speaker, that they did not take the time to study the issue of 

amalgamation. They just went ahead and done it. And this is 

where we failed as government. 

 

We failed to help the people of Buffalo Narrows, the staff of the 

Westside Community College, and more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, the potential trainees, the students that could be here 

every day studying their sciences, studying opportunity in the 

mining sector, studying community development. And the list 

goes on and on and on. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Buffalo Narrows are telling 

this government, you give back every red cent you bilked from 

Northlands Career College for the construction of that building 

in La Ronge; you put it back into the Westside Community 

College and you give us back the adequate funding we once had 

so we can train our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again Buffalo Narrows is one of the busiest 

communities and one of the larger communities in the west 

side. They have a beautiful airport. They’ve got a number of 

services there and they’ve got a number of businesses there as 

well. And again there are many friends and family that I have in 

Buffalo Narrows. But really, Mr. Speaker, if you really want to 

support the community of Buffalo Narrows, then you should 

spend time, take the time to govern properly, take the time to 

listen to these guys, take the time to involve in their process. 

 

And the most important thing is, don’t ever, ever take out any 

money out of Buffalo Narrows that is planned for the Westside 

Community College and place them somewhere else. The 

Westside Community College is in Buffalo Narrows. They want 

that college to stay there. They support that college 100 per 

cent. There’s a need for the college to be there. So the big thing 

is, listen to the people of Buffalo Narrows and support their 

efforts on economic development, social development, and of 

course educational and institutional training. 

 

And again, we’ll go just a little further west of that, Mr. 

Speaker, the community of Pinehouse, Pinehouse Lake. 

Pinehouse, Mr. Speaker, as I just mentioned today in a 

member’s statement, that it’s just an excellent community. We 

have 1,200 people there as well, Mr. Speaker. For some odd 

reason the number 1,200 always pops up in my head because 

these are roughly the population figures of the people of 

Pinehouse. 

 

And this past weekend, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of 

attending their first ever grade 12 graduation in Pinehouse. The  

first ever grade 12 graduation. That’s a tremendous 

accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. Tremendous accomplishment. 

And I could see it in the audience that the parents and the 

grandparents were so proud of the seven people that were up on 

the head table there as grade 12 grads. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me give you just a brief history of 

Pinehouse. What does Pinehouse want, Mr. Speaker? They 

want a decent road, they want economic and they want social 

development, and they want respect. That’s what they want, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That road, Mr. Speaker, is about 100 kilometres. That’s 

probably the longest stretch of road we need fixed in northern 

Saskatchewan. And you look at the history of Pinehouse Lake 

in general. It’s got a lot of tourism potential, a lot of forestry 

development that could be planned for the area. And their 

mayor of course, Greg Ross, and their councillors are working 

very hard to try and develop an economy for their communities. 

 

And what do they have for the economy, Mr. Speaker? What do 

they have to work with to develop an economy? They probably 

have a $200,000 operating grant from the provincial 

government. Now what kind of community economy can you 

develop with $200,000 when you have all the other services that 

you have to deliver to the residents of Pinehouse? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s just simply not financially possible to do 

any kind of economic planning or develop any economy with 

no money. But, Mr. Speaker, somebody forgot to tell that to 

Pinehouse. Somebody did not pick a time to tell the mayor and 

council and the people of Pinehouse that they couldn’t do it 

without money, without governmental support. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re trying their darnedest. They’re using 

every available penny that they can to try and develop an 

economy in forestry. 

 

And you look at the whole situation again with Pinehouse, Mr. 

Speaker. I mention again, road, social development, economic 

planning, and respect. That’s what they asked for from this 

government, and for years and years they have not gotten it. 

 

I had the fortune, Mr. Speaker, of again attending the 

graduation ceremony this past weekend at Pinehouse. And I 

spoke to the people, and I told them what an accomplishment it 

was that the parents took the time to listen to the kids, not like 

this government not taking the time to listen and govern 

according to what the people want in this province. 

 

And the seven people that graduated, Mr. Speaker, you know, I 

couldn’t say anything more about the level of pride in that 

community. And many years ago, about five years ago, they 

had an excellent hockey team  very good hockey team. And 

somebody asked them how come they’d done so well; they 

must have had a coach. They said no, we didn’t have a coach. 

But the funny thing is, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t even have a 

rink and these guys are winning hockey tournaments. 

 

Imagine, Mr. Speaker, if this government would have taken the 

time to put adequate financing for the people of Pinehouse and  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

put in an arena out there for sport development, for cultural 

development, from the millions they made, the 20 or 30 years 

that they played in the North in terms of economic 

development. 

 

Now imagine for a moment . . . we’re talking about the 

Patuanak Pats, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to talk about the 

Pinehouse hockey team. The big thing here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

had these people got the proper coaching, the proper facility, 

they’d be a very, very competitive hockey team. And you never 

know whether one of them could have made the NHL. Never 

know. These guys were good skaters but they didn’t have a 

rink, Mr. Speaker. And that goes back all . . . all goes back to an 

earlier point, is for the last 20, 30 years, we have been speaking 

to deaf people when we tell them this is what we want; because 

consistently, Mr. Speaker, on a constant basis, the government 

has ignored our wishes. 

 

When I was standing up in front speaking to the people of 

Pinehouse, the one message I got is that they’re ready for 

change; they’re ready for challenge. And not to put a damper on 

the whole proceedings here, Mr. Speaker, but some of the social 

problems, some of the social problems of the suicide rate in 

northern Saskatchewan, this is a very depressing fact, Mr. 

Speaker. There are many, many suicides in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And you look at many of these communities, they’re all the 

same. They’re powerless. They sit in these communities, they 

have no control over the economies that operates in their 

backyard, they have no control over the housing stock, they 

have no money for social development, they have no money for 

economic planning. They get $300,000, or 80,000, or 50,000 at 

their community level to operate their community. How do you 

expect these people to develop an economy and rise up, and 

pick themselves up by the bootstraps, when they have 

absolutely no control, no say, over what goes on in their lives? 

 

How could they be expected to develop an economy when they 

have a system of disincentives, Mr. Speaker, everything from 

the social services system to the housing system that we live 

under, total disincentives. The whole system in the North 

penalizes the working people, it discourages people from 

becoming independent, simply because this government has not 

taken the time to govern accordingly to what the people want. 

 

Again, Pinehouse, another example of the spirit of the 

Saskatchewan people and the great human potential of northern 

Saskatchewan people, lies in none other than a person by the 

name of Gary Tinker. Gary Tinker was on walking crutches. 

Gary Tinker is a small person with a big, big heart. And many 

years ago you could understand one thing, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. 

Tinker was a disabled person in northern Saskatchewan and he 

walked down the streets of Pinehouse with his canes. He 

couldn’t use his legs at all. 

 

What did this person do, from Pinehouse, Mr. Speaker? He 

planned a trek right from Pinehouse to La Ronge to Regina. He 

took the time, Mr. Speaker, to raise the issues that are facing 

many disabled people in northern Saskatchewan. This was the 

greatest example of social development that I’ve ever seen. And  

as this small person was walking down the highways, gravel 

roads and hot cement roads . . . hot paved roads as well, he 

epitomized the hopes and dreams that many people of 

Pinehouse had for their own children. They raised the 

awareness. And the days and days and days of being out in that 

sun, and the many sores that he had on his arms and his feet, he 

did not quit. Not once did he quit, Mr. Speaker. He felt many 

times like giving up, but he did not quit. 

 

And that just goes to show you the amount of resolve that 

northern Saskatchewan people have, the fact that people like 

Gary Tinker . . . there’s many thousands of Gary Tinkers out 

there. And whether their fight is in economic development or 

disability awareness or social development, they’re going to 

keep coming and coming and coming unless this government 

starts waking up and taking the time to try doing something 

differently in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Well Mr. Tinker dipped his canes at the Wascana Creek when 

he arrived in the city, and he met with various officials. And 

after two years of negotiations and arguing — he said the trip 

wasn’t too bad but it was the negotiations after that that finally 

wore me down — they established a Gary Tinker federation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, today I really can’t tell you what the status 

of the Gary Tinker federation is. A great effort. And you just 

can’t comprehend the amount of hope that Gary gave a lot of 

disabled people in northern Saskatchewan. He finally raised the 

level of awareness. What does the government do? It doesn’t 

recognize it. 

 

These are severe challenges, Mr. Speaker. And we’re not 

making up these things. These are real life stories. 

 

So you look at the fact the Pinehouse hockey team come out of 

nowhere with nothing to use  great hockey team. Gary Tinker 

came out of nowhere with just his canes to use to prove his 

point. He proved his point. And this last weekend, going to 

attend their graduation ceremony, it showed that Pinehouse is 

determined to change the path that they’re on despite this 

government’s regressive policies and despite this government’s 

inaction to direct finance local economic and social 

development agencies so that they can begin to change the 

system that they live under; they have the control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot speak enough of the creativity of the 

Pinehouse people and the pride that the parents had in those 

seven kids that were sitting there getting their diplomas. This 

was their future, something that they worked for for many, 

many years. And as I sat there, I couldn’t help but feeling a bit 

of scepticism there, because after these people are done grade 

12 they’re going to travel out of their community to get 

training. What if they don’t get employment? What if they have 

student loan problems? Or what if they have housing problems? 

What if they have no employment opportunity? Where are 

they? Well they’re back on the Pinehouse streets, waiting for 

something to happen. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I urge the government to take the time to 

listen to people. Take the time to talk to the people of 

Pinehouse. And like many other communities here, they want a  

  



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

decent road, local economic development, social development 

support, and they want respect. 

 

And that’s the whole thing that we mentioned when I was there, 

is do not wait for government. They will not wait for 

government. They’re positive, powerful people. And if not the 

graduation, if not their hockey team, if not Gary Tinker . . . and 

their mayor and council are trying hard to work with limited 

funds to try and basically do one thing, is to provide hope, 

provide hope for the people. 

 

Now again I made an earlier point, and I’ll make it 10,000 times 

in this House, is the fact of the matter is if this province cannot 

help out 3 per cent of its population that is suffering from 

severe social and economic problems, then where in the heck 

has our compassion gone to? Where is our soul? Where is our 

mind? Where is our very being gone to if we can’t help out 3 

per cent of this provincial population? There’s something 

wrong somewhere and this is not a fair treatment of the people 

of the North. 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was indeed very pleased to be a guest speaker at 

the Pinehouse grad. I had fully intended to spent two or three 

days in each of these communities and perhaps two or three 

weeks to hear more stories of accomplishments, of support. And 

certainly Pinehouse is one community that’s not short on 

inspiration. Twelve hundred people, Mr. Speaker, have had 

many challenges every day of their life. They don’t live in 

cushy places. They don’t have nice, big, beautiful house to go 

home to. They’ve got severe problems. 

 

And you can hear all the chatter from across the room. Well 

that’s fine. They’ve had good lives. They’ve had good times. 

They’ve had some struggles. But, Mr. Speaker, at the very least 

they have opportunity afforded to them. And that’s what the 

northern Saskatchewan people want; they want opportunity as 

well. 

 

Again I’ll go from Pinehouse. I’ll go into my home community 

of Ile-a-la-Crosse. Ile-a-la-Crosse has a population base of 

1,500 people. It’s home of the Ile-a-la-Crosse Selects hockey 

team which I’m the captain of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I tried out for the regular tournament team in Ile-a-la-Crosse, 

which were the Ile-a-la-Crosse Colts, but I had no ability, Mr. 

Speaker. I was not an effective player enough. So what I’ve 

done is, after I was cut from the Colts, the first day in fact, I 

took the time and I said, if I can’t play on this team, I’m going 

to make my own team. And furthermore I’m going to select the 

players I want and I’m going to call them the Ile-a-la-Crosse 

Selects. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the last four years the Ile-a-la-Crosse Selects 

have not won one game . . . in the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker. 

The Ile-a-la-Crosse Selects have always been known to never 

play on Sunday on a weekend tournament. And many people 

believed because we weren’t good enough to make the next 

day, we’d be out the first day of the tournament. A lot of people 

didn’t know that we insisted on attending church  

Sunday morning. So if we had to choose between church and 

hockey, obviously church was more important. 

 

But the key thing here, Mr. Speaker, is we took the time 

amongst ourselves, a band of unwanted hockey players, and we 

played our hearts out, we played our minds out, and we also 

fund-raised on our own, Mr. Speaker. We never won one game, 

never won no prize money, but we played every tournament, 

Mr. Speaker. That just goes to show the determination, Mr. 

Speaker. And again . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I’ve been listening for 

quite a while to the speaker for a great length of time and I’ve 

given him a fair amount of latitude to what’s been going on. 

And I’m having a little problem tying in to the motion that’s 

before the Assembly, of what I’ve been hearing. And I would 

ask the speaker to keep the debate relevant to the motion that’s 

before the House now. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I guess the 

point of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is the whole process here that 

I’m trying to do, Mr. Speaker, is I’m not trying to stall the 

whole process here. What I’m trying to do, Mr. Speaker, is do 

one thing, is I’m trying to explain to government that they must 

take the time to understand what governing is all about. We 

cannot be pushed out through rules and motions — rules and 

motions of this nature — for the simple fact of politics. 

 

We’re here to serve the Saskatchewan people and we must take 

the time to understand what the Saskatchewan people want. 

And I hope to do that, Mr. Speaker, by the constant reference of 

taking the time to understand the Saskatchewan people, taking 

the time to understand the northern Saskatchewan communities, 

and what they suffer through. 

 

So in relevance to the issue we’re here, Mr. Speaker, the point 

is, we shall make the effort to understand. We shall take the 

time to serve our constituents, to explain to them what the 

problem is. And we go on and on about these northern 

communities. Well I’m urging the Assembly to take the time 

now  now  for no politics but for taking the time to 

understand what the northern Saskatchewan communities in my 

constituency are going through. And if we can’t take the time 

for that, Mr. Speaker, then what are we in government for? 

 

The second point, Mr. Speaker, in terms of Ile-a-la-Crosse, it’s 

of historical significance that Louis Riel Sr., the father of Riel, 

was born in Ile-a-la-Crosse. And in fact Louis’s sister, Sister 

Sara, is also buried in Ile-a-la-Crosse cemetery. And obviously 

the communities of Ile-a-la-Crosse took the time to research 

their history and found out that Louis Riel Sr. was born in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and Sister Sara Riel is buried in that cemetery. 

 

So we took the time, as a local community, to understand our 

history and that there is some connections of the Riel Rebellion 

that goes right back to Ile-a-la-Crosse when people wanted to 

fight for the basic thing we’re continuing to fight today; that’s 

the control of land and to realize the great human potential in 

the North. So in essence, Mr. Speaker, understand and take the 

time to understand the dynamics and the history of all of these 

communities. 

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

And today I look at my home town community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and the many people there. The many husbands 

and the wives and the children there that I know, all personally 

know, by their first name basis. They’ve all had a significant, 

positive influence on my life, Mr. Speaker  from the day that 

I was elected mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse to the day I stepped 

down. The big point is that these people certainly built my life 

and I owe to them as much of mine that I could give back as 

possible. 

 

So looking at Ile-a-la-Crosse, again it’s one of the larger centres 

in the community. It’s got 1,500 people; it’s got a friendship 

centre; it’s got a hospital; it’s got a nice arena; it’s got artificial 

ice in the curling rink. The significant things about 

Ile-a-la-Crosse is 95 per cent of the local businesses are owned 

by local native people of Ile-a-la-Crosse. So again, it goes to 

show you the resolve of some of the northern Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, even though my body and my mind is 

certainly here in Regina, my heart is still certainly back at home 

with all the people, and especially the older people there that I 

miss dearly every day that I’m sitting here talking about things 

that we should all have known many years ago, and going 

through motions that are meaningless to them. 

 

To continue on, going down to Beauval, Mr. Speaker. Beauval 

again has a population of about a thousand people. And the 

same situation, Mr. Speaker, is they want some social 

development support and they want economic development 

planning. Their mayor, Mayor Joe Daigneault, is one of the 

longest-serving mayors in the north-west and he is a very 

intelligent person. And as well, his councillors and the 

economic development people in that community have been 

working very hard to try and develop an economy for Beauval. 

 

And housing situation is also a big problem. And the key thing 

here with the Beauval is that they, like many of the other 

communities, have no tax base, very little funding from 

government, to try and solve the economic and social problems 

of the North. Well good luck. When we ask government for 

support, good luck. 

 

And several years ago, Mr. Daigneault, along with other mayors 

in the north-west, they came and met with the province. They 

came and met with the province here and they said, change the 

system or there could be civil disobedience. And that’s the 

whole thing, is that the civil disobedience thing was said, and it 

was made out of frustration because he could see that there was 

very little support being offered to communities like his and to 

many other communities out there. 

 

So in essence, Mr. Speaker, Beauval has a lot of potential for 

tourism, have a lot of potential for educational institutions, and 

has a lot of need for housing, social development, economic 

development, and respect. Again when these guys come to meet 

with you, meet with ministers on the government side, they’re 

not talking for nothing, Mr. Speaker. They’re seeing the 

everyday, real-life problems that exist in many of these northern 

communities. 

 

They see the problem with housing. Mayor Daigneault sees a 

problem with housing. He sees a problem with youth. He sees a 

problem with family support systems. He sees a problem with 

violence, and drug and alcohol abuse. He sees all these 

problems. Then he comes up here and nothing happens. So we 

talk about governing and taking the time to understand what 

government’s all about instead of going through silly motions 

of this nature. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll head out to Jans Bay and Cole Bay 

which is west of Beauval. And Jans Bay, of course their mayor 

there is Louis Morin. And Mr. Morin has worked many, many 

years with another former mayor and they had a lot of things on 

the go for Jans Bay. Jans Bay had under 200 people and their 

annual budget was somewhere like 60 or $70,000 per year. But 

200 people and you should see the tremendous amount of work 

that they’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’ve developed a new school there, they went after water 

and sewer  heavy, heavy lobbying and a lot of tough 

negotiations. And Mayor Morin and also Mike Blackman was a 

former mayor there as well, and the many other councillors, 

they worked hard. They worked hard for, you know, for the 

people, and now we see things are happening. 

 

And certainly if you look at Jans Bay, Mr. Speaker, for years 

and years and years they’ve been asking for a highway. And 

well, Mr. Speaker, today if you travel on Beauval to Jans Bay 

there is no highway. It’s the same road that’s been in there for 

the last 20 years, the same road that any member opposite will 

travel if they went from Beauval to Jans Bay. There is no 

brand-new road there. 

 

Now they can certainly say they’re building it, but how long it’s 

going to take to build and when it’s going to be done remains 

another story. 

 

Cole Bay mayor, Danny Bouvier, same thing. A lot of tourism 

potential, Mr. Speaker, in Cole Bay. They had been talking 

about fishing camps and they were talking about eco-tourism 

and they’ve been talking about housing problems and social 

problems. And all of these discussions that they’re having, 

they’re the only ones initiating anything, and despite the fact of 

the matter is you only have about a $60,000 budget that the 

town has. What are you supposed to do with $60,000? That 

hires one consultant to do a study that’ll tell you they need 

$800,000 to develop 50 jobs. 

 

So in essence, Mr. Speaker, Cole Bay and their mayor and their 

councillors, much like Jans Bay, they’re small; they have 

limited control; they have no extra income. And the government 

has not taken the time to go there and study with them what the 

opportunities and what the potential for change could be, 

working hand in hand, in partnership, with government. They 

haven’t done that. They have not taken the time. 

 

Now you wonder, Mr. Speaker, how many more years these 

communities can wait. Well they can’t wait any longer, Mr. 

Speaker. The problem is here today. And when I hear 

government talk about the 21st century  things are going to  

  



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

go great; we all got to prepare for that  what happens to the 

problems today? Are they swept under the rug for another 

hundred years.? 

 

So when I hear 21st century, Mr. Speaker, I urge the 

government, come back to 1996 and take the time to come here 

and look at these communities and see what their problems are. 

Today’s problems will certainly become tomorrow’s problems. 

 

Next door to Cole Bay and Jans Bay is the village of Canoe 

Narrows. It’s a first nations Indian band, Mr. Speaker, and this 

government, this first nations government, went through 

incredible turmoil several years ago. They were involved with 

the forest industry and through negotiations and cooperation 

and ongoing dialogue they successfully resolved this huge 

blockade they had out there regarding forestry. 

 

And the Canoe Lake first nations have taken the time to sit 

down with their people  every individual family resident in 

that community — they’re saying, what can we do to straighten 

out the problem. They didn‘t hold filibusters to prove their 

point; they went right to the solution, right to the people that 

had the answers, and they worked to put the answers in motion. 

 

And the chief there is Guy Lariviere, and Guy has been working 

constantly with his council. And several weeks ago I attended 

their first ever graduation as well, in Canoe Narrows  first 

ever graduation there as well, much like Pinehouse. 

 

And again the situation is the same. They’ve been asking for a 

road, they’ve been asking for economic and social 

development, and they’ve been asking for respect. And the 

whole situation here, Mr. Speaker, is this is a first nations 

Indian reserve. They have control of their money and they’re 

doing well. They’re doing well. You can see the level of 

optimism in people, because again they have control of their 

system. They have control of what they want to do. And I think 

Canoe Lake First Nation is a good example  another good 

example  of a northern reserve that can teach this government 

lessons on how to manage and how to serve people that they’re 

supposed to serve from day one. 

 

And we head into Green Lake, Mr. Speaker. Green Lake is . . . 

Of course, we’re all familiar with Green Lake. They’ve been on 

the news for many, many years fighting for one thing  access 

to wood for their sawmill. 

 

(2115) 

 

Their local sawmill, Mr. Speaker, for a small community of 700 

people, employs 30 families. And this sawmill under the recent 

. . . or in recent history was not guaranteed a wood supply. They 

asked for 30,000 cubic meters and just recently the government 

finally gave in because the government had no choice but to 

give in. So Green Lake, the mayor, Fred McAllum, and 

certainly his councillors, worked very hard to get some of these 

things in place. 

 

And we certainly can’t forget about their past mayor, Mr. Rod 

Bishop, who’s troubled many years, is now having health 

problems. But he committed himself to the people in the  

community of Green Lake for many years to try and get some 

of these things settled. And talking about the 12 townships of 

land that they’re fighting for; talking about the agreement for 

the forestry industry; and talking about trying to protect jobs in 

Green Lake — that’s what this was all about, Mr. Speaker, just 

asking for control of things, of the nature of land, 12 townships 

which the government knew they owed to the Green Lake 

people, and about the 30,000 cubic meters of wood that the 

government knew the community of Green Lake needed to 

survive. That’s what he was fighting for. And they’ve only gone 

one-tenth of the distance they have to go, but that’s basically  

basically all  on the part of the local government; both the 

mayor, Fred McAllum, his councillors, and of course past 

efforts of people like Mr. Bishop. 

 

And certainly Green Lake, like any other community, they have 

social development problems; they want to work on that. They 

have economic aspirations; they want support on that. And of 

course they want respect. The government should be here to 

serve, Mr. Speaker, to serve the people of Green Lake. And 

how do you do that? You give them some control over their 

lives. You give them some opportunity. And this is why we talk 

about a fair share. We talk fair support and fair effort and 

respect. 

 

Again, I go back to the point of Green Lake. These guys have 

been asking for years for better housing. They’ve been asking 

for the situation with the wood to be resolved. They’ve been 

asking about their 12 townships. They’ve also been asking for a 

home care centre for their elders. 

 

Many elders in that community are living in very poor housing, 

and they’re also living in crowded houses along with their 

families. And you can’t have elders raised in this fashion. And 

this is why I talk about governance, Mr. Speaker, about taking 

the time to listen to what the people have to say. Going through 

the motions of what we’re doing tonight is contrary to good 

government, Mr. Speaker. What’s the purpose of sitting here if 

we can’t have good government and good choices? 

 

Just west of . . . or east of Green Lake of course is Dore Lake 

and Sled Lake, and Dore Lake is a small settlement as well as 

Sled Lake, and Richard Lafleur, I believe, is the mayor of Sled 

Lake. And Mr. Lafleur has of course been around for many, 

many years and he’s been involved with logging and with 

fishing and with trapping. 

 

And they basically have a lot of potential there for tourism, Mr. 

Speaker. They’ve been talking about tourism quite a bit. And 

the whole tourism aspect that they have is based on getting the 

people from the South to go and enjoy the nature, nature in that 

region. They have a nice, beautiful lake and nice wooded areas, 

and of course they’re trying to have a balance between logging 

and tourism. And they’re taking the time to get involved heavily 

in forestry. They’ve got a lot of concerns on forestry and they 

let us know that. 

 

And of course just north of Sled Lake is Dore Lake, and again 

Dore Lake is primarily a small centre with very little money to 

operate with and they’re basically just doing volunteer work at 

the community level to keep the community operational and  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

certainly keep the community viable. 

 

And Dore Lake is a huge lake in itself. There’s a lot of fishing 

opportunity and potential. In fact people from Beauval migrate 

into Dore Lake to do some fishing. Of course Dore Lake 

residents themselves also fish, so fishing industry and wild rice 

and tourism are areas that Dore Lake could certainly benefit. 

 

But again you go back to the earlier point of Dore Lake, is that 

they have no control and no say and no economic support, nor 

do they have any value added processing when you talk about 

the issues associated with the fishing industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have just a few of the communities in my 

constituency that I wanted to make sure that the Assembly was 

aware of in terms of what their aspirations are. And I want to 

make it very, abundantly clear, is that this is what governance is 

about  about explaining to this government what these 

communities are facing day in and day out, of the economic 

problems, and more so, Mr. Speaker, of the social, human 

suffering that’s happening out there. Every day we hear of 

somebody that either has committed suicide or has attempted 

suicide or has been burnt out from alcohol or drug abuse. 

 

When you have people in the North that cannot be treated 

differently, it’s because we’re not taking the time to understand 

one thing. What is government? Government is serving people 

and if you don’t take the time to understand people and 

understand their issues then what are you in government for? 

And I go back to that same point  if we cannot help out 3 per 

cent of our provincial population despite our economic might, 

and where’s our compassion gone to? Right from the streets of 

La Loche to the streets of Pinehouse to the streets of Patuanak 

to the streets of Black Lake, there is young people  enormous 

potential  that is being wasted because we are not governing 

as best as we should. 

 

So my point, Mr. Speaker, is when you think about the North, 

don’t think of Buckley Belanger, don’t think of any political 

party . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the hon. member realizes 

of course that rules of the House do not permit reference by 

proper name to any sitting members of the House, and that in 

fact applies to himself as well. And I know that the hon. 

member will want to avoid doing that and I’ll ask him to 

continue his debate. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, you may have misinterpreted 

me. I said Bucky Belanger; he’s my twin brother. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I just simply ask the hon. member to 

avoid reference that might be interpreted as reference to himself 

by proper name, and proceed with his debate. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess in essence 

— we talk about some of these problems in northern 

Saskatchewan — it’s kind of a situation where we need to start 

really assessing where we’re heading when it comes to northern 

Saskatchewan. And I urge the government to take the time to 

really understand what the whole situation is about northern  

Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s about direct financing of local social development agencies 

so the people  the children and the women that are in these 

communities  can really begin to do their own planning. Not 

going through social government structures, because they get 

eaten up by huge wages and a government that’s not 

transferring responsibility as best as they should. 

 

And I go back to my point, Mr. Speaker. I got a letter here from 

Cecile Caisse, who is an outreach worker in Pinehouse. And she 

indicates to me that there’s absolutely no support whatsoever 

for social development; that she’s applied for some summer 

students’ work, and that wasn’t there. And there was only one 

position  half-time, for six weeks  that was really an insult 

to the people of Pinehouse. And that goes to show you, the 

Cecile Caisses of this world should be heard in this legislature. 

The stories that she has, we should take time to hear that, of 

how we need to really reassess as to a direction we’re going 

when it comes to northern Saskatchewan communities. We 

haven’t got a choice. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I refer to two articles here for exhibition, 

and I can certainly share it with the members opposite if they’d 

like. One is the oil sands project in northern Alberta, Fort 

McMurray in fact. When I said there was a $4 billion industry 

just 40 kilometres away from Garson Lake, I wasn’t kidding, 

Mr. Speaker. Here’s the article right here. Now we have a $4 

billion booming economy in Fort McMurray  jobs for 

everyone  and right across the way in Saskatchewan we have 

a community that suffers 80 per cent unemployment and 

tremendous social problems. 

 

Now what difference does 40 kilometres make, Mr. Speaker? 

It’s really a question of priority. It’s really a question of taking 

the time to go there and talk to the people of La Loche and say 

what you want. 

 

So I’d really like . . . If anybody wants to share this article here, 

I am more than happy to send it over to them so they can see 

firsthand the incredible opportunity happening in northern 

Alberta. And why it isn’t happening in northern Saskatchewan 

is totally beyond me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other fact of the matter is we look at another 

article here. This is of June 3, 1996. It says, “‘Hot’ fortune 

hidden.” That’s the headline. And this is in reference to 

McArthur River mine, Mr. Speaker. McArthur River mine is 

located in northern Saskatchewan, the far North, just around 

Black Lake and Wollaston Post area. And I quote from this 

thing, Mr. Speaker. Right here, it says here: 

 

“We’re 30-times richer than the richest gold mine in 

Canada. When you realize that, you see we have an 

extremely valuable property,” says (mine chief) engineer 

Doug Beattie. 

 

And further, as you go along, further down, he says that the 

potential opportunity in terms of what this thing could actually 

do is the figure of $8 billion industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

  



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

So we have a $4 billion opportunity just miles away from a 

Saskatchewan community, 25 miles, and then you have a 

northern mine site that says $8 billion could happen out of that. 

So when you add 8 billion plus 4 billion gives you $12 billion, 

Mr. Speaker. Twelve billion dollars that you could possibly 

potentially benefit from. 

 

Now if $12 billion cannot assist 3 per cent of the population of 

this provincial . . . of people, then where’s the problem? Why 

are we having a problem? Eight billion dollars. That’s a 

tremendous amount of money, Mr. Speaker. And yet we can’t 

get 200 kilometres of road fixed up? We can’t address the 

chronic housing shortage in many of these northern 

Saskatchewan communities? We can’t even begin to look at the 

impacts of direct financing of local economic and social 

development agencies, of respect, of giving them decent 

support? 

 

See, this is the whole issue I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker. For 

years the people of the North have been saying one common 

theme, is we don’t mind northern development but allow us to 

benefit from it  not through welfare, because welfare is 

killing our people, but through some good, solid economic 

planning, through some very thoughtful social development 

planning. And above all else, let us in on that system so we can 

design together a good system so that we can become 

contributors. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the point is, if this government can do that, if 

this government can do that, then the people of the North will 

certainly respect that. If this government cannot do that, then 

we’ve certainly got some problems. 

 

The real question you’ve got to ask is, why aren’t you taking 

the time? Why aren’t you sending out bureaucrats or teams of 

MLAs to go there and learn what’s happening so they come 

back and they can form policy on it, design a new system. And 

they go back to your same point, Mr. Speaker. I go back to the 

“‘Hot’ fortune hidden” property, and it talks about the 

international spot market prices for uranium now sitting at 

about $16.50 U.S. (United States) a pound, and expected to 

climb higher. And again, McArthur River’s high grade ore “is 

over an 8 billion resource right now,” Beattie adds. 

 

Now this is as plain as the nose on my face, Mr. Speaker, that if 

anybody says that the northern economy is not contributing to 

the provincial economy, then they have to have their heads 

examined. And if you think for one minute that the people of 

the North are totally benefiting from the mining sector and the 

forestry sector happening in the North, this is not the case. 

Otherwise why would we have a recurring problem? Why 

would Jans Bay have a $60,000 budget to operate their whole 

community with? Why would Turnor Lake be struggling for a 

30-kilometre stretch of road to be fixed up for years? You 

know, why would we have problems setting up a construction 

company in Stony Rapids? It’s because we’re not listening to 

the people, Mr. Speaker. We’re not taking the time. 

 

(2130) 

 

And these projects aren’t billions and billions in cost, Mr.  

Speaker. They’re just asking for their fair share. You know, and 

the other . . . some of the things that they’ve been talking about, 

Mr. Speaker, is earlier on I heard some of the comments that 

people made throughout time. And what they’re asking the 

government to do is one thing, is we can appreciate that it will 

take you time to understand our particular situation, but for 

years the government has been basing their development of the 

economy on looking at the mining sector coming in and 

creating jobs, and of course they’re trying to get the forestry 

companies to do the same. 

 

Now the big problem that the people of northern Saskatchewan 

say is that that’s fine; you can develop the mining sector now, 

but as long as you base the economy of northern Saskatchewan 

on the development of a non-renewable resource industry, 30 or 

40 years from now you are going to end up with holes in the 

ground and the mining company’s gone. 

 

Now that’s a short-term answer to some of Saskatchewan’s 

provincial financial problems, and the northern Saskatchewan 

people are more than happy to share their wealth with the rest 

of the world. But what they’re asking for in small exchange  

and this is why the government’s got to hear it, Mr. Speaker, 

they ought to take time to hear it and to listen  is they’re 

asking them to take a portion of those revenues that they get, 

and direct finance local economic development corporations or 

social development agencies, so that the communities 

themselves can become a self-sustaining community. So that 

they can design a system in which they can have a social safety 

net and a social support system in place for their young people. 

So they can have an educational opportunity for their young 

people. 

 

And the second part of the equation, Mr. Speaker, is of course 

economic development. They can develop opportunity in the 

renewable resource industries such as tourism, manufacturing, 

forestry, agriculture, communication, transportation, fishing, 

wild rice, and the list goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. And 

this is what they’ve been saying on a consistent basis. In order 

for these northern communities to come out of the situation that 

they’re under, you must have corresponding economic and 

social development planning. One works hand in hand with the 

other. 

 

And secondly, you must empower people to develop that 

system and to develop the whole process where they can benefit 

not only from the jobs created but they can also decide . . . the 

decision making lies with them, and more so the profits come 

back to them, so they can use that profits for other ventures. 

 

And it makes economic sense as well, Mr. Speaker, because so 

far the system has failed northern Saskatchewan people. You 

see the stats again. I’m not going to argue all day with members 

opposite, but the stats, you know, speak for themselves. If you 

don’t start doing that, giving people the responsibility over their 

own lives, then you’re really doing them an injustice. You’re 

making them more dependent on your system and that’s not 

good. No socialist in the world would want people to be 

dependent on them; they want them to become independent. 

 

And you give the communities one specific task  manage the  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

money as best you can in the same fashion that you’d manage 

money for your municipalities. We’ll give you the rules but you 

guys manage it according to these rules. But don’t make those 

rules, you know, too heavy because they won’t be able to have 

the freedom and the imagination that they wish. 

 

And the second thing is, you look at the situation as you 

develop the renewable base industries at the community level. 

Don’t compete with the mining sector. Certainly the people of 

the North can’t compete with large mining companies, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we must get rid of that myth that the government creates the 

economy. Really, private sector creates the economy. But 

government must put policies in there to make the environment 

exist; and secondly, government must put policies in there to 

make sure that benefits flow to the people on an even basis. 

 

So in reference to taking the time to understand what 

governance is about, is really relevant to this motion, Mr. 

Speaker. So the effort of doing one thing, is set up a fund or 

collect revenues from the northern mining companies or all the 

leases you have, channel a portion of that to social development 

under local control, a portion of that to economic development 

on a local control, so that the communities, over the next 5, 10, 

15 years, can develop opportunity and can develop control and 

employment for themselves. 

 

And then no longer will this government have to come up and 

bang on a table and say, we want you mining companies to put 

out 50 per cent on northern native employment. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, we could have a hundred per cent native employment 

in the North, not only native employment but native ownership 

and native control. And then, Mr. Speaker, you will see that the 

native people will rise to the challenge and we will no longer be 

wards of the province. 

 

So the issue is clear. We all know what needs to be done in the 

North. Everybody agrees. But leave the how to the imagination, 

the innovation, and the creativity of the people of 

Saskatchewan’s North because they’re just tired of the same old 

system. The madness must stop, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other thing that’s kind of bothersome here, and I’ve 

made reference to it time and time again, is . . . you know, the 

insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, is when you have political parties 

use the native people for their advantage. 

 

In this past election I was very appalled and certainly very 

disheartened when it come to politics in general when I see in 

one of the platforms of the Conservative Party was to put a tax 

on the Indians off reserve. And right away the point came up to 

me that, you know, there should never, ever be a political 

agenda at the expense of a minority people. 

 

The people of the North and the first nations government know 

that this was pure politics. They know that the Tories 

mismanaged this province to the tune of 14 or $15 billion. And 

they tried to deflect that very problem by focusing this taxation 

issue on the first nations people. They know. Every time it 

comes time to beat up somebody, let’s go to the first nations. 

Now certainly myself as a Metis member of this House, I 

encourage the government to go, sit down with the people and 

talk about the treaty situation, talk about the taxation issue. It 

was only through successful negotiations and really hard-hitting 

negotiations at times that we can come up with a resolution. 

And the treaty people do want to pay their fair share, Mr. 

Speaker. They want to be part of the contributors of this 

provincial economy, but you can’t do that by throwing politics 

into the mix and saying well, you know, maybe we put $15 

billion in debt here, you know, we got 9 per cent and we’re not 

paying 9 per cent sales tax. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know about you, but it doesn’t take a 

rocket scientist to figure out that 9 per cent of our provincial 

population paying an extra 9 per cent on very limited buying 

power will certainly not create any leverage to cover the debt 

created by the Conservative government. So when I hear them 

talk about high and mighty and how they should tax the Indians 

here and there and trying to put all the people in a position of 

compromise . . . not compromise, but difficulty, for political 

gain, it really does sadden me. And I say, what level have we 

come to as a Saskatchewan people to look at that. 

 

I guess the other thing, you know, when you look at, Mr. 

Speaker, just to give you a background of the reasons why I feel 

we have to understand, and the government also has to do that 

to understand, is that the first nations treaty rights has a history, 

and that history shows that the aboriginal people shared the 

lands and shared the dreams and aspirations of all the settlers. 

 

In earlier periods, Mr. Speaker, the aboriginal populations and 

first nations defended Canada against the battle that the 

Americans . . . that wanted to take Canada over. They call this 

the iron alliance where all the tribes joined the French and the 

English in the early years in defending this country. 

 

In 1885 the Riel Rebellion highlighted the alienation that the 

Metis felt towards the treatment of the federal government. This 

man, Riel, was hung for treason  for fighting for his people 

and for his land. From both the first nations and the Metis 

perspective, historical proof of their loss, Mr. Speaker, and their 

support for this country cannot be discounted. In essence, they 

contributed to the protection of the country. 

 

In most recent times, Mr. Speaker, the day I stood up and with 

all pride saw for myself that the native people continue to 

contribute to this country is when the northern Quebec Cree 

once again joined the federalist fight to keep Canada as one. 

The 80,000 northern Cree once again fought for Canada, even 

though they have been pushed into the far northern regions of 

Quebec and even though that they were, you know, threatened 

with actions against them. And you look at the fact that most of 

these reserves have been pushed north, pushed on land that is 

unproductive. And you look at the history of incarceration, of 

family breakdown, of severe social programs, a lack of health 

services, a lack of housing, a lack of respect  really wonder, 

was it worth it for the native people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Quebec Premier, Mr. Bouchard, wanted to 

break up the country. And what happens to him today. The  

  



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

native community once again, through the actions of the 

northern Quebec Cree, has sacrificed for this country, and to top 

it all off, the Quebec government continues to threaten them to 

this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question is, why? Why would the aboriginal 

population continue to support an environment that has not 

supported them? 

 

We all know in this House, 58 of us, that the aboriginal 

population is suffering. And day in, I try to explain to you all, 

the problems my people face, and day out these problems 

persist. The reasons why the first nations continue to support 

these treaties is that they wish to honour the past and follow 

through with the intentions of our forefathers, that they would 

honour these agreements as long as the grass grew and the sun 

shone. These were the phrases used, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in reference to the issue of using politics at the expense of 

the aboriginal people, we look at these facts, Mr. Speaker. 

Number one, the first nations do not govern in the same manner 

as we. It’s not a slap in the face of the provincial government 

when a taxation issue comes up, and we must get that thinking 

out of our head. 

 

The first nations have their own version of governance, Mr. 

Speaker. And if the government took time to understand that, 

they would realize that it’s not a slap in the face to this form of 

government, it’s really an assertion of what they believe 

governing should be for themselves. So really this is a 

government-to-government issue, Mr. Speaker. And again I 

stress to you, this is not an issue of them not respecting our tax 

law; this is really about past agreements and a separate vision of 

governance. 

 

Number two, the aboriginal population has suffered enough 

indignation as a result of some of the treatment that they 

received over a number of years. And the point is I know that 

they would trade off the 9 per cent PST (provincial sales tax) in 

exchange for all the social and economic problems that they’re 

encountering. There’s no problem there. 

 

And if you take the time to understand, when you see a political 

party try and advance at the expense of an oppressed people by 

fighting one small concession in a centuries old agreement, you 

really wonder and ask out loud what desperation is all about. It 

doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure that out; the strategy was 

there. And we all kind of followed through with that. 

 

Again encouraging economic development by Indian bands will 

ensure jobs, profits, services, and contribution. You look at the 

north-west, how this government got up and said, the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council contributes so many millions of dollars, 

through their forestry partnership, to the provincial economy. 

 

Well the Meadow Lake Tribal Council is first nations. Look at 

all the first nations all throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re contributors. They’re creating jobs. They’re creating 

taxes for this province. They’re doing all this extra work and 

they’re — above all else — they’re reducing the need for a 

social safety net. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is what Indian self-government is trying to 

accomplish. They want to become independent. They want to 

become their own government. 

 

Finally the last point is, we must look at encouraging all the 

governments to work together. A provincial government must 

work in cooperation with the first nations government on this 

matter. And I encourage dialogue and these thoughts would be 

on both minds when dealing with this issue. And therefore you 

really have to look at the intent of what is being accomplished 

here. The intent is not to deal with the matter  really it’s 

about politics and the ignorance of history. 

 

And I again encourage the provincial government to proceed 

with fair taxation aspirations and negotiations with the first 

nations. That’s what this is all about, Mr. Speaker, and I hope 

that I encourage all you guys that you look at the situation of 

why we have to approach the system differently. 

 

I guess the other matter I wish to raise in the north-west, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s of significant interest, is the situation of land. 

And we have a forest management Act coming up in due time 

here. And this forest management Act is going to talk about 

control again, control over the people. 

 

And I urge the government to take their time to go forth and 

discuss with the northern communities, and discuss with the 

northern people, what exactly do they want in this new Act. 

Have you had their input? Have you had their blessing? Have 

you had their involvement with this thing? Because you’re 

governing them. And if you don’t, then what is that saying 

about this proposed Act? It is saying that it’s government driven 

and the benefits are going to government once again. You flow 

all situations . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’ve been listening very 

carefully for quite some time and at quite length to the hon. 

member for Athabasca, and I note that the hon. member has not 

made reference to the motion which is before the Assembly. 

And in order to be relevant, his debate must link to the motion 

that we have here. And I’m sure that he’ll want to make his 

debate relevant to the motion and to help the Speaker 

understand the relevance. 

 

And I’ll ask the hon. member to demonstrate the relevance of 

what he’s saying to the motion that is before the Assembly right 

now. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess the 

relevance to the motion is that when you have Bills, proposed 

Bills, and you have a general order of government and the 

conduct of government, the intent here is to serve any people 

that you’re going to have a significant impact on. And this was 

not done in this fashion. And you can more so see the fact the 

motion here is not intended to fill out the obligations of meeting 

the needs of people. 

 

So really in essence, what I’m trying to do is to explain to the 

Assembly here that we have got to look at listening to people.  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2139 

That’s the whole intent of serving people. Underlining that 

whole thing is, time and time again, to serve the people. This of 

course is intended to simply delay the process and to get the 

session under wraps and really, Mr. Speaker, I would not be 

doing my job as an MLA if I did not explain to the people here 

today, while I still live and breathe, some of the problems of 

northern Saskatchewan people. So really we have to take the 

time to study these impacts of any Act and every action by 

government and if we don’t do that then we’re in deep, deep 

trouble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other significant differences in the 

North that the government did not take the time to go forth and 

understand is that many of these northern Saskatchewan 

communities are really in a situation of being not involved. And 

now I go back to the situation with the forestry industry in 

general. From what I can gather, is the first nations in the North 

are part owners of the mills that operate in Meadow Lake. They 

own part of the system that of course harvests trees and what 

not. 

Now had this government and the former Tory government 

gone into these communities and instead of going through a 

motion of this nature to prove a political point, had they taken 

the time to go in there and said, what can we do to resolve the 

differences between the Metis communities and the treaty first 

nations in relation to the land and the resources around . . . now 

the first nations are saying to most governments is that this is 

our form of government, we want to do it this way and that’s 

our way of doing things. And we have to respect that. 

But on the flip side you have the Metis communities that are 

given meagre amounts of money and their jurisdictional 

boundary ends at their airports. How could they develop an 

economy? Even in spite of social and economic development 

dollars, they still have to access the land. So when you look at 

the forestry industry in general, what happened was the old 

divide-and-conquer routine what was done. They allowed the 

Indian first nations to come on board with owning part of the 

industry in Meadow Lake but they excluded the Metis 

communities and the only reason, in my humble opinion, is the 

reason why they let the MLTC (Meadow Lake Tribal Council) 

in was to use them to play off against the Metis communities 

and because the first nations had money for investment. 

 

Now those were the reasons I feel that had the government 

taken the time to really understand what this whole thing was 

about, they would have really understood that the Metis 

communities had been ignored for many, many years. 

 

Now imagine 5, 6, 7 years ago, Mr. Speaker, that if there was a 

real, true, concerted effort of getting the Metis communities to 

become part owners of the forestry industry they would (a) of 

course, benefit from the profits of this venture and those profits 

could have made other, further profits. They could have 

benefited from the decision-making ability in terms of the 

management of land. The aboriginal people have a lot of 

allegiance to nature and to the land in general so they would 

have had . . . their internal system would have told them, protect 

the land at great lengths. 

 

And then secondly and third, you would have the 

decision-making power that the northern communities have  

been asking for for many years. Now what you have in the 

North, to understand the dynamics of the North, is you have 

seven or eight Indian bands own part of the mill that owned the 

forestry management licence agreement. And then you have 10 

or 12 Metis communities that have no say, no ownership, and 

no benefits from that. 

 

So you add that up and you can see that there is some 

differences between the Metis and the Indian people, that the 

Indian people are somewhat involved as small shareholders but 

the Metis communities are not. However, instead of creating 

animosity, which was the original intent of government, it has 

really created an allegiance between the two. They are now 

talking in terms of how they could get the Metis communities 

involved. But how could the Metis communities get involved 

when the government didn’t take the time to listen to them? 

How could the Metis communities get involved when the 

government did not take the time to give them appropriate 

financing to invest into this project? 

 

Consider for a moment, Mr. Speaker, if the government had 

taken the time to govern according to what the people wanted, 

to really govern according to how you can maximize benefits to 

the northern people from all the northern resource development, 

is you allow them to become part owner of this whole system. 

That’s the key thing. Allow the ownership component to enter 

into the picture, and the government never took the time to do 

that, Mr. Speaker. It never did. 

 

And when you talk about consultation you don’t go and say 

we’re going to develop the forestry industry and you go back 

and tell the government, well we consulted with them. That’s 

telling, Mr. Speaker. You’re telling the people what they can or 

cannot do. And this is where it’s really a crying shame in terms 

of how many years have been lost because the government did 

not take the time to get governance done. It ignored one 

particular segment of people in the north-west and that of 

course is always a sore point of many of the Metis communities 

out there. 

 

And imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, is after 10, 12 years 

the communities tell the government, our investments are 

paying off, we are now able to sustain our economies on our 

own. We have a social development plan that we put together at 

our own time, and we are able, from the profits of our 

companies, are able to ensure that social development happens. 

We therefore do not need any more of your social welfare 

dollars. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, we look at the whole situation with the 

Act. You look at the situation with the mill, and the whole 

intent is to have one thing happen  that the northern 

communities don’t have any influence nor any control of land. 

The Metis communities simply have their little boundaries and 

that’s it. 

 

And you can talk all day and all night if you want, Mr. Speaker, 

but there’s no way that you can develop any economies, 

especially with tourism, fishing, and agriculture, if we do not 

have proper access to land, to good planning, and financial 

support, along with the social development support system that  

  



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

is necessary for this thing to process as we all wish. 

 

The key thing here, Mr. Speaker, is you look at the role of 

government in general, in northern Saskatchewan if you allow 

the northern communities to be more proactive in the 

development of all the resource industries, then of course we’re 

going to take on more of the management role. 

 

We see some of the examples of Patuanak and their first 

nations’ policing force, of their justice system. They’re starting 

to develop those systems. And yes, they are in their infancy, but 

suppose you expand that opportunity to the Metis communities. 

Could we have Metis conservation authorities? Sure we can. It 

doesn’t have to be the province’s job to make sure that the 

northern people are not fishing out lakes and shooting out 

moose. 

 

The key thing here, Mr. Speaker, is you give the people the 

responsibility, they will rise to the occasion. So the whole thing 

of letting the people become involved with governance and land 

and certainly involved with the employment opportunity and 

the development of northern resources, it holds a tremendous 

amount of opportunity. There’s so much that could be 

accomplished with this thing, Mr. Speaker, especially in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is where the problem that we spoke about of not 

respecting the system and not looking at involving certain 

groups, excluding certain groups, it all adds to the frustration of 

many, many people. 

 

And what I envision when it comes to the northern forestry 

component and certainly of the responsibility of SERM 

(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), is 

that I envision, Mr. Speaker, a community of people that are 

financially responsible, socially aware, and economically 

developed to a point where they are able to take a much larger 

role in not only the development of policy but really in ensuring 

that land and all the resources are managed properly and fairly. 

 

The most significant point is that you can do all of these things 

if you would simply do one thing, is to empower people over 

land and over policy and over revenues that are derived from 

northern Saskatchewan. And any time that you look at the 

situation, Mr. Speaker, when you want to talk about stats, 

northern Saskatchewan covers 252,430 or square kilometres, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s half the province, Mr. Speaker. In half the 

entire province, just think about the incredible tourist potential, 

the fishing potential, the wildlife potential, the forestry 

potential, eco-tourism, agriculture  the whole bit, Mr. 

Speaker, for 3 per cent of the provincial population. 

 

This is where the government has failed through playing simply 

motions of this nature, and certainly trying to stall the process. 

If there is ways and means in which we can change the process 

quicker and sooner, Mr. Speaker, as government we certainly 

would. As government, we would do everything in our effort 

and everything in our power to make sure that we could change 

those things. 

 

And you look at the situation that we always say, Mr. Speaker.  

If you cannot help out 3 per cent of the provincial population 

that occupies half the land mass of this province, then where are 

we going wrong? 

 

And the reason we’re going wrong, Mr. Speaker, is simply 

because we don’t take the time to govern accordingly. We go 

through the motions of this nature to try and drag out the system 

and stall the system for the benefit of the majority. And I feel 

that the people of the Athabasca constituency have certainly 

been more than patient with some of these issues. 

 

The road issues are not going to go away. The housing issues 

are not going to go away. The social and economic problems 

are not going to go away. And the government hasn’t got the 

responsibility to make those go away. But where the 

government should be responsible, Mr. Speaker, is they should 

allow the means, both financially and technically, and certainly 

over the influence of land and policy, give the authority of that 

process to the people of the North. Certainly you can trust the 

land mass with northern native people and certainly with the 

non-aboriginal populations as well. 

 

So in reference to the forestry Act, Mr. Speaker, I see in the 

House here we talked more about the effects and impacts on the 

forestry companies when in essence we should have talked 

about the impacts and effects on the northern communities. 

We’re cutting huge chunks of land. And yes, the northern 

communities are involved with forestry development, but we 

always try, day in and day out, tell the people, what about the 

communities? 

 

Take the time, government. Take the time to go and talk to the 

Ile-a-la-Crosses, to the Pinehouses, to the Buffalo Narrows. Go 

see what they want. Govern according to some of their wishes, 

because they’ve been forgotten for so many years. Take the 

time to really begin to understand why we have reoccurring 

problems. Because they’re not in charge, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

never had any influence; they’ve never had any control over 

land. And recently, in some of my equations and my 

discussions and my tabulations and calculations as a result of 

estimates here, you know we can really see that the there is no 

significant dollars  no significant dollars  for social 

development; none whatsoever. There are no significant dollars 

for economic development. 

 

And I go back to some of the examples of the Pinehouses and 

the Ile-a-la-Crosses, Mr. Speaker. They got to fund-raise at 

bingos for economic development dollars. In 1996, we had a 

fund-raise for economic development dollars through bingos. 

Now that’s the whole problem. 

 

You look at some of the challenges of northern affairs, the 

social issues  the social issues  Mr. Speaker. Northern 

Saskatchewan has 21 per cent of all families headed by single 

parents  21 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, the entire province 

only has 12 per cent. So we’re almost double. And yet there’s 

no money to talk about social development. 

 

Saskatchewan has the third-highest number of teen mothers and 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has three times this high 

provincial rate of teen moms. Now this is really, really sad  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

when you walk into the communities of Pinehouse, which I do; 

and Patuanak which I do; and many of the other communities, 

which I do. And I have said this before in the House here. Take 

the time, go travel these communities, and look. When you see 

the little kids walking around, you know, and they . . . right 

away the first impression that comes to me in my mind is that 

child’s future has been determined already because of the social 

and economic oppression that’s happened to many of these 

northern communities. That child has got a severe challenge. 

 

(2200) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, look at some of these stats on northern 

Saskatchewan having three times the provincial rate of teen 

moms and Saskatchewan’s the highest in the country, then we 

know we got to do something differently. We know we got to 

change the system. And that’s the whole point I’m trying to 

make here, is that there’s got to be a new process in place. 

 

The northern leaders have been saying that for years and years 

and years. Give us revenue sharing, give us control, give us 

land. And in 1996, there’s no revenue sharing, no control, and 

no land. The treaties have some treaty land entitlement 

settlement that they’re owed and certainly the federal 

government and the provincial government were obligated to 

pay that. But in general, the land issue has not been addressed. 

 

So you look at the situation of the northern issues, the social 

issues, Mr. Speaker. You’ve got to have a new approach to 

northern Saskatchewan. You’ve got to take the time to listen. 

You’ve got to take the time to govern according to the needs 

and the demographics — the demographics of the North. 

Understand what’s going on in these communities. Travel to the 

communities. Spend a few weeks, a few days, talk to people. 

Say, what can I do differently? And that’s all they’re asking for, 

is respect. 

 

And you look at everything from the social issue, Mr. Speaker, 

to the education. The educational level of one-third of the 

population over the age of 15 is functionally illiterate compared 

to 16 per cent for Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

So again, you go to the mining companies and you say, well 

employ so-and-so. Well he needs his sciences. Some of these 

guys barely completed grade 9 or 10. So you’ve got to 

re-educate them and you’ve got to hopefully get them to fitting 

in some job that doesn’t require sciences. 

 

So you can see why the 50 per cent northern native employment 

stat is really an effort to try and fill the lower-paying jobs that 

are labour intensive, you know. And all of a sudden the cream 

of the crop and all the higher-paying jobs really are held by 

outside people from the North. 

 

So you look at the social issues, you tie in the educational 

challenges, and then you look at the fact that we haven’t 

empowered them, we haven’t discussed the land issues, and 

then this goes on for 10, 20, 30 years. Some people look at the 

North as a big corporate playground. You look at the situation 

with the lack of economic planning, the lack of social planning, 

and then you, just for good measure, let’s throw in the fact that  

you want to charge PST now to the Indians somehow. You 

know, it goes on and on and on where it’s getting more and 

more insulting. 

 

So really the point, Mr. Speaker, is that, how do you expect the 

people to really benefit from governance if we’re not taking 

time as government to hear them  if we insist government is 

this way, and if anybody disagrees with our way of governing, 

then we’re going to do something to discourage you or we’re 

going to get it through anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest issues in northern 

Saskatchewan, of course, is health. Health has been an ongoing 

problem for many, many years. Some of the mental health and 

social health issues facing many northern communities, Mr. 

Speaker, is the most alarming one and the most discouraging 

one is suicide. 

 

And this is not a situation where just the northern communities 

suffer from this particular problem, Mr. Speaker. It’s all 

throughout Saskatchewan. But the alarming thing is, on a per 

capita basis, suicide is very, very high in northern 

Saskatchewan. And what drives young men and young women 

to take their own lives, Mr. Speaker, is just a total sense of 

hopelessness. And there’s no support system in place; there’s 

no adequate programs in place; there’s just a total lack of 

commitment. And it goes on and on and on and on and on. 

 

And the point of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is this didn’t come 

all of a sudden one year ago, or that the government was told 

this was going to happen. It didn’t come 5 years ago; it didn’t 

come 10 years ago. This message was told 20, 25 years ago, 

that you’ve got to have proper social development in northern 

Saskatchewan if you want to have the people, in any way, 

shape, or form, change the destiny that the government 

basically has carved out for them  a destiny of hopelessness, 

a destiny of powerlessness, and a destiny of trying to just 

destroy our people. 

 

Now as people we get up and we talk and talk and talk and 

argue and argue and argue. We’re doing our job. We’re 

bringing up these issues. We’re trying our darnedest here to try 

and explain to the government what they’re doing wrong in 

northern Saskatchewan. Now if the government turns around 

and says, okay, we understand what you guys are all about, we 

want to enter in a brand-new era and change our system  well 

hold it now. We ask you to consult with us. We didn’t ask you 

to . . . we asked you to talk to us and get our agreement; we 

didn’t ask you to consult with us. There’s a whole pile of 

difference between talking and listening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, family violence, alcoholism, substance abuse  

these are some of the things that are really affecting, not only 

the people in general, but the really bad thing is the young 

people, the youth. And when you see five or six or seven or 

eight kids sniffing glue, you know, just to, I don’t know, for 

excitement or to escape their problems or whatever the case is, 

then it starts to hit home. 

 

You know, gee whiz, you know, these are kids that have a lot of 

potential. They’re much younger than me and you, and they  

  



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

got some ability inside them to really contribute to this province 

and we’re not recognizing that ability. Every single member in 

this world, Mr. Speaker, and that includes the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party, does have goodness in them. It’s a fact 

of the matter is, you got to explore it and you got to develop it. 

And you really have to get it out in the open so it really 

becomes an asset to you as opposed to a liability. 

 

Some of the issues that are dealing . . . when it comes to 

northern health and the situation with health, it’s hard to deal 

with these issues in the North primarily because of limited 

formal mental health services. Now recently mental health 

problems in the North  you talk about the population  

tremendous mental health problems, Mr. Speaker. Tremendous. 

And did you know that the entire west side, Athabasca 

constituency, hasn’t got one mental health worker. They had a 

temporary mental health worker several months ago, and due to 

funding cuts this person is no longer employed. 

 

So you know, you look at the limited . . . it says limited and I 

basically say non-existent. So really we have to look at the 

whole issue of governance again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How many more MLAs and how many more speeches must we 

go through here to get the government to start serving the 

people? How many more games? How many more policy 

sessions? How many more regulations meetings? How many 

more committee sittings? And how many more appeals must we 

undertake to get the government to listen? 

 

And this is the fundamental flaw with this motion, Mr. Speaker, 

is we’re not governing or controlling. And this is the reason 

why northern Saskatchewan for many years have not been 

heard in this Assembly, and this is why I think it’s important for 

me to do that at this point in time in relation to this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other problem that deal with the issues in 

health of course is the widely scattered settlement patterns. 

What that is of course, being half the land mass, and you see the 

tremendous travel that has to happen. There it goes again, our 

situation of local control. 

 

You can’t have a regional approach and hope to have . . . to 

maximize those benefits for health services if all your offices, 

and all your control, and all your decision making, and all your 

staff, are located in Saskatoon or Regina or even La Ronge for 

that fact. You simply cannot do that. 

 

When you don’t hand over control of social and economic 

planning to the local level, what message you’re telling the 

local people is that you’re not capable of running your own 

system. You’re not capable of designing a better system than 

us. You’re not capable of governing yourselves and you’re 

certainly not capable of controlling your lives. That is what 

government is saying when you continually insist on delivering 

services from a one-stop shop somewhere in the South or even 

La Ronge. 

 

So with the widely scattered community pattern, the only 

successful resolution to this process is turning control from the 

La Ronges and to the Buffalo Narrows and to the Fond-du-Lacs  

and to the Stony Rapids and on and on and on. 

 

The second thing is the conflicting jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, 

the conflicting jurisdictions between the first nations and the 

province and the Metis communities and the federal 

government and on and on and on. There’s thousands of stories, 

Mr. Speaker, of a bus or a taxi cab that can’t pick up a first 

nations person or it can’t pick up a Metis person because he’s 

only authorized to pick up treaty Indians or he’s only authorized 

to pick up emergency cases, and this is what we mean by 

conflicting jurisdictions. 

 

If you’re ill, if you’re sick, you need medical transportation or 

medical attention, it doesn’t matter if you’re Metis, Bill C-31, 

treaty, status, or non-aboriginal in the North, you should have 

fair access and good access to health care and health facilities. 

That is the key thing. The jurisdictional issues must be also 

addressed and this is certainly going to be a challenge. But how 

you minimize that challenge, Mr. Speaker, is you clearly have 

to make sure that you involve the people and you get the people 

to talk to you as government, as opposed to government 

consulting with people. We’ve been consulted long enough. 

Consultations of a government nature, certainly that doesn’t 

work. We’ve seen evidence of that for the last 20 years and we 

certainly hope we’re not going to see evidence of that for the 

next 20 years. 

 

The other factor, of course, is a factor that we all are kind of 

holding our breath up North when you talk about the issues of 

the North in terms of health, health services, is the budget 

restrictions. Like again, you go to the situation of half the land 

mass and there’s 3 per cent of the population scattered out 

throughout the whole land mass. And that’s going to be a 

tremendous challenge, Mr. Speaker, when you talk about how 

you’re going to, within this particular budget, you know, give 

services. 

 

If you’re going to turn over and hand over control and authority 

to a local governing board, then you must hand over adequate 

compensation to fulfil those duties, Mr. Speaker. If 

governments are looking at doing self-government basically at 

the expense of the northern aboriginal people, then it’s not 

going to work. It’s like me telling you, I’m going to . . . I order 

you to buy a car. You must buy a car, Mr. Speaker, but here’s a 

hundred bucks to buy that car. You know it’s simply not 

possible to do that so . . . and same thing with health care. If 

you’re going to make sure health care is a success or any effort 

of self-government is a success, then you must have the 

corresponding financial support and contribution and backup to 

that plan if you’re going to make sure it succeeds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look at some of the proportion of people in age 

groups in northern Saskatchewan, again still dealing with 

health. Really the problems in social health are wide-ranging. It 

affects all age groups. In northern Saskatchewan we have a 

heavy population of young people. I would go so far as to 

suggest that 65 per cent of the population has got to be under 

25. Just a tremendous amount of young people. 

 

Now you think you have social and economic problems now. 

Just wait till these children start growing up and start needing  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

employment, and wait till these children start growing up and 

start being bored in some of these communities. So in essence 

we do have five if not ten years to start getting these problems 

rectified and solutions put on the fast track here. 

 

And the only way we can do this, Mr. Speaker, is to make sure 

you involve the people. Don’t tell them what to do. Don’t put 

restrictions. Don’t put burdens and all these problems on them. 

You commit the same amount of money, if not more because of 

the challenges, and you ensure that they have final local control 

over decision making and allocation of dollars. There’s nothing 

that can beat local control. The people of the North, 

economically, have more sense than any one of us here in terms 

of what they foresee as an economic opportunity in their 

community. They have to sell it; they have to do it. And the 

whole process, Mr. Speaker, is just simply empowerment. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, continuing on with the situation of children in 

poverty, and I go with some stats here, Mr. Speaker. Children 

under 15 make up about 44 per cent of the northern population, 

44 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, look at the housing problems in 

the North, look at the lack of health services, the lack of family 

support, the lack of employment. Who pays that price, Mr. 

Speaker? The family man or the family woman who knows that 

they’re stuck in a system that they can’t break out of, a system 

of dependency that really has an effect on the self-esteem. 

 

But the people that suffer the most, Mr. Speaker, are the 

children. And again, these children, the children all over, I 

really marvel at the incredible strength both spiritually and 

morally that many of these kids have. Their life at this point in 

time, Mr. Speaker, may be relatively simple, but it’s still tough. 

And they are the ones that end up sleeping in crowded houses 

and they’re the ones that really have a lack of social 

development, of cultural awareness, of recreational activities, to 

develop their whole being. 

 

(2215) 

 

And if you don’t do it for the politics, Mr. Speaker . . . and 

that’s why the motion here is exactly saying what we all 

shouldn’t say, is that we should govern how we feel. We should 

govern according to what the people’s desires are, Mr. Speaker. 

And there are many children in northern Saskatchewan that are 

living in poverty  many, many children. And these are fine, 

healthy, adorable children, Mr. Speaker. And all they want to 

do is they want a different answer. 

 

So if a government cannot provide solution and cannot even 

provide hope for these communities, then what is that saying to 

us as a society in today, 1996  is that we’re failing our people 

because of the political system that we operate under. This 

motion really discourages me. I was really looking forward to 

trying to raise the awareness, and when we see the type of 

tactics happening in here, it really discourages me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m trying to look at the situation in the North, and I made 

that point often. If there’s one point that these guys would ever 

remember me by is the point is, why is it that we can’t help 3 

per cent of our provincial population with the tremendous 

problems that they’re having, is because we have lost our  

compassion. We have lost the role of governance to the role of 

politics. Mr. Speaker, we look at some of the situations you talk 

about in the North in general, and the point that we make here is 

when you talk about children, this is what this is all about, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We know that the government, the provincial government, is 

trying to cut the debt by close to $2 billion by the next election 

in 1999. We know that’s the plan; we see it in the Finance 

documents And the real question we’ve got to ask ourselves  

yes, we all agree the debt’s got to go, but at what cost, what 

human cost? 

 

And the other question is, where are you going to see those 

savings crop up? You’re going to see those savings crop up in 

social programs as social problems. You’re going to see those 

savings crop up in more health cuts. You’re going to see them 

crop up in suicides. You’re going to see them crop up in more 

and more human suffering. And that’s the whole point, Mr. 

Speaker, is if you want to govern, and you want to govern to 

serve, then why can’t we govern and serve and support 3 per 

cent of the provincial population that is suffering 90 per cent of 

the grief over the last 20 years — is because you’re simply not 

listening to people, you’re not hearing people. What you’re 

doing is you’re consulting people. Well consulting people, Mr. 

Speaker, has a totally different meaning to me as it would to the 

government. 

 

So the great human cost, Mr. Speaker, in ignoring the people of 

the North in the pursuit of economic independence of 

government and the control of government is something that I 

can’t support, Mr. Speaker. And this is why I’m speaking to the 

motion today. We must take the time to hear and to understand 

what affects Stony Rapids? What affects Pinehouse? Why are 

we having these continual social problems? 

 

If any of the MLAs or people within government travel to the 

North, stop and talk to some of the children. Stop and talk to 

some of the parents. When you pull into these communities the 

first thing most visitors used to tell me when they come to 

Ile-a-la-Crosse is, what’s in Ile-a-la-Crosse? What’s keeping the 

people here? And I tell them the land and our way of life is 

keeping people here. They look at the existence of these 

northern communities on purely an economic perspective. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of history to these communities, 

a lot of hopes for these communities. And all those hopes and 

the aspirations of the people are the real treasure in some of 

these communities. And that’s what you got to understand when 

you go to northern communities, is these are Saskatchewan 

people. These are not northern natives that you can push aside. 

These are people you must deal with because today’s problems 

will certainly become tomorrow’s problems as well. 

 

So what effect and what impact government have from here on 

in, and comes from northern Saskatchewan communities, will 

certainly have a bearing on whether we’re going to have a 

successful northern population or not. 

 

The other factor that’s really quite scary, Mr. Speaker, is some  

  



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

of the disincentives that are out there when you talk about 

northern systems that we live under, and the biggest problem, 

Mr. Speaker, is housing. We talk about housing in general. How 

could you for a moment talk about housing when there is no 

housing in the North in terms of markets. 

 

Now a good example is this young couple occupied a 

government house in my home community, and the government 

said  the young man went to work at the mine site and the 

wife worked at the school  and the government said, for you 

to live in that house, you have to pay $900 a month rent. And 

the guy said, $900 a month, I can’t afford that. You know, I 

work but I have three kids here or four kids, and I can’t afford 

900 bucks a month. Well that’s too bad because the rules are, 

it’s 25 per cent of your income must be paid as rent. This is low 

income housing program and if you’re working, we’re not 

going to help you. So the guy said, well can I offer you 500? 

And of course they said no, the policy stays. 

 

So in essence when you talk about governance, Mr. Speaker, we 

got to rethink how we offer program support like housing to 

northern Saskatchewan. This guy figured out that for an 

average-size bungalow in Ile-a-la-Crosse, he would have paid 

$235,000 for that house over a 25-year period. No housing 

market exists in the North, they said, so how could they justify 

charging a working man 235,000 bucks for a house that isn’t 

worth 20,000 bucks? You simply can’t. 

 

So what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that working couple and 

their three children had to buy a trailer at great cost to them, and 

they had to try and set it up at great cost to them as well. And 

they lived through a miserable winter, trying to get this place 

fixed up for habitation, and they’re successful. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the big problem that happened was . . . is 

what’s totally beyond me, is a month later the government then 

moved a family that was on welfare in there, with one child. 

Now what is beyond me is how could a working couple not 

afford a house in the North, yet a family on welfare could. 

 

Now the family on welfare needed a house; I’m not penalizing 

the people on welfare. They certainly see no economic 

opportunities so they’re forced to go to welfare. But what’s 

beyond me is why couldn’t the government show flexibility and 

show innovation in trying to resolve this issue. And even if they 

took the $500-a-month rent from this guy, they would gain 500 

bucks more. But instead they ended up paying 110 from one 

social services budget into another housing budget. So in 

essence, who lost? The Saskatchewan taxpayer lost. 

 

So really, Mr. Speaker, housing in northern Saskatchewan is 

just harming the working people. They say the housing market 

in northern Saskatchewan doesn’t exist. Well obviously it exists 

on a convenience basis for the government, that if they want to 

penalize the working people at will, they can certainly do that. 

They’re not making any concessions whatsoever to try and help 

the working people find accommodation and to try and keep 

them in their houses that they have. Because they have children, 

they should have a house, but because they have a job, a 

good-paying job, they’re being penalized. 

 

And if anybody tells you that you can go to the bank and get 

financing for a house, well I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, the bank 

will not in any way, shape, or form invest in housing in 

northern Saskatchewan because the housing markets do not 

exist. So the real estate association says there’s no housing 

markets; the bank says there’s no housing markets. How can the 

government justify charging 200 or 700 or $800 a month to a 

working couple? They can’t justify it, and they know that 

housing is hurting the working class of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So . . . and those are some of the disincentives. You look at the 

situation with, you know, with the economy in general, 

everything from housing to training to community-based 

economies, to control and influence over land. None of those 

things exist. None of them are relevant to northern 

Saskatchewan people’s wishes. They don’t ever want to see 

governments saying that we’re serving them because obviously 

if they were serving them, these stats I’m speaking about would 

not continue year after year after year. 

 

I want to say a few words, again, about some of the adults just 

to show you the contrast, Mr. Speaker  that adults over 65 

make up about 4 per cent of the northern population and these 

adults, Mr. Speaker, those are the strength of the community, 

these older people. And many a time because of the housing 

shortage, many elderly people keep their grandchildren. The 

young population, the young teen mothers  they have no 

place to keep their kids. Who ends up picking up the slack? 

Many grandparents, Mr. Speaker. Many parents that . . . 

grandparents that love their grandchildren, want to support their 

grandchildren  they end up picking up the slack and doing all 

the raising of the children with the help of the young mother. 

But certainly you have these older people living on fixed 

incomes. They are the saviours of many of these northern 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can’t keep counting on our old people because 

they’ve done so much already. So when you look at the fact that 

4 per cent of them are over the age of 65, there’s not that many 

parents or grandparents around. There’s many, many more kids. 

So that’s the situation with the elderly people. They’re doing 

their fair share. They’re looking after many grandchildren; they 

live in poor housing on limited fixed incomes and they don’t get 

the support that they so richly deserve. 

 

The other trend that’s continuing, Mr. Speaker, is birth rates in 

the North. They’re obviously higher than the South, when you 

talk about teen mothers, you talk about the young population. 

And the fertility rate is almost twice that of the province as a 

whole. 

 

So we know that the problem is constant and consistent, that 

we’re going to have many, many young people for many, many 

years, so why not plan accordingly. And that’s where it all goes 

to the simple fact, Mr. Speaker, in reference to the motion here, 

is we must govern according to the demographics, to the 

aspirations, in the particular circumstances of northern 

Saskatchewan’s people. 

 

Life expectancy for the North, Mr. Speaker, is a lot lower for  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

males and females in the North. And what’s that saying, Mr. 

Speaker, is that life in northern Saskatchewan is not as special 

as a life in southern Saskatchewan, and we really have to look 

at some of these things. 

 

And the high youth dependency ratio in the North, the ratio of 

those under 15 to those between 15 to 64. So what that’s saying 

is that there’s a heck of a pile of young people and if you don’t 

have the corresponding social programs, and the recreational 

programs, and the proper facilities, then you’re just simply 

saying you’re giving up on this particular group of people. And 

if you give up on them, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to find their 

own way of entertaining themselves. They’re going to take 

matters into their own hands. And we all know if you leave a 

young bunch of kids unsupervised and with no support, that can 

only spell trouble. 

 

And in the end, Mr. Speaker, if you do not start doing things 

differently for the people, then what you’re going to end up 

having is a tremendously constant stream of social programs 

with a constant number of young people. It’s not going to 

change. 

 

I guess in essence, Mr. Speaker, in the North males outnumber 

females by a wider margin than other regions in Saskatchewan. 

There’s many more men in the North and this could certainly 

. . . I know I can support that fact, Mr. Speaker, because I was 

cut from a hockey team. The competition was quite great and I 

wasn’t all that good of a hockey player, Mr. Speaker, but I 

thought I had a chance to make it. But the competition was 

good and fierce and obviously with . . . (inaudible) . . . like this 

no one can blame me for not making the Colts hockey club. 

 

And I guess the other factor is you look at how the population is 

distributed, the breakdown of population. In the population of 

32,000 people there are 40 recognized permanent communities 

in northern Saskatchewan. So you divide . . . 40 divided by 32, 

you can see the tremendous concentration of people and 

problems in one small section of land. 

 

And you got that much problems and that many challenges, 

how could you expect local governments to change the system 

overnight without good, solid provincial government support, 

Mr. Speaker? You simply cannot and you cannot expect local 

governments to do that based on the small amount of money 

that they are granted, and the fact that they have no control, and 

the fact that there’s no innovative government measures. That’s 

why item no. 7, from the proposed motion by Mr. Shillington, I 

simply cannot support that. And so we had to look at different 

ways of exciting and innovative governments. 

 

Population density, Mr. Speaker, now we can speak another 

couple of hours on that. The situation with density is it’s .24 per 

square mile. And the province as a whole, Mr. Speaker, is 4.12 

persons per square mile. 

 

Now I want to ensure you guys that once we’re done this 

particular segment we’re going to . . . of course being fair, as 

we always are, we’re going to do this in Cree for the Cree 

audience, so they’re able to hear what we have to say about this 

particular problem. 

So we look at the density situation, Mr. Speaker. It’s not going 

to be an easy job to provide regional service. So again, it goes 

back to our same old philosophy, is give local people local 

control, and local ability to control the outcome. Then and only 

then, sir, are you able to really make a difference. They know 

what needs to be done and only they can determine the best 

future for themselves and their children, and certainly their 

community. I guess the other factor, Mr. Speaker, is in terms of 

what we think needs to happen to support the social health 

effort, is the social and mental health problems that . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  It now being 10:30, this House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTIONS 

 Extended Hours 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2115 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2116 

 


