


















































June 4, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2147 
 June 4, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 
behalf of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
with respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre in 
Regina. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Melville, from Balcarres, 
from Craven, and some signatures from Regina. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Melville, Bangor, 
Stockholm, Waldron, Atwater, and other Saskatchewan 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle, White City, Broadview, and 
communities throughout southern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan 
residents regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina and Weyburn, but the majority are from the community 
of Yellow Grass. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from a number of 
communities in southern Saskatchewan and also from the city 
of Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, 
Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise to 
present a petition of names from concerned citizens throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many concerned citizens 
from the communities of Moose Jaw, Parkbeg, Mortlach, 
Avonlea, Willow Bunch, Strasbourg, as well as Pilot Butte, 
Stoughton, and some from Regina as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan citizens concerning the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Sedley, Grenfell, Nipawin, Ogema, 
Wolseley, Sintaluta, and then going into my constituency, the 
community of Mossbank. We also have the city of Moose Jaw 
represented here, as well as Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
  



2148  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from Regina here. They’re also from Preeceville. 
They’re from Southey. They’re from Assiniboia, Carnduff, 
Lemberg, and they’re from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, on 
day no. 65; the 65th day that I’ve been with my colleagues and 
the people in Saskatchewan in their efforts to save the Plains 
Health Centre. And so I’m bringing forward this petition today, 
Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have pages and pages and pages of people, and it 
looks like these are from the . . . basically from the Regina . . . 
and in particular Regina Elphinstone and Regina Albert South 
constituencies. I so present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very proud on behalf of some citizens from Saskatoon and 
Asquith, to present petitions on the Saskatoon Family Support 
Centre: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Department of Social 
Services of the province of Saskatchewan to reconsider 
their decision to reduce these programs, and to return the 
programs of the Saskatoon Family Support Centre to their 
previous level of delivery of service. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed. Pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
urge the Department of Social Services to reconsider the 
decision to reduce parent education support programs. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you, in the east gallery today, a 
group of students from grade 6 to 9 from the Countryside 
School in Saltcoats. Their teacher is also present with them 
today, Ray Isaac, and some of their chaperons are Norman and 
Darlene Wohlgemuth, Burt and Irene Friesen, Roland and Ann 
Warkentin, Reg and Rena Penner, Sheryl Isaac, Carol 
Wohlgemuth. 
 
I would like to ask the members of the Assembly to welcome 
them here today, and I will be meeting with them at 2:30. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce in the west gallery, a fellow from my constituency. 
And I have to tell him I hate to keep meeting like this, but it’s 
either that or read the Hansards which Paul does faithfully. I 
have valued Paul’s political advice in the time I’ve known him. 
And I thank you for joining us today. You can see we’ve worn 
most of our other guests out, and it’s a lonely task these days. 
So thank you for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, a couple of ladies who have 
been here to watch the proceedings many times in the past 
while. And they’re in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Firstly I’d like to introduce you to Vicki Lissel. Vicki has been 
heading up the Saskatchewan chapter of the hepatitis C society. 
She also just returned from Toronto where she was present for 
the continuing proceedings for the Krever inquiry. 
 
With her is Bonnie Soerensen. Bonnie has also been active in 
the fight for compensation for people infected by tainted blood. 
Both of these women are here today to watch the proceedings in 
the House, and I’d ask that we welcome them warmly here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Tourism Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From the 
beginning of the session, members have made statements 
inviting the public to our constituencies for a wide and exciting 
variety of events, announcements that prove there is something 
in Saskatchewan for every tourist. I suspect there will be even 
more announcements every day. 
 
With that in mind, I’m happy to recognize this as Saskatchewan 
Tourism Awareness Week, June 3 to 9, in the province. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, tourists spend about a billion 
dollars a year in Saskatchewan, thereby contributing to an 
estimated 40,500 full-time and part-time jobs for Saskatchewan 
families and young people. 
 
Special events and activities are planned this week to emphasize 
the garden of delights that we offer the tourists to our province 
under the 1996 theme, Saskatchewan Vacations: Good as Gold. 
This theme recognizes both the economic value of tourism to 
the province, and Tourism Saskatchewan’s new Great 
Saskatchewan Gold Rush campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may recall that under the leadership of the 
Minister of Economic Development, Saskatchewan formed 
Saskatchewan’s first Tourism Authority, and recently the 
industry-driven partnership was strengthened by the merger of  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

the Tourism Authority with the Tourism Industry Association 
of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Tourism Education 
Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members to join with me in commending 
the vision and hard work of everyone involved during 
Saskatchewan Tourism Awareness Week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Providence Place Protest 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This coming 
Wednesday, yet another public meeting will take place about 
this government’s cuts to health care, this time in Moose Jaw. 
This meeting is sponsored by a committee of community groups 
who joined together several years ago for the purpose of 
building Providence Place and its world-class geriatric unit. 
 
These residents committed countless hours and millions of 
dollars to help build this facility, only to discover that this 
government wouldn’t honour its commitment to operational 
funding for the geriatric unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands of people are concerned about the 
threatened closure of this unit. I would like to send the Minister 
of Health some letters from concerned residents. Later today, 
Mr. Speaker, I will deliver to the minister over 1,300 more 
letters from people who oppose this government’s decision to 
cut funding to the geriatric unit. That will bring the total 
number to almost 4,000. 
 
In closing, I urge the minister to follow the example of 
community groups that helped build the geriatric unit. Come to 
Moose Jaw and tell them you’ll make good on your 
commitments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Saskatchewan Children’s Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
for the past eight years there has been an event held in 
downtown Saskatoon that’s tailor-made for children. The 
annual Northern Saskatchewan Children’s Festival begins today 
in Kiwanis Park and runs until Saturday. 
 
Children and their families from across central and northern 
Saskatchewan will be attending the festival, which includes 
various performing arts such as vaudeville, clowns, acrobats, 
musicians, actors, and jugglers. There are 49 performances of 
11 different shows involving local talent and artists from across 
the country. 
 
These performances include a musical duo who will show 
Saskatchewan children what Newfoundland life and music is all 
about; a colourful group of dancers and musicians from 
Manipur, India; the Rymers from Northern Ireland will perform 
music, mime, and storytelling; and Beatlemania-Fab Four 
look-alikes from New York with their wonderful Broadway 
tribute to the Beatles. 

Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Festival is expected to attract about 
20,000 people and is always a popular event in Saskatoon. I 
encourage everyone to attend the Northern Saskatchewan 
Children’s Festival along the riverbank in downtown 
Saskatoon. I am sure it will be educational and lots of fun and 
provide an opportunity for children and their families to share 
good times together. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passing of George Leith 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to today 
extend my condolences to the family of George Leith, who 
passed away on Friday. He had spent many, many years serving 
the Canadian public. 
 
Mr. Leith served two terms in this House as an elected 
representative of the Liberal Party for the constituency of 
Eston-Elrose. He was first elected in 1964. He went on to 
continue his political career as a special assistant to Eugene 
Whelan. Mr. Leith also served on the Canadian Grain 
Commission and the National Committee on Grain 
Transportation. 
 
I’m sure that all my colleagues in the House will join with the 
official opposition in extending condolences to George’s friends 
and family across western Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Children’s Miracle Network 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 
like to congratulate the Children’s Miracle Network, STV 
(SaskWest Television), and SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network Corporation), on a tremendously 
successful telethon this past weekend. 
 
Last Sunday, the Children’s Miracle Network raised well over 
half a million dollars for 160 organizations throughout the 
province. The telethon was broadcast from 7 p.m. on Saturday 
through to 4 p.m. on Sunday on both SCN and STV. It was run 
by volunteers from the stations and from the Children’s Health 
Foundation. STV in Saskatoon lined up 30 volunteers  
announcers, technicians, and other staff members  to help 
with the event. 
 
The Children’s Miracle Network will use the money to fund 
organization and projects that provide patient care, research, 
and health education. The Children’s Health Foundation is a 
good example. The foundation hopes to unlock the mysteries of 
some rare childhood diseases and improve the safety, welfare, 
and health of Saskatchewan children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the spirit of Saskatchewan was shining through on 
Sunday as people through the province showed their support 
and generosity for the project. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Children’s Miracle Network on 
a tremendous fund-raiser, and thank the volunteers for their  
  



2150  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

time and commitment and for making the telethon a big 
success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passing of George Leith 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the Leader of the Opposition in extending our 
condolences to the George Leith family. Mr. Leith represented 
the Eston-Elrose constituency for two terms in the ‘70s. My 
home is within the old Eston-Elrose constituency and I had 
occasion to meet Mr. Leith on brief visits. 
 
Mr. Leith was a respected representative and I’m sure he will be 
missed by many. I had occasion to become also good friends 
with one of Mr. Leith’s son-in-laws, Mr. Brent Bannister. Mr. 
Leith is survived by a loving family and we extend our most 
sincere condolences to the Leith family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ranch Ehrlo Society Sod-turning Ceremony 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday I was 
happy to take part in the sod-turning ceremony for the new 
school building of the Ranch Ehrlo Society which is located 
near Pilot Butte in my constituency. 
 
As well as celebrating the new building for the Schaller School, 
the staff, the students, and friends of the Ranch Ehrlo Society 
took advantage of the day to mark its 30th anniversary of 
service to Saskatchewan youth and families  an anniversary 
that is truly a reason for celebration. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the Ranch Ehrlo Society is a 
non-profit organization which now operates 10 group homes in 
and around Regina as well the campus near Pilot Butte. 
Residents are from 8 to 18. The special educational needs of the 
student residents are provided at Schaller School. In addition, 
integrated elementary and high school classrooms are located in 
Regina schools. 
 
Over the years, Ranch Ehrlo has changed its programing to 
meet the needs of children who are not served by more 
mainstream programs and it’s approach has worked because of 
its committed and caring staff and because of the community 
support it relies so heavily upon, such as the donations that are 
provided for the building of the new school. Our province will 
also be contributing $400,000 over the next 5 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ranch Ehrlo is one of a kind in Saskatchewan, but 
like all of our schools it is preparing its students for their 
entrance into the new century. I congratulate the society for its 
work over 30 years and wish it well in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

30th Anniversary of Ranch Ehrlo 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to pass  

along congratulations on behalf of the official opposition to all 
the staff and supporters of the Ranch Ehrlo program who 
recently gathered to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the 
program. 
 
Ranch Ehrlo offers a unique program in Saskatchewan for the 
treatment of troubled youth. It is also one of the few places in 
Canada that is pioneering a program to battle solvent abuse. 
 
When it first started 30 years ago, six youth were in the 
program and were cared for by about 20 staff members. Over 
the years, Ranch Ehrlo has developed and grown. Today it 
employs 150 full-time staff members along with 40 part-time 
workers. The society now looks after about 90 youth. The 
programs currently offered at Ranch Ehrlo include education, 
work training, and counselling. 
 
I would like to congratulate all the people who have worked so 
very hard to foster Ranch Ehrlo’s growth. And I would also like 
to commend all the youth who pass through the program and 
who have used the skills they have learned at that place to better 
their lives. Thank you. 
 

Regina Big Brothers Golf Tournament  
and 25th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The ninth annual Big 
Brothers Texas Scramble Golf tournament was held May 31 at 
Emerald Park Golf Club. More than $12,000 was raised at this 
fun event. I’ll announce the winners of the golfing prowess in a 
minute. 
 
But first, Mr. Speaker, this year marks Regina Big Brothers 
25th anniversary, a special year for two very special groups. 
First, the many young boys who have benefited by having an 
outside-the-family person who cares and who shares time and 
events with their little brother. Second, the Regina Big Brothers 
Association that need our collective support to carry on their 
service to humanity. 
 
Regina Big Brothers have an number of events lined up this 
year. Needed to help make these events happen are: big 
brothers; new board members; runners for the Big Brothers 
Torch Run from Regina to Moose Jaw, August 3, 
commemorating the Saskatchewan Summer Games; and fourth, 
ticket sellers and promoters for the Message in a Bottle event. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the moment we’ve been waiting for, the 
golfing prowess. At seven under par the winners were: Dave 
Ferguson, founder of the Prairie League Professional Baseball 
League; Les Wallace of IBM; and the member for Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Contributions Disclosure 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, given 
some rather startling revelations in just the recent past, I would  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2151 

like to bring to the attention of this House a copy of the report 
of the Chief Electoral Officer on the annual fiscal returns of 
registered political parties in Saskatchewan for the period 
January 1, 1995 to December 31, 1995. 
 
The report states, and I quote: 
 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 
disclosed that contributions to the P.C. Lotto Saskatchewan 
fund established by the party in 1988 were inadvertently 
not disclosed in the party’s annual fiscal returns for the 
years 1988, 1989, and 1990. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this statement is a clear admission that even the 
new PC (Progressive Conservative) Party acknowledges that 
disclosure should have been made in the appropriate fiscal year. 
 
Will the Minister of Justice explain, as a result of questions that 
have been fuelled by these recent revelations, if it were found 
that MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) or the party 
represented are in contravention of The Elections Act and if the 
new PC Party have used a secret fund to aid an election 
campaign, what penalties would be imposed and would the 
election of such members become null and void? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I take this question 
because of the responsibility that I hold for The Elections Act 
which I have been discussing with the members opposite for 
some months now. The situation raised by the member is, I 
understand, in the hands of the appropriate authorities including 
the Chief Electoral Officer. And our indication is to wait until 
we receive advice from him and from other officials who will 
be interested in the question. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
response. And under section 210 of The Elections Act it states 
that all donations received by individuals, corporations, and 
organizations to a political party must be disclosed in that fiscal 
year. Will the minister explain if there is an exemption of these 
rules for the new PC Party, and what action is the minister or 
his department prepared to take today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
member’s question I’m not aware of any exemptions that were 
accorded to anybody. As I said to the member, this situation is 
in the hands of the Chief Electoral Officer and we are going to 
be awaiting his report. 
 
In the meantime the new Elections Act is in front of the House 
and I’ll be talking to members opposite about what might be 
appropriate so far as that Act is concerned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible Wilkie Hospital Closure 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The official 
opposition has demonstrated how the sick and the elderly have 
become victims of this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government’s chronic under-funding of our health care system. 
Now it appears that this government is directing its venom at  

the most defenceless in our society, the severely disabled, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because of this government’s actions of course, which is the 
offloading to the health districts, the Wilkie Hospital may be 
closed. As a result, 10 severely disabled young people who are 
provided with 24-hour care and therapy may be forced to move. 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain why his government is 
abandoning the most vulnerable members of our society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, implicit in the question 
from the member is the implication that the Greenhead Health 
District, which is responsible for the Wilkie Hospital, will be 
abandoning the people that live in the Wilkie Hospital. 
 
And I want to say to the member and to the House and to the 
public that of course that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
heard allegations from the opposition before that seniors are 
going to be thrown out on the street. Now we’re hearing that 
handicapped people are going to lose their homes. And I can 
assure the House of one thing, Mr. Speaker, and that is that if 
there are handicapped people, and I believe there are 10 in the 
Wilkie Hospital that need to be cared for, they’re going to be 
cared for, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to be cared for today as 
they have been in the past, and they’ll be cared for in the future. 
And the member knows that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact is that this 
government has severely downloaded and offloaded to the 
health districts. That is why the problems arise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My office spoke, Mr. Speaker, this morning with the mayor of 
Wilkie. Wally Lorenz says that these disabled patients need the 
care and therapy they get at the Wilkie Hospital. He suggests 
their lives will be placed in jeopardy if not provided the quality 
of care they now receive. Simply moving them to a long-term 
care facility will not provide them with the level of care that 
they require or in fact deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government appears bent on meeting its 
bottom line regardless of who they hurt along the way. In this 
case they have chosen a target that cannot speak for themselves. 
Obviously the humane side of health care no longer exists in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister make a commitment in this 
House today to intervene and protect the disabled residents of 
the Wilkie Hospital? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, if it is the member’s 
argument that these multiply handicapped individuals are not 
going to be cared for, then I say that the member has no 
argument because we live in a humane society, Mr. Speaker. 
The government is humane; the district health board is humane. 
  



2152  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

No decision has been taken by the district health board  no 
decision has been taken by the district health board in this 
matter, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell the member that when and if 
a decision is taken by the district health board, that decision will 
be to provide these multiple-handicapped individuals with the 
very heavy care that they need, Mr. Speaker. And for the 
member to suggest otherwise is just playing politics, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 
 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday I called on the Minister of Health to show some 
compassion and provide compensation to those who contracted 
hepatitis C through no fault of their own. 
 
I brought to the attention of the minister a specific case 
involving Bonnie Soerensen whose six-year-old son has this 
life-threatening disease. I indicated that she had contacted the 
minister’s office eight months ago, but her calls were not 
returned and she was provided no information. The minister 
denied this accusation, indicating to the media that his office 
did provide the information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bonnie Soerensen says she was outraged to hear 
Friday’s comments because she received absolutely nothing in 
the way of information or assistance from the minister or his 
office. Will the Minister of Health explain if he intentionally 
misled the House, and will he apologize to Bonnie Soerensen? 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Now the hon. 
member knows that he cannot do indirectly what the rules do 
not permit him to do directly, and the rules clearly do not permit 
him to do directly, to accuse the member of intentionally 
misleading the House. I will ask the hon. member to withdraw 
the unparliamentary remark and apologize to the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I withdraw the remark and apologize for 
that remark, and instead I will rephrase the question to ask the 
minister to explain his actions, which then I think will only 
result in one thing: that he then apologize to Bonnie Soerensen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as I explained to the 
member on Friday, the first day that I ever heard about the 
Soerensen case is the same day that I met with Ms. Soerensen. I 
said that to the member the other day. 
 
And as I also said to the member the other day, in cases where it 
is clear that infection was caused by a blood transfusion and 
where there is serious medical problems and where negligence 
is established for which the Government of Saskatchewan is 
responsible, we will consider settling such claims. And each 
claim will be considered on its merits. I’ve written Ms. 
Soerensen; I’ve advised her of that. I’ve advised the member of 
that. I’ve advised the House of that. That’s what we’ll do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister is not 
disputing with myself. He’s disputing with people in the public. 
Mr. Speaker, the minister admitted to the media last Friday that 
Bonnie Soerensen’s six-year-old son deserves compensation, as 
he says. But he is prepared to do nothing about it. He says, let’s 
wait for the Krever Commission to unveil its findings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one thing these people do not have is a lot of time. 
What is so frustrating is the fact that this government didn’t 
have to find someone to blame before they compensated HIV 
(human immunodeficiency virus) infected hemophiliacs. This 
situation is no different; these people we are talking about are 
human beings, Mr. Speaker. Why is this so hard for the minister 
and that government to understand? 
 
Will the minister make a commitment in this House today to 
take a leadership role and begin drawing up the terms of a 
compensation package for that six-year-old, for Vicki Lissel, 
and for all the others who’ve contracted hepatitis C through no 
fault of their own. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve explained to the 
member repeatedly that each case has to be looked at on its own 
merits. What the member is suggesting, as he suggested the 
other day, is that I should stand up in the House and announce 
immediately how much compensation any particular person 
infected with hepatitis C should receive. 
 
And so I challenge the member, Mr. Speaker. If he’s not just 
playing politics, as of course that is what he’s doing, then let the 
member get up and tell the House what exact amount of 
compensation should be paid to Ms. Soerensen’s son or anyone 
else infected with hepatitis C. But he’s not going to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, because that cannot be determined at the present time. 
 
But if the member is not just playing politics, let the member 
stand up and tell the House what amount it is that the people are 
supposed to pay right at this time. Let him do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Queen City Cleaners 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Finance. Madam 
Minister, it was recently announced that the Queen City 
Cleaners here in Regina is going out of business on June 15. 
Queen City Cleaners has sent out a letter to its customers 
explaining the reasons for this decision. The letter reads: 
 

For 76 years, Queen City Cleaners has served the citizens 
of Regina and area. During this period we have survived 
many downturns in the economy. We survived the Great 
Depression, the Dirty Thirties, the war years, the polyester 
revolution, and numerous recessions. What we’ve been 
unable to survive is the voracious appetite of governments 
at all levels for an increasing share of our customers’  

  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2153 

disposable income. 
 

Madam Minister, a 76-year-old Regina business with 50 
employees and a million dollar payroll is going out of business 
because taxes are too high. How many more businesses have to 
shut down before we start to see some meaningful tax relief in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
refers to a company that has announced changes to its structure 
in Regina. I only wish that he would pay more attention to the 
announcements that are being made of new companies setting 
up in Regina and throughout the province. 
 
Last Friday of course RRR oil recycling announced the 
establishment of a firm here in Regina. On Saturday we 
attended, along with about two thousand other people  
including the former member for Thunder Creek, Rick Swenson 
 the opening of the spa in Moose Jaw which will employ up 
to 100 people. 
 
And I want to quote from a Canadian economist, Gerry White 
from the Canadian Business magazine, who said today in a 
report, and I quote: 
 

If you want to live somewhere in Canada that has got a 
quality of life and potential real estate value, you put your 
money on Regina and Saskatoon. 

 
Now if all of those things are coming up roses, obviously 
Saskatchewan is going to have a very, very bright 1996 and ’7. 
So of course, Mr. Member, you can come here and have . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, I would only wish that you would 
pay more attention to the existing businesses here in 
Saskatchewan that are struggling to survive. In NDP 
Saskatchewan, even the cleaners are getting taken to the 
cleaners. 
 
Mr. Minister, this letter sums up exactly why Saskatchewan is 
struggling behind other provinces in terms of economic growth 
and job creation  the voracious appetite of government for an 
ever-increasing share of our customers’ disposable income. And 
nowhere is that voracious appetite more than in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, when he was in opposition, the Premier called 
taxes the silent killer of jobs. Taxes have just killed another 50 
jobs here in Regina. Mr. Minister, where are those workers 
going to go? How many more jobs have to be lost before you 
start to address the problem of the tax burden in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, it comes as a little bit 
disconcerting from the new-old Conservative opposition who  

are responsible for the mountain of debt in this province, of 
which $850 million of taxpayers’ money, taxpayers’ money 
which you talk about here, going to pay interest on the debt that 
your previous administration under Mr. Devine racked up for 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now just calculate that on the E&H (education and health) tax; 
$80 million per point of E&H tax, or 720 million is the total 
amount we take from sales tax, doesn’t quite cover the interest 
on the debt that you left the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to you, look in the mirror. Look in the mirror. Check with 
your buddies, those that were kicked out in the last election, as 
to why the taxes are high in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Personal Care Home Licences 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health. Mr. 
Minister, after two years of waiting, your government finally 
brought in regulations for personal care homes. And although 
we think it took far too long, we certainly applaud you on this 
move. 
 
However it has come to our attention that there are further 
unnecessary delays, this time for licences through your 
department. Mrs. Trina Illchuck and Mrs. Joanne Johnson from 
the Moose Mountain area have applied for a personal care home 
licence and were told by your department that they would have 
to wait six to eight months for application to be processed. 
These women have over 26 years experience in senior homes 
and as special care aides. 
 
Mr. Minister, if individuals meet the criteria outlined in the 
regulations, have the financial backing and the medical training 
necessary, as well as 35 to 40 persons waiting on a list, what’s 
the hold-up? Why is it taking so long to process these 
applications? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I think the member raises a 
very valid point. And if these individuals have been told that it 
will take that long, I’m concerned about it also, and I will ask 
the department to look into this situation. I will not ask them to 
give special treatment to these individuals, in the sense that the 
applications should be dealt with in the order in which they 
come in. But I will ask them why it’s taking so long and what 
steps could be taken to speed up the process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A further question to 
the minister. Mr. Minister, I thank you for the response. And 
I’m going to ask you, Mr. Minister, can you give a commitment 
to this Assembly that you will have a response by the end of the 
week as to what the delays are that would hold up a special 
application for a licence such as we have here in the community 
of Arcola? 
 
  



2154  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I can’t commit to the member that I will 
have anything specific to say with respect to the particular 
application he’s talking about, if that’s what the member is 
asking. 
 
I can commit to the member that I will take this up with the 
department at the earliest possible time, such as this afternoon, 
and do my utmost to see if there is some way to speed the 
process up. I make that commitment to the member, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Universities Restructuring Report 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for Post-Secondary 
Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s election platform promised 
open and accountable government. Now we find out that they 
ain’t being anything but open and accountable. Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education said he is refusing to release a report 
on restructuring the province’s universities, this even though the 
report will cost the taxpayers at least $44,000. 
 
Will the Minister of Post-Secondary Education explain why he 
feels he can ignore his government’s promise to be open and 
accountable and refuses to share the report with the taxpayers of 
this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I wanted to inform the 
hon. member that I never did refuse or say that I would refuse 
to release the report. The question of whether or not the report 
would be made public came up at the end of a hour-long session 
that I had with faculty members in Saskatoon last Friday. 
 
And I had never considered whether the report would or would 
not be made public because the report, so called, is not expected 
to make any recommendations or make any decisions or do 
anything other than report on progress. And the process within 
the university is very public process in the sense that there are 
any number of committees and any number of people involved 
in it. And it is quite likely that the report that I’ll be receiving 
from Mr. MacKay will report on matters which are well known 
within the university community. 
 
But in light of that, let me say to the hon. member, I believe that 
if people are interested in seeing the report, we’ll be glad to 
make it available. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
minister for those comments. Students and staff at the 
universities, Mr. Speaker, are scared about the future of those 
institutions. They know that the government can slash funding; 
they can force program closures and perhaps even forcing  

universities to amalgamate. It is no wonder that they’re scared 
of secret reports, when you know that this government has a 
hidden agenda. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you want to stop this speculation and put the 
fears to rest, my question then is, what is your plan as far as the 
report, and what will you be doing with its recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve just indicated 
to the member, I didn’t know there’d be so much interest in the 
report. I can’t think of anything that Mr. MacKay is likely to be 
reporting to us that isn’t already known. And on that basis I 
believe we’ll make . . . on that basis — if members opposite 
will be so kind as to listen — on that basis I can’t think of any 
reason why we’d want to withhold it. I think we will make it 
public when it comes along. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rural Internet Service Charges 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 
the vast majority of Saskatchewan communities SaskTel is the 
only provider of Internet services. However, on the 
ever-expanding information highway, SaskTel has created two 
classes of Internet users  those from the province’s major 
centres, who are on-Net, receive 20 hours of service on the 
Internet for $20; those who are the rural customers, who are 
off-Net, receive three hours of Internet services for $20. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SaskTel explain why rural 
residents are being discriminated against and why rural 
residents pay more than 6 times what their urban counterparts 
pay for this service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 
opportunity to answer that question. There are, yes, two kinds 
of subscribers  subscribers off-Net and on-Net. The rural 
subscribers are for the most part on the off-Net. It should be 
noted that there are no long-distance line charges, and so it 
makes sense that the block of time would be more expensive in 
rural areas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are no line charges, and I would also point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in North 
America where there is widespread access by rural subscribers 
to the Internet, at any price. In Saskatchewan, SaskTel has 
undertaken to provide that service where no one else will do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, then 
if this access is so available, nowhere is the unfairness of 
SaskTel’s Internet structure more obvious than it is in 
Lloydminster. In Lloydminster, Alberta side, a customer can 
receive 50 hours of service for $50 before paying an additional 
$1.50 an hour. On this side of the border, a customer who pays 
$20 monthly fee to SaskTel receives only three hours of service. 
After three hours, one must start paying $6 an hour. 
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2155 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister make a commitment in the House 
today to provide a level playing-field for Internet users in urban 
and rural Saskatchewan with Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as this is an emerging 
service, obviously there will be changes in time as the pattern of 
people who subscribe to this service develops. And I am 
reasonably sure that there will be some changes over time, as 
the system develops, to the line and time charges. 
 
But Lloydminster can hardly be described, Mr. Speaker, as a 
rural area. And I would be interested to know from the 
members opposite how much rural subscribers in Alberta pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Business Credit Checks 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Deputy Premier promised through his Partnership for Growth 
to cut back on regulations. Today I have another suggestion for 
this regulations problem. 
 
If someone wants to do a credit check on a specific company, 
they can call on someone like Dun & Bradstreet to get that 
information. But if that same business owner wants to find out 
who is inquiring about the company, they’re out of luck. And if 
that business owner wants to find out what information Dun & 
Bradstreet is giving out about their company, they have to pay a 
fee. Even the NDP government in B.C. (British Columbia) is 
more in tune with business than this government. They have 
removed these oppressive regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister repeal the regulations that 
prevent businesses from accessing this information and set 
businesses free from the heavy hand of government control? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite I find it a little surprising that her talk of 
regulation, that that’s a difficulty, in large because most 
businesses that are moving here, if the member would listen for 
a moment, the most companies that have been moving here and 
investing in Saskatchewan, whether it’s in the oil and gas 
industry or biotechnology, are saying the reason they’re doing it 
in Saskatoon — or in the areas of oil production — is because 
the regulatory process in Saskatchewan is more streamlined 
than other parts of Canada. And for ag biotechnology they’re 
saying it’s better than in any other part of the world. 
 
Why don’t you get onside with what’s positive about our 
province? I say again, look, look, look here, Canadian 
Business. Canadian Business, I say Canadian Business says 
that Saskatchewan has one of . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now the hon. member 
knows that he is not allowed to use exhibits. The hon. member 
knows that. If he uses an exhibit, I’ll ask the page to remove the  

item. Order. Order. I’ll ask the page to remove the item. Order 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order. The Speaker is not 
seeking advice. Order. 
 
And if the hon. minister would like to complete his answer, I’ll 
recognize him to complete his answer. Order, order. The hon. 
member will come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, before I was 
interrupted, I was quoting from a magazine and I want to 
continue that . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Now the minister 
knows that he’s not to be commenting on the rulings of the 
Chair. And I’ll just ask him to, without commenting on the 
Chair, to proceed to conclude his answer and to do that directly. 
 
Order. Order. Order. Order. All members will come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a 
recent article that talks about the Saskatchewan economy and 
says: 
 

As recently as the 1990s . . . or 1990, the people were 
bleeding away from the economically hard-pressed city, 
plunging crop prices . . . 
 

And it talks about the problems. It says: 
 

Today, though, that people look at Regina and Saskatoon 
as two of the top communities in Canada to invest in. 

 
So I ask the member opposite: get onside; be more positive; 
accept what’s happening in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and to all the members of the House, I would like to introduce a 
group seated in your gallery. Today we have visiting Regina 
and the legislature, a group of grade 5 and 6 students from the 
Foam Lake Elementary School. I believe there are about 52 
students and their teachers: principal, Mr. Jim Hack; teachers, 
Dennis Bugera and Ruth Gislason. I’d also like to introduce 
Wayne Freison, the bus driver. 
 
I look forward to meeting with the students and the staff in the 
course of the afternoon, after you’ve concluded your tour. And I 
ask all members to join with me in welcoming this group from 
Foam Lake. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



2156  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Status of An Act to amend The Education and 
Health Tax Act 

 
The Speaker:  Order. Before orders of the day, the Speaker 
would like to make a statement to the House. Order. 
 
On May 28, 1996, Bill No. 117, An Act to amend The 
Education and Health Tax Act respecting the taxation of 
Saskatchewan Indians off-reserve, The Education and Health 
Tax Amendment Act, 1996, was introduced by the member 
from Moosomin. 
 
This Bill is presently standing on the order paper for second 
reading. I direct members to the second readings heading under 
private members’ public bills and orders in supplement 7 which 
you received today. 
 
It is the Speaker’s duty to review all Bills in respect to rule 36 
of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. This rule states in part that any Bill which 
proposes “. . . to impose any new or additional charge upon the 
public revenue or upon the people. . .” must first be 
recommended by the Lieutenant Governor before it is 
considered by the Assembly. Order, please. The principle 
underlining this rule is fundamental to our constitution . . . 
Could I have order, please? Order. 
 
The principle underlining this rule is fundamental to our 
constitution because the executive of government is held strictly 
accountable for all public expenditure. It must also be solely 
responsible for initiating legislation involving the imposition of 
new or additional charges upon the public revenue or upon the 
people through taxation. 
 
The question to be addressed here is whether Bill No. 117 
contravenes the parliamentary principle of the Crown initiative 
in financial matters. 
 
Bill No. 117 seeks to repeal an exemption from the taxation 
provisions contained in The Education and Health Tax Act 
granted to aboriginals living off reserves. The effect of this Bill 
will be to increase the incidence of taxation and thereby create 
additional revenue for the Crown. 
 
I refer members to Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, in paragraph 601 
where it is stated that: 

 
The recommendation of the Crown is needed for such 
measures as bills relating to the . . . repeal of an exemption 
from an existing duty, as the burden of the duty is thereby 
augmented . . . 
 

Therefore I find that Bill No. 117 requires a recommendation 
from the Lieutenant Governor. Because Bill No. 117 requires a 
recommendation and because the member from Moosomin is 
not a member of the Executive Council, I must  order  I 
must rule that the said Bill is out of order and will be removed 
from the order paper. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In accordance with our policy of 
being open and accessible, I table the answer to the question. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 111 is provided. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 16  Third-party Funding 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
motion as put forward by the member of Kelvington-Wadena 
will be as is indicated in the blues, and I would like to support 
the motion as put forward. 
 
I cannot emphasize enough how important it is for the NDP 
government to finally take responsibilities for its actions. It is 
time for them to stop offloading financial difficulties onto third 
parties, who are struggling to cope with the cuts. And it is most 
definitely time to take meaningful steps towards creating a more 
. . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. The hon. member 
. . . Order. The hon. member is out of order. He cannot be 
debating any motion which has yet to be moved. And the 
motion is listed in the name of the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena and cannot be considered unless moved by 
the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
I would ask for leave, if the House would return to item no. 2 in 
private members’ motions. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to 
begin this debate, and we’ve had it several times before but 
unfortunately it’s something that we seem to have to discuss 
over and over again. The reason we have to continually debate 
this issue is because this NDP government can’t, or won’t, stop 
its arrogant, selfish, and political way of dealing with business 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time again I, along with my colleagues, 
have pleaded with this NDP government to take just a few 
moments to sit back and take note of the irreversible damage 
they are doing to our province. Instead of standing up and 
taking action for the people of this province, they have chosen 
to cower from the many critical issues that are facing 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
The members opposite stand up and spout a lot of meaningless 
rhetoric in an attempt to convince themselves just how great a 
job they are actually doing. Well, Mr. Speaker, the only ones 
they have convinced are themselves. The public aren’t buying 
into it. In fact the people are completely fed up with this NDP 
government. I can’t understand why the members opposite feel 
they must put politics ahead of their constituents. 
 
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2157 

The member from Regina South ran his campaign on the 
promise to save the Plains health care centre. He was elected, 
and then he turns his back on his constituents. I would ask the 
member how he can still look himself in the mirror and why 
he’d want to. Mr. Speaker, I guess I can’t blame the member 
since he was just following suit with all of his colleagues on 
their crusade to break every promise they ever made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the government opposite is questioned about 
their ruthless commitment to totally dismantle rural 
Saskatchewan, they have a patent response  blame Ottawa or 
blame the Tories. I’ve stated before in this Assembly that I can 
sympathize with the government for having to tackle the 
enormous debt left by the former Tory administration, but that 
was six years ago. 
 
Now this NDP government has shifted the blame to the federal 
government. The federal government is trying to get its fiscal 
house in order, and instead of encouraging them to do so, this 
NDP government chastises them. On the one hand, this NDP 
government wants increased transfer payments, and on the other 
hand, they tell the federal government to cut taxes. I would 
encourage the NDP members opposite to join the federal 
government as they attempt to balance our national budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard all the cabinet colleagues say over 
and over again that they have back-filled 100 per cent of the 
reductions in transfer payments. Well if they have back-filled 
dollar for dollar, then why are so many hospitals closing, and 
why are so many school closures becoming more and more of a 
reality, and why are municipalities having to do more with less? 
 
The budget for health care in this province has not changed 
since this NDP government’s so-called wellness model was 
introduced. This wellness model has meant complete 
devastation of our health care system. It is translated into the 
shutting down of over 50 hospitals and health care facilities. I 
guess it’s fair to say that this NDP government hasn’t been 
adequately funding health care for many years now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has offloaded onto 
municipalities and communities at record levels. The books of 
this province were balanced on the backs of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. The taxpayers have done their part, but the 
government onslaught hasn’t broken stride. 
 
(1430) 
 
In a time where we must be prepared for the next century, this 
NDP government is driving the people of Saskatchewan into the 
ground. The members opposite know this and they just won’t 
admit it. They enjoy playing politics too much to actually do the 
job they were sent to this Assembly to do. All we have to do is 
watch members opposite attempt to justify their cruel and 
irrational decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the business people of this province are the ones 
who will lead Saskatchewan into the next century. Business is 
the job creator. Quality, sustainable jobs is what the people of 
this province need and it’s what they want. This NDP 
government would be far better off if they would quit blaming  

everyone else and direct their energies into creating 
environment that stimulates real economic growth. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan don’t want to hear that this NDP 
government blame whichever scapegoat they choose for the 
week. They want jobs and they want to contribute to our 
province. And all they ask for in return is quality health, 
education, and social programs; and in rural Saskatchewan, 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are amongst the most 
hard-working people in the world. They’ve proven time and 
time again that they will pay their share of taxes. In fact they 
do. But in order to do so, Saskatchewan people need jobs and 
the only way jobs can be created is through real economic 
growth. I’m not sure if the government knows what the 
indicator for real economic growth is, but it is in job start-ups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a lot to offer. It is a great place 
to live, to work, and to raise a family. It is a place with 
unlimited potential for any businessman or woman. The 
problem is that we have a government in Saskatchewan that 
apparently doesn’t want to see the people of this province 
prosper. I think they only want to see government prosper. If 
they truly wanted to see the province prosper, then why would 
they insist on setting up roadblock after roadblock in the 
business community? 
 
Last week in this Assembly, the member from Regina South 
stated that the number of business bankruptcies in 
Saskatchewan has declined every year since 1991. Mr. Speaker, 
since 1991 Saskatchewan has seen nearly 2,300 businesses go 
bankrupt  far more than Manitoba has experienced. And I 
can’t for the life of me figure out why the member from Regina 
South is so proud of so many bankruptcies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess it is understandable, since this is the same 
member that claimed that transfer payments in terms of tax 
points don’t exist any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at Saskatchewan’s economic 
performance in 1995. Statistics Canada shows our economy 
grew by only .8 per cent. This is the third worst in the entire 
country and well below the national average. Just before last 
June’s election this NDP government claimed that our economy 
was booming. They also claimed that there were thousands 
more Saskatchewan people working. Mr. Speaker, once again 
this NDP government felt it had to play politics instead of 
dealing with the truth. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development responded by saying, 
and I quote, “I think you’ll see a phenomenal number of jobs 
for 1996.” I sincerely hope that the minister is right. But we 
can’t forget that he said the very same thing last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t hear the NDP members opposite say too 
much about these numbers. They call it preaching doom and 
gloom when I say it. But unfortunately it’s nothing short of 
reality. As a result of this government’s choices, our economy 
doesn’t have much opportunity to experience real economic 
growth and create quality, sustainable jobs. 
  



2158  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

As Eric Howe, University of Saskatchewan economics 
professor, stated, we have a built-in problem due to our 
enormous tax base. He said, and I quote, “Even when the 
economy should be firing on all cylinders, it’s still spluttering.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this leads me to the motion that I have put 
forward: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its policy 
of offloading its financial difficulties onto the municipal 
governments, the district health boards and their affiliates, 
and the school boards, and rather that this Assembly call 
upon the government to face its financial difficulties by 
creating a business and economic climate in which the 
province would foster and encourage real economic 
growth, which in turn would produce a tax base capable of 
enabling the government to effectively deal with its 
financial difficulties and at the same time meet its 
responsibilities in the fields of health, education, social 
services, and municipal services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this motion clearly sums up two 
things. Firstly, that this NDP government has balanced their 
budget on the backs of third parties, forcing them into a very 
severe financial difficulty. Lastly, this motion provides a fair 
and compassionate alternative to the drastic offloading practised 
by this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by creating a business and economic climate that 
would foster growth and encourage real economic growth, 
Saskatchewan would be able to deal with its financial 
difficulties. By producing a tax base that evenly disperses the 
burden would enable the government to meets its 
responsibilities in the fields of health, education, social, and 
municipal services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government is not meeting its 
responsibilities in these areas. I know they don’t want to admit 
that they are on the wrong track and they’ve made several 
detrimental decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage the Assembly to support the motion 
that I have put forward. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker:  Now to be in order, the hon. member must 
conclude by moving her motion  you can’t debate after 
moving the motion  and also identifying the seconder. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Moved by myself 
and seconded by the member from Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its policy 
of offloading its financial difficulties onto the municipal 
government, the district health boards and their affiliates, 
the school boards, and rather that this Assembly call upon 
the government to face its financial difficulties by creating 
a business and economic climate in this province which 
would foster and encourage real economic growth, which 
in turn would produce a tax base capable of enabling the 
government to effectively deal with its financial difficulties 
and at the same time meet its responsibilities in the field of  

health, education, social services, and municipal services. 
 
The Speaker:  Before recognizing the hon. member for 
Canora-Pelly, the Speaker would ask if the Assembly would 
provide leave to the Speaker for correcting an error that I made 
in the Speaker’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Correction to Previous Statement 
 

The Speaker:  I appreciate the cooperation of the hon. 
members. In the Speaker’s statement, I correctly referred to the 
Bill as An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 
respecting the taxation of Saskatchewan Indians off-reserve, but 
in error referred to it as Bill 117. For the information of the 
House, it is Bill 116 on your order papers, and I want to correct 
that error for the information of the members. 
 
I thank you for your cooperation. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 16  Third-party Funding 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to support the motion put forward by my 
colleagues, the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena and the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
I cannot emphasize enough how important it is for the NDP 
government to finally take responsibility for its actions. It is 
time for them to stop offloading financial difficulties onto third 
parties who are struggling to cope with the cuts. And it is most 
definitely time to take meaningful steps towards creating a more 
prosperous financial climate in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is known that over the last four years education 
cuts in this province have been millions of dollars. In fact in 
excess of $20 million has been cut from the education budget. 
The boards of this province have faced 2 per cent cuts and 4 per 
cent cuts and 2 per cent cut again, and in fact then a final zero 
per cent increase or zero per cent decrease if you might like to 
use that term. 
 
And as a result, massive funding has been transferred from the 
Government of Saskatchewan to local governments, that is, the 
boards of the province of Saskatchewan. And they are reeling 
under this impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Education critic, I must stand up today to speak 
on behalf of school boards, staff, and students, who are so 
deeply affected by this government’s offloading policies. As I 
have continued to argue throughout this session, education in 
this province is facing a shaky and frightening future. But this 
government is playing dumb. They feel that if they continue to 
pretend that nothing’s happening, people won’t notice their 
covert methods of slashing funding to school boards. 
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2159 

Mr. Minister, as I’ve indicated in the House  Mr. Speaker, 
I’m sorry  as I’ve indicated in the House before, a method of 
financing school boards is done by an equalization formula 
called the equalization grant. And one of the factors that plays a 
very important role is referred to as the equalization factor; it 
has previously been called the computational mill rate. This 
mill rate distributes a method of providing grant to all school 
boards in the province. There are many boards in this province 
who have high assessments and a mill of taxation will create a 
revenue of in excess of $800,000. And I’m referring of course, 
to the large urban centres. 
 
But when we start to look at smaller rural school divisions, a 
mill will probably produce a revenue source of 35, $40,000. 
This, Mr. Speaker, is the way the boards receive funding. When 
this government changed, by way of the grant allocations this 
year, when they changed the equalization factor by increasing it 
by 2 mills from 66.4 mills to 68.4 mills, what they have 
effectively done is ask the local taxpayer  it is a method of 
downloading  they have asked the local taxpayer to 
contribute an additional $14 million to the costs of education. 
 
As a result, boards have had no choice  and I will identify for 
you, Mr. Speaker, some of the problems that school boards are 
facing  they haven’t had no choice but to make serious cuts to 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think people will be fooled for too much 
longer. As soon as they see how government cut-backs are 
affecting the children of their communities, they will speak out. 
As soon as they see their schools losing programs and watch as 
teachers are forced to move away from their communities, they 
will start to protest. Already we can see that happening. 
 
Let’s look at some of the school boards across the province. 
The Timberline School Division is facing a 3 mill increase in 
1996. Student enrolment did decrease, and it decreased by 34 
from last year’s total. The government cut the grant to the 
Timberline School Division by almost $160,000. 
 
Now this is a school division whose mill rate . . . whose 
assessment produces a value of less than $40,000 per mill. So 
that’s the equivalent of 4 mills of taxation if they want to 
balance. What they have decided to do, Mr. Speaker, is of 
course make other changes. And they have decided that there 
will be 2.5 teaching jobs that will be eliminated this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to note that Timberline School 
Division has been following a process of redesign. And they 
have been looking at the way they deliver education programs 
in all of their schools. They have had a committee in place that 
is looking at restructuring. And this committee has been 
working for two years, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say that it 
takes its toll on everybody, not only the residents within a 
community, the staff. 
 
And I also note that an article that appeared last week in the 
local paper has indicated that one of the board members, a 
board member from Sturgis, has decided that she will resign. 
The resignation has been submitted because of the pressures 
that she has felt put upon herself, that the board is trying to  

cope with the lack of funding, the fact that the government has 
decided not to provide an adequate grant system, and on the 
other side the pressures of trying to maintain schools. And due 
to pressures upon herself and upon her family, she has decided 
that it is not worth staying in public life and has decided to 
resign. 
 
(1445) 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that the toll is not only on the 
community, but is also on individuals, as here we have an 
example of a school board member who has said, enough is 
enough; I don’t need this. And she has decided to resign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kamsack School Division isn’t fairing any 
better. In fact it’s probably worse. They are looking at a 4 mill 
hike this year in their tax rate. The funding for the band 
program and for the special arts program has disappeared. 
Effective January 1, the funding for the band program in the 
Kamsack School Division will no longer be provided by the 
Kamsack School Division board. They have asked that the 
parents  that the parents  will be responsible for 
fund-raising to keep the band program going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kamsack School Division has been noted for its 
strong music and band program throughout the years. I’m sure 
that many people in the House, many members, have had the 
opportunity to hear Kamsack school bands perform at opening 
ceremonies, conventions and the like, throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen is, effective 
January 1, funding will no longer be provided. It will be a 
fee-for-service kind of thing to the parents. That is a program 
that is cherished by many. I have letters coming in from 
residents in the Kamsack School Division to say our band 
program is very important to that select group of students. Not 
every student is going to be taking part in extra curricular 
activities that are sports related. Many are in the area of fine arts 
and music. And the interest shown in the band program in 
Kamsack I’m sure is going to be hurt when it becomes fully 
known that every parent will have to contribute certain dollars 
to be able to have their son or daughter take part in the 
Kamsack band program. 
 
The special arts program in the Kamsack School Division is 
also disappearing at the end of this school year. Bus driver 
positions have been eliminated; and 3.5 teaching positions are 
being axed in the Kamsack School Division. So we have 
significant changes to that school division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Timberline School Division and the Kamsack 
School Division are but two examples of many other divisions 
that have indicated to me the kinds of cuts that they are making. 
 
Now the government can feign innocence and they can insist 
that any cuts are purely a school board decision, but the fact is, 
Mr. Speaker, boards are forced to make these decisions because 
of provincial government offloading. The decision to close a 
school, the decision to eliminate a program, the decision to cut 
staff, to reduce grades in a particular school and downsize,  
  



2160  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

those decisions are made by the board of education at that local 
level. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they are driven by the financial requirements 
of that board. And if adequate funding is not provided by the 
provincial government . . . and the taxation level has reached a 
maximum in many school divisions, rural Saskatchewan. Tax 
arrears, Mr. Speaker, are exceedingly high. I’ve indicated to this 
House, Mr. Speaker, that in east-central Saskatchewan those 
school boards that have a mill rate that produces anything up to 
$40,000, many of them have tax arrears that exceeds $1 million. 
That percentage as a percentage of their assessment base is 
double what is common across the province. It is double the 
provincial average. 
 
So you can see that the boards are struggling very dearly. The 
cuts that the boards have experienced over the last four or five 
years are starting to show up very significantly because the mill 
rates have increased every year. The form of downloading that 
the provincial government has used with regards to the local 
taxpayer and the school boards, the school boards pass it off to 
the ratepayer. If they want to maintain programs, if they want to 
maintain schools, if they want to maintain the number of 
teaching staff, that has to be funded. 
 
How do you fund that? You increase the mill rate. And as a 
result there are certain people that look at the tax rate and say, I 
just can’t pay any more. And as a result, arrears have grown 
significantly in many school divisions. 
 
I ask the members, do they honestly think that school boards are 
making these tough choices because they want to? I don’t think 
so, Mr. Speaker. No school board wants to axe teaching 
positions. When you cut a position and a family moves away, 
and that family has children, it’s a domino effect. As soon as 
you cut staff, you have people move away. As a result, a 
business closes and maybe another family moves away. And in 
the end, you have to make more cuts. And that is what is 
happening to the rural boards of education especially. 
 
Does the Minister of Education think that her actions have no 
effect on school boards? Is the NDP government so 
contemptuous of Saskatchewan people that they can say these 
things without conscience? If this is the case, Mr. Speaker, I 
pity every child in this province, who deserves a high-quality 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the government has any thoughts 
outside the parameters of the insular caucus office. After seeing 
the kinds of choices this government makes, I seriously wonder 
what sort of process they go through. Do they sit around the big 
table in the Premier’s office and haphazardly slash a department 
budget, celebrating every time red turns to black, without giving 
any thought to what this means in human terms? Do they even 
begin to equate the numbers in the books with the people who 
live in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether they realize it or not, the money they so 
carelessly play with comes directly from taxpayers. So when 
the government sets priorities, it shouldn’t be with their 
patronage interests in mind. They shouldn’t make decisions  

based on what makes them look important or gives them a sense 
of control. The government should make decisions that are 
good for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children, more than anything, are at the heart of 
our society. If you ask people why they want to build a 
prosperous future for Saskatchewan, I am sure they would 
include our children in the answer. Children embody all of the 
hopes and dreams of our society and we see them in a future 
full of promise and hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite would agree with 
me when I say children are one of the most essential parts of 
our society. But, Mr. Speaker, if they are willing to say this is 
true, why then are they not willing to protect these children? 
Why are they not willing to fight for their future? Why do they 
let programs and resources dwindle, without uttering a single 
word in protest. I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. It is because 
they have bought into this government’s humanless approach to 
governing. 
 
Now the members opposite will criticize us and say that we 
want savings but are asking for more money in health and 
education. They say we are contradicting ourselves, but, Mr. 
Speaker, we are not contradicting ourselves. We believe in a 
fiscally responsible government, and we believe in reducing the 
provincial debt, but we don’t believe that we should make those 
cuts on the backs of our seniors or on the backs of working 
families or on the backs of our children. It’s a matter of 
priorities, Mr. Speaker, and it’s time this government got its 
priorities straight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but again bring up the promise made 
by the Premier himself in 1990. He said, “Increased education 
is a priority. All I can say is we simply have to find more 
money.” In six short years, the Premier lost his compassion and 
his integrity, but I want to know how he can look at the students 
who come into this legislature daily and know that by breaking 
his promise, it is those young people who are suffering. Where 
is his compassion, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Time and time again we have brought up the discrepancies 
between urban and rural programs run by this government, and 
we aren’t the only ones who are concerned. In an article from 
the March 28 edition of The Western Producer, Jack Braidek 
writes: 
 

I do suggest that a hard look be given at how education is 
delivered out in the country and perhaps in urban centres 
too. The old notion that you move bodies to where 
education happens is becoming more and more heartless 
and costly. 
 

I hope the government takes articles like this very seriously 
because they do express the way people in rural Saskatchewan 
are feeling. Mr. Speaker, as boards of education have completed 
their budgets for 1996  for the fiscal year, 1996  many have 
been forced to make great discontinuances. In fact we are aware 
of many schools that have been announced as closed for the 
future at the end of June 30. As we move into 1997, Mr. 
Speaker, boards of education are looking at many, many  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2161 

schools. We hear right here in the city of Regina, Scott 
Collegiate, long known for its strong program in one of the 
inner city schools of this city that has had an enrolment decline 
 yes, it has declined slightly  but it is still a school that has 
in excess of 160 students. But the board of education that is 
facing major cuts is looking at this school and saying, can we 
deliver a program somewhere else and can we deliver it more 
cost-effectively? 
 
And as a result, it doesn’t matter whether you’re a rural school 
division of 5 or 600 students looking at balancing the books or 
whether you’re one of the two largest systems in the province of 
Saskatchewan  Regina Public  they are also looking at 
school closures as a way of saving costs and trying to balance 
what this government has done to them as far as offloading of 
revenue. 
 
And since the government seems determined to ignore us, they 
need to hear what’s really going on in communities throughout 
the province. Do they listen to people? Do they listen to 
teachers who are losing their jobs? And of course, do they listen 
to school boards who are forced to deal with harsh government 
cuts? 
 
Mr. Speaker, a letter in the Leader-Post from the president of 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association explains the 
frustration boards are feeling. He writes: 
 

Here is the situation in a nutshell. The provincial 
government has told school boards, after three years of 
provincial funding cut-backs and in light of federal transfer 
reductions, you will get no more and perhaps less money. 
At the same time, the government is negotiating a contract 
with the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation that will 
result in significantly increased costs, costs that school 
boards and the local ratepayer will have to pay for. 
 
Consequences of the government’s actions, if it stays this 
course, are clear. Fewer teachers working in Saskatchewan, 
fewer programs for students, more school closures, and 
higher property taxes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) represents the people who are most directly 
affected by government cuts. It is the school trustees who have 
to take the heat for the government’s actions. 
 
While the Minister of Education sits in her insular little office in 
the marble palace talking about how government is not hurting 
our education systems, board members are dealing with angry 
teachers, parents, and students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stand by my beliefs that this government is 
hurting education despite the minister’s protests that funding is 
increasing. And I say that only because the facts are there. 
 
Fact  teachers’ salaries in 1997 will cost boards a further $8 
million. That’s in addition to the costs that were borne this year 
in 1996 which the Minister of Education says will be funded by 
the government. 
 

Second fact  other staff increases will cost between 3 and $5 
million. With every labour settlement for one sector of the 
entire complement, there will definitely be a spin-off for all of 
the other groups involved in this sector. The teachers have 
negotiated a contract that calls for some salary increase  not a 
lot, but some. 
 
(1500) 
 
What we are looking at now, Mr. Speaker, of course, is what 
about the bus drivers? What about the custodians? The teaching 
assistants? All of the staff that works, the non-professional staff, 
that works for school boards throughout the province. If they 
are entitled  and I’m sure they are  to a settlement of some 
type, those negotiations will take place. They’ve started, and 
they will continue to take place throughout 1996 and ’97. Using 
a bare minimum, those costs are going to be somewhere in that 
3 to $5 million, further costs to boards of education. 
 
Fact, Mr. Speaker  grants will be reduced by another $7.1 
million next year, 1997. Minister has indicated in the budget 
address that there will be $900,000 supplied as an extra amount 
of money to boards of education. This is not so, Mr. Speaker. 
Next year, as I’ve indicated, $8 million will be the increased 
cost for teaching staff only. And as a result of the minister 
having indicated that she will pick up the cost of this teaching 
staff complement, that means that there will be an $8 million 
increase. 
 
But as a result of the $7.1 million decrease, there is only a net 
of $900,000. Boards are still faced with a decline because they 
have an $8 million bill, and they have a $7.1 million cut. You 
add those two numbers together, Mr. Speaker, and you have 
$15.1 million net change to the boards of education in this 
province. 
 
If the minister is correct and says that she will be adding an $8 
million grant to the total, the boards of this province are still out 
$7.1 million for next year. 
 
That is also taking into account that we will not have a change 
to the equalization factor. The equalization factor, as I 
previously described, that went up by 2 mills this year. If that 
changes at all, for every 1 mill change in the equalization factor 
to all the boards in this province, that’s a further $7 million. As 
I indicated, this year it changed by 2 mills, which was $14 
million. If we have any change again next year, we could be 
looking at huge amounts of money as far as costs to boards of 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we haven’t even looked, we haven’t even looked 
at the day-to-day costs of operating a school division, the 
increases. It is known. Paper costs this year have jumped 
anywhere from 30 to 50 per cent. We note that there has been a 
significant increase in the cost of gas as provided for rural 
transportation. That has not been taken into consideration at all 
in terms of the grant factor. So boards of education will be 
forced to deal with a massive shortfall of money, even though 
the minister has guaranteed that they will cover teachers’ salary 
increases. As I’ve indicated, the boards are going to be out at 
least 10 to $12 million when you take those other increases into  
  



2162  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

account. 
 
What does this mean, Mr. Speaker? It means program losses. It 
means school closures. It means shorter weeks, and it will 
definitely mean higher student/teacher ratios. Mr. Speaker, that 
is a statistic that Saskatchewan cannot be proud of. We have 
one of the highest student/teacher ratios in all of Canada. That 
is something that we have to work at, to change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the minister plays her numbers game, it becomes obvious 
who the real losers are, that is, our children. Mr. Speaker, this 
government would like to blame all their evils on federal 
cut-backs. But I don’t buy that. And I don’t think the people of 
this province should be expected to buy that. The fact is, this 
government is systematically chipping away at Saskatchewan’s 
social and community infrastructure. 
 
It is the members opposite who decide where the money goes. It 
is the members opposite who decide to offload funding cuts 
onto municipalities, onto health boards and their affiliates, and 
onto school boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by listening to the people of this province, I am 
certain the NDP government could come up with innovative, 
compassionate, viable solutions. This government does have an 
opportunity to stimulate the economy. And if they work on 
improving the business climate and started bringing in money, 
then they could channel some of these funds into badly needed 
social programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it odd that our party has to fight for social 
programs, seeing as the NDP is supposed to represent the 
left-wing side of the political spectrum. But when it comes to 
health, education, and municipalities, they seem to have chosen 
to perch on the far right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said earlier, I strongly support the motion 
moved by the member from Kelvington-Wadena and for the 
very reasons I have just discussed. I implore the members 
opposite to also pledge their support. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
support the motion put forth by my colleague: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government for its policy 
of offloading its financial difficulties onto the municipal 
governments, the district health boards and their affiliates, 
and the school boards, and rather that this Assembly call 
upon the government to face its financial difficulties by 
creating a business and economic climate in the province 
which would foster and encourage real economic growth, 
which in turn would produce a tax base capable of enabling 
the government to effectively deal with its financial 
difficulties and at the same time meet its responsibilities in 
the fields of health, education, social services, and 
municipal government. 
 

As a new member to this legislature, I thought that oral question 
period would be a time to get answers on behalf of the  

people of Saskatchewan. But time after time in this session, our 
members have stood in this Assembly, they have asked 
questions about the rapid dismantling of the health care system 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And time and time 
again, we have had to put up with non-answers from an 
arrogant Health minister. 
 
I am pleased to have this opportunity to outline some concerns 
the people of Saskatchewan have about their crumbling health 
system. I hope this time the government takes a new approach 
and actually listens to some of their concerns. 
 
The health care debate in Saskatchewan is not new. It’s been 
ongoing for decades, but what is new is that the people of 
Saskatchewan have never seen a government try to totally 
absolve itself of all the massive health care cuts that are 
sweeping this province. This government’s so-called health care 
reform is a systematic dismantling of the health care system, 
piece by piece. 
 
What is most maddening is that when the people turn to the 
Minister of Health for explanations for the bed closures, the 
staff cuts, and cuts in services, the minister simply shrugs his 
shoulders and lays the blame on local health boards or the 
federal government. 
 
I just don’t understand how this same government can boast 
about its wonderful health care reform, yet it refuses to accept 
any responsibility for health care cuts at the local level. Perhaps 
it’s a disease that afflicts the government of the day. The current 
government is showing all the symptoms of refusing to be 
accountable to the very people it is supposed to represent. 
Despite the protests and the raucous health board meetings and 
the petitions, this government is refusing to listen. 
 
A quick look back in Hansard to the Devine years show that the 
now Deputy Premier once proposed a motion during private 
members’ day that said that the Tory Health minister not be 
paid more than a dollar because he was refusing to accept any 
responsibility for the health care system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that if you ask the people of this 
province today, they would say that the Health minister should 
be paid even less than a dollar. He is not earning his salary 
because if you listen to his answers every day in question 
period, he claims he is not at all responsible for the mess that 
Saskatchewan’s health care system is in. He accuses my 
colleagues and myself of creating a false fear about the crisis 
Saskatchewan’s health care system is facing. 
 
Well I would like to inform the minister and his government 
that I am simply relaying the messages on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan people. These are the same people who in some 
towns are forced to use a pay phone to get health care services. 
These are the same people who are trying to cope with the 
closure or changes to 52 hospitals across the province. These 
are the same elderly people who are being ripped apart from the 
people they have known all their lives because the care centres 
in their home towns are being shut down. 
 
It may come as a surprise to the Minister of Health to find out  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2163 

that hundreds of people across Saskatchewan are so worried 
about the decline of their health care services that they turn out 
by the hundreds for local health board meetings. These are 
emotional and extremely tense meetings. The government 
members opposite would soon find that out if they decided to 
attend some of those meetings. 
 
An issue that many of those local health boards are dealing with 
is the pitting of communities against each other to compete for 
dwindling health care dollars  dollars that are allocated by 
this government. That’s why we are seeing long-time friends 
angrily arguing with each other. Because each of their 
communities is trying to prove which one is more worthy of 
health care funding. 
 
Every day I stand in this House along with my colleagues and 
present petitions on behalf of the thousands of Saskatchewan 
people who are against the closure of the Plains Health Centre. I 
know our caucus gets dozens of letters and phone calls every 
week expressing concerns about the state of health care. And I 
am sure that the government gets many of the same phone calls 
and letters. 
 
Yet the Minister of Health seems to think it’s not his 
responsibility to answer these concerns. He proudly stands in 
this Assembly and he says that his government has back-filled 
federal cuts dollar for dollar. I know that that is not true. And he 
is certainly not fooling the people across Saskatchewan. 
 
If the health care funding levels were being properly 
maintained, we would not be seeing headline after headline in 
community newspapers explaining how the local health boards 
are being overwhelmed under the burden of funding cuts. 
 
It’s shocking to see this government’s lack of regard for the 
well-being of Saskatchewan people. Because when those 
members were in opposition, they campaigned on the health 
care issues. When the Health minister or one of his 
representatives is involved in any national conference or 
discussion on health care, they proudly take credit for the 
revolutionary health reform in Saskatchewan. They hold 
Saskatchewan up as a model for the rest of Canada. 
 
But it’s a much different story when the minister leaves the 
national stage. When responding to any question about health 
care services in Saskatchewan, he quickly points his finger of 
blame at the federal government or the local health boards. Now 
that’s quite a double standard. 
 
The government wants to take credit for health care reform but 
it believes it is not responsible for millions of dollars in health 
care cuts. Saskatchewan people know who holds the 
purse-strings on health care in this province. This government 
allocates the health care funding, then it cowardly sits back and 
lets the local health board members clean up the mess the 
government has created. 
 
In fact it seems that the government members hardly have the 
time to visit their own constituencies to listen to people’s health 
care concerns. They did not show up in Swift Current and they 
did not attend the meeting in Central Butte. They did not  

answer to the people in Fort Qu’Appelle or in Moose Jaw. I find 
it hard to believe that not one of the 42 government members in 
this Assembly had the time to attend those health care meetings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it all boils down to a question of compassion, 
honesty, and commitment to providing quality heath care 
services to Saskatchewan people. I am sad to say that this 
government seems to be lacking in each of those areas. 
 
(1515) 
 
I would like to offer the members across the way a little advice. 
I think it’s time that this government gave the people of 
Saskatchewan a bit more credit. The people across this great 
province know that this government is reneging on its 
responsibility to make sure that the sick and elderly are 
receiving quality care. The government is not fooling anyone by 
pointing the finger of blame at Ottawa or the local health 
boards. 
 
It’s time that this government sincerely started listening to the 
health care concerns that we bring forward on behalf of the 
people. It’s time that the government made some attempt to 
answer people’s health care concerns. 
 
The truth of the matter is that there is fear in communities 
across Saskatchewan about what the end result of these massive 
health care cuts will be. I can’t even tell you how many elderly 
people have talked to me about questions of who will care for 
them when they can no longer care for themselves. Some of 
these people are spending the last years of their lives wondering 
if they will be forced to move away from their families. 
 
This is an alarming situation. Our elderly deserve better and so 
do all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
If this government wants to end the talk of a health care crisis, it 
will start responding to the needs and concerns of Saskatchewan 
people. The voters of this province will not forget your broken 
promises. I thank you. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today in support of the motion before us and discuss this 
government’s track record in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Having been a member of rural Saskatchewan for my entire life 
and lived in basically the same community for some number of 
years, I’ve always watched with great interest, Mr. Speaker, on 
the devolving of rural Saskatchewan and the work and the soul 
and the heart that was put into rural communities and rural 
living by rural residents. And it’s always amazed me how 
governments may come and go and yet rural Saskatchewan 
always stays. However, this particular government, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not so sure that rural Saskatchewan can withstand 
its plague. 
 
I wonder . . . I often think back and wonder what was discussed 
at the first cabinet meeting of this government in 1991 after 
they were elected. And I’m wondering if the discussions did 
indeed centre around rural versus urban in Saskatchewan. And  
  



2164  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

it’s becoming very evident as days go by that indeed that 
discussion did take place at that time. 
 
And I’m also wondering how long it took for this government 
to decide that rural Saskatchewan really didn’t count any more 
in their eyes. And I think that’s where we’re at today, Mr. 
Speaker, and wondering: what does rural Saskatchewan mean to 
the government of today? 
 
I wonder if the government took many meetings, many cabinet 
meetings, many discussions, and what role the MLAs from rural 
Saskatchewan played in those discussions, Mr. Speaker. We see 
today where it’s more increasingly clear that the rural MLAs 
have less and less say in the decisions of cabinet and the 
decisions of this government. I wonder what input the MLAs in 
1991, the rural MLAs, had into the decisions made at that time 
which has led us to where we are at today. 
 
The motion that we have before us, Mr. Speaker, talks about 
rural Saskatchewan in three different forms — in terms of 
municipal governments; it talks about rural Saskatchewan in 
terms of health and district health boards and their affiliates; 
and it talks about our education system through the school 
boards and what’s happening in the decreased funding and the 
lack of commitment to these areas in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As I said, having lived in rural Saskatchewan my entire life, it 
gives me some background and some right, over and above that 
of being an MLA, to talk about rural Saskatchewan and defend 
it. I too have spent the majority of my spare time in the last 25 
years fighting for health care and the rights of the people of 
Saskatchewan, particularly rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think that also gives me some rights in addressing this 
serious problem that we have before us this time in the history 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
If I think back, Mr. Speaker, to when I first became involved in 
health in this province, it was certainly at the local board, as 
many communities had similar boards to what our community 
had in terms of a hospital board, of what was the facility that 
was in our community that we worked so hard to strive and 
maintain and meet the needs of the community. 
 
Unlike larger centres, we didn’t have the luxury of having two 
or three different agencies or facilities within our community 
because of the population and because of funding problems. But 
the one facility, one agency, did usually meet the needs and we 
worked very hard to ensure that that happened. 
 
We also worked very hard to ensure that the people in the 
community were heard and their views were brought forward to 
the health board and were looked at, and most often were acted 
upon, Mr. Speaker. The residents of the communities banded 
together in terms of volunteering their time, as did I as a trustee, 
most often having some mileage paid. However at the end of 
the day, usually it was out-of-pocket expenses. But that did not 
deter the spirit of volunteers. 
 
Across the province there were somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 455 to 460 volunteer boards at the time of the 
onset of the wellness model in this province, at which point in  

time they were quickly disbanded and tossed aside, without 
even so much as a written thank-you or gratitude by the 
minister of the day. 
 
In our community we had many, many people represented there 
at the community level, on our community health board, from 
 I’m just trying to recall the number of small towns and RMs 
(rural municipality) that were represented  in excess of 20, 
Mr. Speaker. Some members represented two or three different 
communities at the board level, while others were large enough 
to be able to have a sole member for their representation. 
 
But the board members were not the only ones that volunteered 
their time and their services. The community people themselves 
came forward in many different ways to support the health 
initiatives of the day, to ensure a viable and a needed health 
system for the community and the district, and one that met the 
needs of the people. 
 
These people varied from anyone giving a small donation or a 
large donation to the health board, to the hospital board, and 
sometimes amounted to considerable amount of dollars which 
was used to sustain the health facility, of course, when 
governments of all stripes were a little bit slack in their funding 
of the health programs in the small communities. 
 
There was people as well that volunteered their time to go out 
and raise monies as well, through many different types of 
activities, whether it was a bingo or whether it was a hockey 
game or a ball tournament or simply a fund-raising exercise to 
gather up some much needed dollars to buy a certain item for 
within the health agency. 
 
There was also of course, a group, an organized group, of 
volunteers which are still present in today’s system, called the 
health care auxiliaries. These people operated out of the facility 
in direct relationship with the health board and worked to solve 
many of the problems that these health agencies would find in 
terms of funding, in terms of human resources, which provided 
the volunteers with an avenue to do their work on behalf of the 
people of the community. 
 
We’ve come a long way from that time, Mr. Speaker, and it 
certainly hasn’t been down the path that I would like to have 
seen in terms of the thanks and the homage paid to our 
volunteers. 
 
As well, at that time, Mr. Speaker, many of our health trustees 
who came from varied walks of life . . . I recall our local board 
had an accountant and insurance agent on the board as well as a 
couple of farmers. We most likely had a storekeeper. We most 
likely had a professional person from other walks of life as 
well. I don’t think we ever had the luxury of having a lawyer sit 
on our board  at least not in the 20-some years that I spent on 
the board. Although we would have been very happy to have 
had some legal counsel on that board. However, in small 
communities, most often we don’t have an abundance of 
lawyers and their time is often spent looking after the legal 
interests of the local people. 
 
However, unlike the government opposite — there are a  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2165 

number of lawyers sit within their cabinet and so they do have 
the luxury of having that expertise. However I’m not sure that 
that — a lot — is the answer to many of our problems. 
 
In our local community, as I said, we had our local health 
board, our hospital board and it’s . . . I guess, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker now, as opposed to the Speaker of the House, and I 
welcome you to listen to the debate. We came from varied 
walks of life and we had many relationships in other 
communities that were involved with different health agencies 
and facilities as well. 
 
But as we became more familiar with our jobs, I guess, I recall 
back to about my fourth health board meeting, when I was 
appointed by our local municipality to represent their interest on 
it, that there was a bit of turmoil in that association. And being a 
new kid on the block and having piped up on a few issues, 
suddenly found myself being nominated for the Chair. And so 
at a very young age and very early in my health career, I found 
myself being the chairman of a local health board, which was a 
bit of a feat for someone who was prepared to volunteer some 
time, but certainly not the amount of time that it takes to chair 
one of these boards. 
 
However, I said sure, that I would try and do my best, and we 
worked toward the same goals as the previous Chair and the 
board did in ensuring that health needs of the community were 
being met. However as we became more familiar with our role 
as a health trustee, we realized that things have to change, as do 
they in every walk of life and every occupation  that things 
change and you need to change with them. But always change 
must not be for the sake of change but for the sake of the 
betterment of the community, of a particular organization. And 
that’s what we’ve strived to do. 
 
In striving to do that and to accomplish that, we realized that we 
couldn’t survive within ourselves and that we had to reach out 
and work with other communities and other health agencies. 
And we certainly strived to do that, and did. 
 
Many of the neighbouring communities that we worked with, 
you know, had similar boards as we did. And we were very 
happy to be involved with the communities of Davidson and 
Craik, and certainly Watrous, who all had health agencies  
and as far away as Central Butte, Mr. Speaker, which is a 
considerable distance from my home town of Liberty, and 
Imperial, where the health facility now is. 
 
But none the less we came together as a group of concerned 
citizens under the guise of health volunteers and health trustees 
and were able to make some great gains in the health areas in 
insuring that the citizens and the taxpayers of all those 
communities’ health needs were being looked after, whether it 
happened in the community of Imperial, whether it happened in 
the community of Central Butte. 
 
But we did do that, and we worked very hard at attaining some 
of the goals that we set for ourselves back in the late 1970s. 
 
As well, we moved so far as to come together as a unique group 
called a district coordinating committee, where we actually sat  

down and drew up some plans for the whole area as to where 
we might be heading with this whole health issue, whether in 
terms of community-based services or institutional-based 
services. 
 
And all the services that we need to provide needed to be 
provided to the citizens of those communities in a friendly, 
home-based setting; not having to uproot our seniors from their 
home communities and having them put in an institution in a 
larger centre  some being as many as some hundred miles 
away  which only deteriorates the state of an elderly person 
in that instance. 
 
We also tried to maintain people with other needs within the 
community and to get the services provided to them that were 
necessary to have them remain in the community and live out a 
healthy and viable lifestyle. 
 
(1530) 
 
Through the district co-ordinating committee, the local 
communities themselves provided the funds for us to use, to 
have, you know, someone that would do a bit of the 
bookkeeping for us and bring together the people on a regular 
basis to meet. And I was actually lucky enough to have been the 
Chair of that group before it was thrown aside in late 1991, 
early 1992, to give way for the government’s wellness plan. 
 
At that point in time, many communities were trying to decide 
where they could best fit into this whole picture under the 
wellness model. And unfortunately despite the words of the 
minister of Health of the day, Ms. Simard, that it would not pit 
community against community, Mr. Speaker, it has done that 
very thing. It has and it did pit community against community. 
 
As I said, the communities tried to fit into the program of 
course, as humans sometimes do, without recognizing that some 
changes have to take place. However, if people are unsure of 
the program where we’re headed, they tend to be a little 
reluctant to go, and certainly in this case were very reluctant to 
believe in all the things that the Health minister of the day 
would talk about and promise them. 
 
The communities at that time then tried to decide how they 
could best fit into the system, into the wellness model, so that 
down the road when the cuts were coming  as they knew they 
would and they have, and they are  wanted to make sure that 
they could survive. So that their community could survive, so 
that their health agencies could survive, so that their health 
facility could survive. And that’s not the way to try and reform 
a system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The way to reform a system is to educate the people. Bring 
them onside and show them where they’re going. Show them 
the values of the program that you’re working for, and then 
when everyone’s working together you can move ahead much 
faster and you will have the support of the people. 
Unfortunately that did not happen, and it has not happened, and 
consequently we’re where we’re at today in health reform. 
 
As I talked about the people being unsure of where they were  
  



2166  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

headed with this whole wellness model, I would like to quote an 
article from the Leader-Post back in February. And it talks 
about . . . it quotes Dr. Roberta McKay. She makes a couple of 
statements which I found very interesting, and the first one is 
that people get sick, Mr. Speaker, she says. And that’s a fact of 
life. No matter how much we try and prevent illness and 
sickness, we can help but we can’t solve that. People will get 
sick, many times through no fault of their own; many times 
through their own fault. We can't stop that. This is a free 
country and all we can do is hope to educate people. 
 
And I guess, having been one that’s never been a smoker in the 
course of my lifetime, I do believe that of course smoking is 
very hazardous to our health. However, it is also a huge tax 
base for the governments of the day and it is hard to really 
criticize the smokers on one hand, and when you’re trying and 
hoping that they will buy more and more of the products to 
ensure that the dollars keep flowing in. 
 
However, all we can do is hope to educate those. And I 
certainly have been and I will continue to lobby my better half 
that maybe smoking isn’t the best avenue for her to continue on 
if she would like to spend her last days healthy with her healthy 
husband. 
 
I would like to quote again from this article. It quotes Dr. 
McKay as saying: 
 

“It begs the following question. Wasn’t it a bit bold to 
stake the major part of health reform on something that no 
one is sure works better than the old way? That’s what 
we’ve been saying. That is, that this is a massive social 
experiment with no evidence it will work or be less 
expensive,” McKay said. 
 

The problem that I see with this is that the experiment is with 
people’s lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I don’t think that it’s 
right that any government experiments with people’s lives. And 
that leads them down a path where they’re unsure where they’re 
headed and where we’re headed in this whole wellness model. 
 
However, communities did try and come together in some form 
in the wellness model in the districtification process. And of 
course now we’re seeing that there are many communities, as I 
said at that time as the chairman of the provincial health 
association, that many communities are fitted into the wrong 
districts and they did that for all the wrong reasons. 
Unfortunately that will take some time to straighten out. 
However under the lack of funding commitment by the 
provincial government to these districts, I think that that will 
most likely happen much sooner than later. 
 
As we move through that process of course, as I said, being 
involved as the chairman of our local health facility and as well 
as the chairman of our district organization, and I also was a 
member of the Davidson Comprehensive Health Board, one of 
the first communities in the province to come together under 
one roof as a health board which represented many of the local 
services which, to name a few, have included their hospital, the 
acute care end of it, which would have also included the respite 
program; the long-term care sector where they had a special  

care home in Davidson; the ambulance, of course, which played 
a great role in emergency services in that community and 
surrounding communities; as well as the home care group that 
was there; and also the housing authority. 
 
It seemed to me at that point in time . . . and I had pressed for 
many years to try and have these types of boards set up where a 
community could be represented by one board, by one health 
board which would represent all the needs of a community. And 
I talk about community, community could be . . . meant more 
than the town of Davidson; it meant the town of Davidson, the 
surrounding area, and many of the small towns which utilize the 
services within Davidson. 
 
But we did however come up with that board, and the board 
was working very well. There was lot of work done by the 
chairman of the board of that day who put a plan together, who 
brought all the people together, was well known in the 
community by everyone. And I applaud Mr. Lynn Sentz for the 
work that he did in that community in bringing that 
comprehensive health board together. 
 
However, once again when the wellness model hit and the 
board was thrown aside and of course the communities were 
forced to fit in within the boundaries of some district health 
board, and they chose the Midwest Health Board, the Midwest 
Health District represented by the Midwest Health Board to fit 
into. 
 
So many of these volunteers that had put so much time and 
effort into their local community in terms of health were all 
thrown aside without so much as a thank-you and the wellness 
model proceeded. And we’re at, of course, to the point where 
we’re at now. 
 
One of the problems with all that is that when you do away with 
the people that have been involved in the health system, the 
trustees, you threw away years and years and years of 
knowledge, Mr. Speaker, knowledge that could never again be 
captured and harnessed and in going towards solving many of 
the problems that we’re faced with today in health. 
 
So however, the health reform process moved on and it did pit 
community against community. And we’re to that point again in 
time, Mr. Speaker, where communities are once again pitted 
against each other in trying to survive, as was so clearly 
illustrated a week and a half ago in the community of Canora 
where the district health board there was put in a severe 
problem where they’ve had a decrease in funding from the 
provincial government, where they aren’t living up to their 
obligations as a provincial government to ensure that people 
have a safe and satisfying health system and of course to meet 
all the needs under the Canada Health Act. 
 
And of course accessibility always comes forward when we talk 
about the Canada Health Act and where we’re headed with that, 
and what accessibility really means under the terms. Does 
accessibility mean that you have access to acute care services 
within the province, regardless of how many miles you are from 
it? Does accessibility mean that you have access to emergency 
services irregardless of how far it might be, but you have  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2167 

access? If the ambulance is 200 miles away, I guess you have 
access to it, Mr. Speaker. If you live some $300 from an acute 
care facility and of course there’s some way of getting you 
there, I guess you can call that access to acute services. 
 
All these terms in the Canada Health Act are being stretched to 
the max these days, Mr. Speaker, and certainly in Saskatchewan 
they are no different. 
 
In the community of Canora in the health district of Assiniboine 
Valley, we saw one of the problems that we have in pitting 
community against community, where they’re all fighting for 
the services that they deem to be what’s needed within their 
communities. We saw the community of Kamsack being 
represented there. We saw the community of Preeceville being 
there. And of course, Mr. Speaker, the meeting was held in 
Canora, and those people were very much represented there and 
certainly put their case forward admirably as to what they 
wanted to see. 
 
Those people talked about many things, about the services that 
they feel are necessary and that are needed by the residents of 
those communities. And I sympathize with them because 
they’re not unlike the concerns that I have in my own 
community and certainly throughout my own constituency of 
Arm River. 
 
The people talked about losing beds and cutting back. And 
certainly we all know that with today’s limited budgets we have 
to be frugal, and we have to stretch a dollar and make the most 
out of our dollars that we have, but not at the expense of the 
needs, the health needs in particular, of our citizens of the 
province. 
 
The people there talked about . . . acute care beds seemed to be 
the issue for them that day. But it was also only one of the 
issues. We have the issue of long-term care beds where we’re 
seeing right across the province people being moved out of, 
what they view to be their homes, the special care homes, and 
being relocated to other communities, to other places, whether it 
be for nine or ten days under the respite program or whether it’s 
to some closed-down acute care ward in a hospital somewhere, 
wherever the people can fit in. 
 
And not under the guise of wellness or what’s needed for those 
people, it’s all economic. It’s nothing but economics by the 
government, by downloading to the people in the districts as 
well as the people of the province. 
 
The people there talked about home care. The board chairman 
himself mentioned the fact that home care will not be in any 
form that we have known it to be in the past. That was a 
discussion that I had as a member of the provincial health 
association some two or three years ago, that because of the 
lack of dollars in health care that there would end up being in 
health care . . . that our old programs such as the home-making 
and the meals on wheels, Mr. Speaker, would be things of the 
past simply because of priorities in the system. And that’s 
coming to fruition now. 
 
The chairman of the Assiniboine Health District talked about,  

because of the priorities and because of the lack of funding 
from the provincial government, that the home care program 
would be changed and that the priorities would be nursing care. 
Of course we all know that we all have to make priorities, but 
the old home care program, Mr. Speaker, was a proven and 
trusted one by many people in the province, especially our 
senior citizens. 
 
And when you had people that were able to keep in their own 
home but couldn’t look after their own home-making, their own 
house cleaning, these programs, even though, even though, Mr. 
Speaker, the clients themselves paid a portion of this home care 
funding, the home care dollar went a long ways. We had people 
that would go in, and home-makers that would go into the 
homes and look after these elderly people. And quite often 
spent many more hours in the home than were ever billed for, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now we’re seeing that program being eroded as well as the 
rest of health care in the province, and a program that was laid 
out as to being the saviour of health care. And as Dr. McKay 
had stated that it’s, and I quote again: 
 

Wasn’t it a bit bold to stake a major part of health reform 
on something that no one is sure works better than the old 
way? 

 
So we staked the program, the government staked the program 
 their wellness model  on home care, and now we’re seeing 
that the funding is not there for it either. And so the program 
itself is being eroded to the point of destroying the whole 
program and the security that it provided for keeping our 
elderly people in their homes. 
 
(1545) 
 
The advantage of a home care program or home-makers’ 
program is of course to keep our people in their homes as long 
as they can, whether it be seniors  and that’s the largest 
numbers that we have in this province and they’re steadily 
growing; our age is steadily increasing in the province  but 
there are others as well. There’s handicapped people that are 
able to stay in their own homes using some home-making 
services, some home care services. 
 
But what’s happening now is we’re seeing that program being 
eroded to the point of the service not being there. We’re seeing 
many, many beds closed whether it’s in acute care sector or 
we’re seeing in the long-term care sector. We’re seeing it all 
across the beat, Mr. Speaker, and these people are being put out 
into other avenues, and we hear the minister talk about finding 
places for people. I raised the issue this morning in the 
north-west about where those handicapped people will be able 
to reside. And so I hear him saying, well there will be housing 
provided for the people, whether it’s those or whether it’s the 
people of Moose Jaw or whether it’s the seniors in Swift 
Current, that housing will be provided for those people. But 
where, Mr. Speaker? 
 
If you put them back in homes, put them in private homes, the 
home care program, the home-makers program, has been  
  



2168  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

eroded to such a point that the districts will not be able to fund 
that either. They don’t have the dollars to fund all these 
programs by keeping people in their home, even if that’s what 
we all know is best for particular, our senior citizens. 
 
So what are they to do? What’s going to happen to these people 
if the money is not there for the home care program? I don’t 
know. That’s the question that I hope the Health minister and 
the cabinet of the day have really taken a serious look at, Mr. 
Speaker, and will address so that we can . . . so that we don’t 
have to see so many headlines in the paper as this one here from 
the Leader-Post where the headline is: “Health care was top 
worry”. And I quote from the article on January 10, I believe: 
 

Anxiety about health care in Saskatchewan reached a 
higher point in September than . . . any other point in 
recent polling history. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if this is what health reform and the 
wellness model is all about, I’m wondering why we have to see 
headlines such as this, and we have to see quotes such as this 
from polls that indicate that people have never been so uneasy 
about health care in this province than they are now under this 
NDP government. 
 
It’s a little worrisome for many people but it’s also for the 
families of seniors. And I guess again I come into that class, 
where I today still have an 82 . . . an 83-year-old mom and dad 
living together in their own home without any home care to this 
point, Mr. Speaker. And I’m wondering what would happen if 
something does occur that they would need home care. These 
folks live in rural Saskatchewan. They still live on the farm, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re many miles from any home care worker, 
and the cost  and the cost, Mr. Speaker — to get these home 
care workers to them on the farm is enormous. And if we can’t 
afford to keep our seniors that are willing to spend their last 
years in dignity and happiness in special care homes, how in the 
world can we ever afford to have home care provided to those 
people living on the farms in Saskatchewan if they wish to 
reside in their homes? 
 
A question that I will be posing at some time to the Minister of 
Health is, what is the cost, how far are they prepared to go, to 
keep people in their own homes in this province? 
 
But there are many other people. There are families where both 
the husband and wife work, don’t have the luxury to be at home 
and look after their seniors any more. We’ve moved to that 
point in the history in Saskatchewan where there’s more people 
working now than ever before. And so the option isn’t there for 
people to be there to look after them. And when they’re away 
from nine to five and these elderly people need care during the 
day, who’s going to provide it if we can’t do it, if we can’t 
afford it through the home care program? 
 
So here we have the government based its wellness model on a 
program that they’re not prepared to fund, that we’re now 
seeing is being eroded, and that those services are not going to 
be able to be afforded by the district health boards to ensure that 
these people can stay in their homes for the rest of the their life 
if necessary, as long as they can live in comfort and  

certainly have some dignity. 
 
One of the issues of keeping people in their own homes is that 
very one of some dignity and the very people that built this 
province are now our seniors, and I’m just wondering why 
we’ve decided, or why this government’s decided, that they’re 
not that important any more and that they can be bounced 
around the province at will trying to fit them in to wherever 
there’s a bed for them. 
 
I think we’ve come to that point that I would not want to see 
have happen with my parents. They were born and raised in a 
community. They contributed to it through volunteer exercises, 
as I alluded to earlier. My father was on the health board 
previous to my becoming on it. He was a councillor. Helped 
organize a seniors group in Liberty. 
 
These people built a community and now they’re being asked 
to, in their last days, be moved away many, many miles to a 
strange environment to live out their last days. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I attended the funeral of an aunt of 
mine who was 97 years old, who passed away. And that lady 
was able to spend her last number of years in her own area in 
her own community in a special care home. As I listened 
yesterday to the eulogy at the funeral and to the many relatives 
and friends gathered afterward  as often happens in rural 
Saskatchewan; people get together and visit and reminisce 
about the person that we’ve lost  the same theme kept 
reoccurring, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is the care given to this woman in the last 10 years of 
her life in a small community in a small, special care home by 
local people, by local staff, and how that made that lady feel 
and was able to live out her last years in dignity and happiness 
with local friends and relatives being able to come and visit her, 
as would not have been the case had the small, special care 
home not been in the community, Mr. Speaker. So we cannot 
underestimate and we cannot understate the very importance of 
keeping these senior citizens . . . to live out their last days in 
happiness and dignity with friends and relatives. 
 
I just noticed another article from the Leader-Post where we 
talk about long-term care. Over the last number of years and 
even up to date, we seem to talk a lot about acute care. Acute 
care has been the hot subject in the wellness reform and many 
places lost their acute care designation through that wellness 
process. And sometimes the acute care words, I guess, were 
much overused and way too much emphasized on, because 
many of our small institutions, Mr. Speaker, in the province 
hadn’t provided what is now known as acute care for many, 
many years. So that was not the issue. That is not the issue. 
 
The issue now is providing the services that are needed by local 
residents, Mr. Speaker. Sometime we talk about respite. We talk 
about recovery. Back when I started as a health trustee, acute 
care covered everything. It went everywhere from level 4 to 
level 1 to level 6. It was respite; it was recovery; it was people 
coming home from major surgery in our large cities. And that’s 
the way it should be, Mr. Speaker. That’s what wellness is all 
about. It’s having people recover in their own  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2169 

communities, living in their own communities, and living out 
their last years in their communities. 
 
So anyway the acute care scenario has been much overstated in 
the past, and it continues to be. But this headline from the 
Leader-Post reads, “Long-term care next hot issue.” 
 
And I’ll just quote from the article a couple of sentences, Mr. 
Speaker, where the writer goes on to say, “Long-term care will 
be the next hot spot in health reform, predicts the chairman of 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations,” which 
is SAHO. 
 
The chairman of that day of that association goes on to talk 
about, most health districts are pretty strung out in terms of 
economics. It also goes on to say that they haven’t had the 
money they needed to break some new ideas. I get a little 
disturbed when this particular article and this particular former 
chairman of SAHO talks about new ideas. 
 
He also goes on to talk about the extreme costs of small health 
care . . . or small, long-term care agencies in Saskatchewan, in 
particular rural Saskatchewan. That they need to be . . . that 
they’re not cost-effective, they’re not economic. Therefore once 
again we have decisions being based on economics as opposed 
to what’s needed to meet the needs of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan’s health care needs. 
 
He also goes on to talk about the infrastructure that we’ve got 
has too many small, high-cost facilities. Well what’s the cost of 
a life? What’s the cost, Mr. Speaker, of having our elderly 
people live out their last days in their own community? I don’t 
think you can put a cost on it. At least I’m not prepared to do 
that. But it appears that the government of the day is prepared to 
do that. And that is the problem that we’re seeing today. 
 
We also go on to a quote in here from Susan Wagner, a 
University of Saskatchewan nursing professor and at that time 
chairman of the Saskatoon Health District Board as well, and 
talks about the shrinking fund is going to force districts to 
eliminate nursing home beds. 
 
Well that’s all fine and dandy to say in the name of economics, 
but what happens to the people that are in those beds and our 
growing elderly population of seniors that are going to be 
needing those beds, Mr. Speaker? What’s going to happen 
them? Where are they going to go? 
 
She goes on to say it will likely lead to the closing of whole 
facilities because so many districts have small homes with 10 or 
15 beds that are uneconomical to operate. 
 
Economics, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this is all about. That’s 
what this government has based its health reform on, is 
economics. The needs of the people have not been factored in 
and they continue to proceed on that issue. 
 
We talk about the small homes being uneconomical. Back in 
1990, 1989, we proceeded in our community to build a new 
integrated facility, as they were called, something that I 
personally had been striving and fighting for for some 15 years  

with different Health ministers, different deputy ministers 
across the piece. And finally they were starting to be built. 
 
In the community of Imperial, we had an old hospital built back 
in about 1964. And we felt at that time if we could just add onto 
that existing structure, add on 10 or 15 long-term care beds, we 
could quite adequately meet the needs of the people of the 
community. 
 
I recall some of the discussions that took place within the 
community and out of the community and with Sask Health at 
that time. And I in particular recall the support that the board, 
the present board at that time, had for that approach to health 
care in the province. I recall it very vividly. 
 
I also recall us proceeding to do all the necessary studies that 
we could in the most cost-efficient way we could, without going 
out and hiring expensive firms to come in and do studies, as it 
seems to be the norm now by the districts, to tell us how we 
could most effectively meet the needs, the health care needs, of 
the people in the province. 
 
I also recall the very day that a bureaucrat from the Department 
of Health came out, Mr. Speaker, to address the board on this 
issue, and at that time told the board, the whole board in 
attendance, that the addition of a long-term wing to the present 
hospital was not an option. 
 
However the government of the day, which was a Conservative 
government, said that the only way that they would approve any 
type of change of agency in our community was if we were to 
build a new structure, a new building, a new integrated facility. 
 
Well of course the costs associated with doing that were 
enormous and of course sky-rocketed from our original 
proposal to add a long-term care wing on. And so it took 
considerable discussion and consultation within the community 
to go out to see if we could indeed raise that kind of money. 
 
(1600) 
 
However we did, Mr. Speaker. And we built a new integrated 
facility. And we had . . . built it with 10 long-term care beds and 
we built it with eight acute/respite recovery type of beds, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
People got behind the project. We raised the money. We 
borrowed some money. And we built it. We also built it in mind 
with having space that we could do clinics, out-patient clinics, 
Mr. Speaker. And to this day that program still goes on in the 
integrated facility in Imperial. Of course it’s not called that any 
more. It’s been given a new name  health centre or 
something. I’m not sure of the exact terminology of it. 
 
But that program still exists today. We named it at that point in 
time, Let’s Keep Healthy Clinic. It still exists there today, Mr. 
Speaker, where once a month we bring in an expert in whatever 
field it is, whether it’s chiropody or chiropractors or you name 
it  eye doctors, what have you, and it’s attended by some 40 
to 60, usually seniors, every month to talk about and explain to  
  



2170  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

them by these professionals how they can best keep those needs 
being met while they live in their own home. So that program 
still exists. 
 
We also did it with the understanding that when we first started 
out, there was funding under the program for an activities 
director which, I’m very proud to say, we never utilized that 
funding in that the local health auxiliary took that program over 
and provided the service to the institution at a saving of about 
20-some thousand dollars a year to the institution, which the 
money was used then for other things, to provide other health 
care needs in the area and in that agency that the citizens 
needed. 
 
The program of course is still under place. However, there is a 
paid director now that provides that program in the facility, 
which is a little surprising, that when the wellness model came 
through and the districtification occurred and the communities 
out there decided to go into the Regina Health District, that 
once that happened, then the district deemed it necessary to 
have that position as being a paid position. So it is now, and 
there’s a paid activity director there that provides that service. 
 
We also, as we were building this facility, looked at bringing 
other people in, making activity areas so that we could have 
seniors’ groups that would come in and do all sorts of things to 
help entertain the residents and make them feel at home within 
the agency. That did happen; that still is happening today where 
people are allowed to come in. 
 
They actually do things, whether it’s a sing-song or whether 
they have the local choir . . . sometimes chooses to practice 
there. We let people come in to do meetings. They actually go 
so far as from time to time  I think they still do; at least they 
did when I was the chairman of the local board  provided 
meals for our local groups that were dinner meetings and what 
have you there. 
 
So under the spirit of cooperation, the community, this facility, 
and this agency was built and evolved into something that does 
meet the needs of the community, and we went beyond a 
reasonable doubt through the districtification process and the 
health reform to prove to the government that these types of 
facilities, known then as integrated facilities, certainly are most 
cost-effective and are not economically unfeasible. So there’s 
an example, Mr. Speaker, of one community that came together 
to ensure that the needs of the local people were met. 
 
However, what’s happening now is, with the economic crunch 
created by the former Devine administration and now with the 
policy of this present NDP government to meet its economic 
targets on the backs of the sick and elderly, we’re seeing where 
many of these small projects are being severely pressured to be 
able to continue to operate and be maintained at local 
communities. That’s very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because as 
we move through this process, we’re certainly going to talk 
more about it over the next three or four years. And we’re going 
to see continued pressure on many of the district health boards 
to whack and slash at many of these small institutions which 
they deem to be uneconomical. 
 

One of the issues that has arisen as a result of the last budget 
and where the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance 
and the members opposite talked about the greatness of their 
budget and that the health dollars in the health budget basically 
remained the same, but they forget to talk about the rising costs 
that we have in day-to-day living in Saskatchewan. They also 
forget to talk about labour costs. And we’re just starting now to 
see some of those costs come to the forefront. And who’s going 
to pick up those dollars? 
 
We’re, as I stated, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing the districts all 
over the province being taxed to the limit, making decisions 
based strictly on economics and not on the well-being of the 
people that they serve, but strictly economics. And the health 
care needs of the people in the districts are being ignored. 
 
However, the labour costs is a fairly problematic area, I would 
think, for all the districts in this province. As we know, the 
provincial health association negotiates on behalf of its workers 
through a plan, I guess for lack of a better word, provided by 
the government of the day and the Minister of Health. And what 
the role of the provincial association is, to go and negotiate with 
the unions and say okay, well you know, we all know how the 
union process works. However the government likes to keep its 
unions happy and so they constantly provide wage increases in 
one form or the other, and therefore it places an extreme burden 
on the provincial health care association, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now they’re sitting at the table, our provincial health 
association of SAHO sits at the table representing basically all 
the health care agencies in the province, which of course 
include the 30 major ones of the health districts. So they’re at 
the table. The districts are out there whacking and slashing and 
closing because they’re being underfunded by the provincial 
government, and yet SAHO is sitting at the table with an offer 
from the government offering the union workers more money. 
 
Now to me there’s a problem there. There’s always been a 
problem there, but in this particular instance and this particular 
time in Saskatchewan history, there’s a major problem. Because 
I would think if I was a district board I’d be saying to my 
provincial association, we cannot afford any more increases. 
We’re taxed to the limit. We don’t have the money. We’re 
closing homes; we’re closing beds; we’re putting people out; 
and we can’t afford any increases. 
 
However, the provincial association is there with the 
government’s mandate of who knows what  2, 3, 4, 5 per 
cent, including all the benefits that we all know go along with 
packages. So who will pay for this? Because I haven’t I heard 
the Minister of Health say that he’s going to come forward and 
provide the necessary funding for those workers? 
 
What I’ve heard him saying is, oh the districts will do the right 
thing. The districts are doing a great job. The districts will have 
to pick that dollar amount up out of their budget and pay it in 
increased wages. Whether it’s direct hourly wage or whether 
it’s benefits or what it is, it’s still dollars  dollars out of the 
district health board’s budget. 
 
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2171 

So what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? To me it means that, 
okay if we have to pick up another 3 or 4 per cent wage 
increase, I can relate that into whatever terms you want into 
district dollars. Depending on the size, depending on the 
number of employees they have, they’ve got to find that money 
in their budget. Now they don’t have it, so what does that 
mean? It means more closures. 
 
So at this point in time the districts are only starting to deal with 
and tackle the problems that have been created over the last two 
or three years of downloading by the provincial government, to 
them. And they’ve been grappling with that. Now all of a 
sudden they’re going to be hit with some more costs and they’re 
going to have to deal with that. 
 
So I only see one thing happening, Mr. Speaker. I can tell the 
people of the province  and in particular if you’re in a small 
community and you have some type of service there, you better 
be prepared to stand up and fight for it because it’s going to be 
hit upon because the districts are in an untenable situation. They 
don’t have the dollars to continue on and they can’t. 
 
Once again, if I was in a district . . . and I’ve talked to many of 
them and they’re starting to realize that they’ve got to go as a 
group, and if they can’t go as a group through their provincial 
association, then they’ll have to go by themselves. 
 
Just to quote another article from the Leader-Post and it’s back 
a couple of months ago when there was a moratorium placed 
upon union negotiations by the government in preparation for 
them bringing down their budget. Because certainly the 
government didn’t want this to come to the forefront, the 
monetary issue with the unions to the forefront at budget time 
when they’re trying to show that they were maintaining their 
health dollars in Saskatchewan. 
 
However, the vice-president for SAHO, Brian Morgan, and I 
quote, says: 
 

That’s what bothers us. We seem to be directly targeted. 
SAHO has been placed in an extremely awkward position. 

 
And that position, Mr. Speaker, is a position that I’ve just 
described where you have them representing the health care 
agencies in the province, virtually all of them, and they’re also 
going there with a mandate from the government and most 
likely for a fairly large wage increase  an untenable situation 
to put the district boards in through their representative at 
SAHO. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that this government keeps talking 
about the downloading, about the offloading from the federal 
government. We hear that daily. We’ve heard it for months and 
I suspect we’ll hear it for several more months. 
 
However, one thing that the provincial government fails to 
recognize is that virtually they’ve passed on everything that 
they’ve been downloaded on onto other agencies, whether it’s 
the health, or whether  in the motion that we’re addressing 
here  whether it’s health or whether it’s education or whether 
it’s the municipalities, they’re passing down, they’re passing  

down the dollars, the offloading to these other agencies, the 
same way as they’re complaining about the federal government 
having done. 
 
However, they are very slow to react and to talk about some of 
the projects that the federal government has come in to help 
them out with. And I’ve raised some of these before, Mr. 
Speaker, in the House. And their health infrastructure 
announcements that are made, whether it’s in Macklin . . . I 
noticed in this article we talk about the town of Vanguard, half 
a million dollars to expand and renovate the existing health 
centre there. Neilburg is another $808,000. And one in Norquay 
for an upgrade of well over half a million dollars  $600,000 
to be example. 
 
However, the provincial government fails to recognize the 
millions of dollars that are pumped into this province by the 
federal government, and all they do is criticize about 
downloading. And yet that’s a little like the pot calling the 
kettle black, when they’re doing exactly the same thing. 
 
They also talk about these . . . and this article also goes on to 
talk about the above cases, and there was nine of them in total. 
And it goes on to say that the majority of the 10.2 million in 
funding is from the districts themselves. So the provincial 
government’s had pretty much a free ride on this one. 
 
I just happen to notice as I talked earlier about the acute care 
fight, Mr. Speaker, that’s been actually raging in this province 
for the last four years, five years, another headline of acute care 
beds to be closed. This is an article from January 25, and it was 
talking about the South Central Health District Board to close 
the acute care beds at the Pangman Hospital on May 1. And of 
course we raised that issue back on May 1, that there were more 
closures. And of course the Pangman Hospital was the 53rd 
such facility that was closed, or to use the government’s terms I 
guess, reformed. 
 
And from a community going to have, you know, 24-hour 
emergency care, 24-hour nursing care, having these recovery 
beds in their small hospital so that their people can come back 
from major surgery in the larger centre and the tertiary that’s 
provided in the tertiary hospitals, to having a viable health 
agency, a viable health facility in their community, to one 
where they virtually have a 9 to 5 service in their community 
provide the services. 
 
Still better than some of the communities that moved directly 
from a viable health institution to a telephone booth, Mr. 
Speaker. But I’m sure that Pangman will do everything they can 
to survive and hang on to what services that they do have now, 
and hopefully that we can bring this government to its senses 
and rethink their whole wellness model and admit that they 
made a major mistake in the way it was handled and the way 
that the people were educated about it and some of the moves 
that they have taken. 
 
I noticed another headline where we’re talking earlier about 
communities pitted against communities, and the former Health 
minister talking about Health reform and the wellness model 
would not pit community against community. I said earlier, it  
  



2172  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

has. It did, and it will continue to do so. 
 
And the article here is from the Leader-Post again, Mr. 
Speaker, where it talks about the scenario I described earlier in 
the north-east part of the province where, and I’ll quote from 
the chairman once again, Mr. Peterson: “From our perspective it 
isn’t doable. The district can’t afford to continue to operate the 
home.” 
 
(1615) 
 
And this is in reference to the Eaglestone Lodge in Kamsack 
where of course the Kamsack folks are trying to fight for the 
services that they feel are necessary in their area. And the 
district health board made a decision based strictly on funding 
which was a direct result of offloading by the provincial 
government to the health districts. 
 
I really think if you look back, Mr. Speaker, over the health 
reform and the wellness model as it started back in late 1991 
after this government came into power, is that it’s strictly been 
based on economics. I recall some discussions with my 
involvement through the provincial health association at the 
time, about where we were all headed with wellness and what 
input the local people would have and the local communities 
would have. 
 
And the minister of the day I think originally started out with 
some good thoughts about health reform. And she talked, and I 
talked to her for many, many times over the course of the first 
couple of years of her portfolio, where she talked to the people 
and explained to them that, you know, where they were trying 
to get to and that all the things that make up a small community 
would be taken into the equation, would be factored into the 
equation, Mr. Speaker, and that included the finances, 
economics. 
 
And the communities were prepared to work with the 
government of the day at that time under those guises that all 
factors being equal, that everything would be looked at. If a 
health agency was in a community and there was a number of 
jobs involved there, that plays a great part in the survival of that 
local community. 
 
However, it became more evident as the time went on as we 
started talking to other cabinet ministers, the Finance minister 
in particular. I recall when that portfolio changed from the 
minister of the day who quit at that time for health reasons and 
there was a new one appointed, it seemed at that point in time 
all of a sudden all those things that we talked about as health 
trustees with the department and with the Health minister were 
going to be thrown out the window. 
 
And the boom was lowered in the offices of the provincial 
association over on Park Street, that health reform had come to 
such a point that economics would not play a role in the 
decision making in a community whether a community would 
maintain its services or not. And of course that was in direct 
reference to the 52 hospitals that were either closed or 
converted. 
 

So the wellness model took a turn, at that point in time, to the 
worst. And that is one of the reasons where we’re at today, 
because health reform was based strictly on economics and 
continues to be and it’s not based on the needs and the 
well-beings of the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the motion there’s two other areas that are 
touched on. One is education and one is municipal services. 
And as the member so clearly indicates across, it is very 
interesting and it appears there is a trend created there in that 
health kind of led the way in reform. 
 
And as I look at the education reform being started now, Mr. 
Speaker, I sense and I’m a little bit leery  no, I’m not a little 
bit leery; I’m a lot leery and sceptical  that education reform 
is going to take the same direction that health did. We’ve seen 
now, as I said earlier in health, it started out, the minister went 
out and talked to the communities, talked to the people and get 
their input and we’re going to listen to what the people of the 
province said. 
 
I’m hearing the same thing over the last month or so. We’ve 
heard the ministers of Education say, in particular the minister 
of . . . it just slips my mind where the minister is from, but she 
talked about going out, starting to listen to people. And those 
meetings are now being held across the province. I believe I 
have one up in my country tomorrow night, Mr. Speaker. There 
was one there last week which I wasn’t able to attend, but I will 
be there Wednesday night. 
 
It seems to be taking the same trend, where under the guise of 
going out and talking to the communities, listening to the 
people, listening to the education trustees . . . Familiar ring. 
They were trying to listen to the health trustees. We’re going to 
listen to all these people and we’re going to come back and 
formulate our opinion on what’s going to happen with 
education in this province. 
 
Well I think, Mr. Speaker, that the decision has already been 
made. I think the minister and the government knows full well 
what they’re going to do with education in the province, and it 
means a downsizing of services in rural Saskatchewan for our 
young people out in the small communities. That’s why I’m 
sceptical; that’s why I’m leery. I’m afraid education will take 
exactly the same route as did health. 
 
We’re also seeing that the government is talking about 
municipal governments. We’ve had a great controversy over the 
last three months about a Bill that they brought forward. And of 
course what it did was it got the people in rural Saskatchewan 
on their feet, particular the many reeves and councillors that 
we’ve got throughout the province. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, many of those same reeves and 
councillors were the same people that were involved in health 
care. The reeves and the councillors and the aldermen and the 
mayors were the very people in many cases that sat on some of 
these health boards. In many instances the local councils felt it 
necessary that they have direct representation on their health 
care boards because the local hospital districts, of which we 
were one at home, had taxing authority, Mr. Speaker; therefore  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2173 

these people that were duly elected wanted to ensure that their 
tax dollars were being used in the most frugal possible way. 
 
So small wonder that these councillors, that these small 
councils with their reeves and their mayors and their aldermen, 
are sceptical about what’s happening with municipal services. 
 
These same reeves and councillors and aldermen and mayors 
were the same people that were basically thrown aside when the 
health reform took place. It’s no small wonder they’re sceptical 
about what’s going to happen to them in the reformation of the 
municipal sector, local governments, in this province. 
 
However the education scenario is so much like happened in 
health that it really is scary, and it bothers me somewhat. If the 
government and the minister responsible is truly interested in 
going out and talking to the people of the province that are 
involved in education  which would include the boards, it 
includes the teachers, and includes the taxpayers of the province 
 then great. But they’re prepared to talk to them, but they’re 
not prepared  and they’re even prepared to listen  but 
they’re not prepared to take under advisement what these 
people are saying because their plan is already made up. And 
that’s the unfortunate part. 
 
If you’re going to do that, if you’ve already got your mind made 
up, why try and fool the people once again as you did in health 
reform and do it again in education and a third time in the local 
government aspect. 
 
The government saw what happened when the local councillors 
and reeves and that group, through SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), told them what they 
thought of their plan. And there seemed to be a contradictory 
conversation with these groups from the Premier and from the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs as to whether they were going to 
proceed and how they were going to proceed, which is very 
interesting. 
 
One day the minister would say that yes, they are going to 
proceed. And then the Premier would get pinned down as he did 
at the SARM convention and actually took quite a rough ride at 
that convention . . . and in his comments . . . and unfortunately 
then came out hard and says that we will be proceeding. And 
the next day the minister says we won’t. And so it was back and 
forth. And I think they were feeling severe pressure from our 
local government boards, through SUMA and SARM, and 
recognized the errors of their way. 
 
Unfortunately that didn’t happen in health. As people were 
trying to fit into the system and communities were fighting 
against community, trying to ensure that their services would be 
saved, those people couldn’t come together. One of the things 
that the minister of the day and the government of the day and 
the Department of Health did so well through their whole 
wellness reform, that they were able to pit more than just 
community against community, Mr. Speaker. They were able to 
pit health sector against health sector. 
 
Using the guise that the community wellness model would look  

after all the health needs of the people of the province, and 
slamming at the acute health care sector, it brought the 
long-term sector onside because they’re saying, well we’re 
going to cut acute care; the long-term care sector is basically 
going to stay the same, stay stagnant, so they weren’t going to 
see a lot of cuts. And the community, the home care program, 
was going to just see a massive broadening  more money, 
more services, and that was going to be it. So you had the 
sectors at each other’s throats as well. 
 
And we saw that happen at the provincial level too, where there 
was three provincial associations involved  the acute care, the 
long-term care, and the home care sector  and everybody’s 
fighting for their turf and for their own territory. 
 
And what happened? Well it’s like the old adage. The 
government came right up the middle. They got what they 
wanted, they got their wellness model started. And in the 
meantime the communities and the people involved with 
different health sectors were so busily fighting amongst 
themselves that nobody was really noticing what the 
government was doing. And now we’re paying for that very 
thing. 
 
And that is exactly what the government is planning on doing in 
education. They’re going to go out, they’re going to try and pit 
the teachers against the trustees, they’re going to try and pit 
community against community. I’ve had phone calls already in 
my own constituency about teacher cuts and school closings 
and our community should have it and theirs shouldn’t. That 
won’t happen. The people will not let that happen again, as it 
did in health care. 
 
The same thing will apply to the municipal sector, the local 
governments. Those people are some of the most efficient 
groups in our province. They work within their budgets. 
They’re directly accountable to the people that elect them. 
Unfortunately that’s not always like the MLAs on the sides 
opposite. They don’t seem to be accountable to their 
constituents. And so the plan of coming up the middle will not 
work in terms of agriculture, in terms of the local governments. 
 
The local government boards, I’ve talked in this House before 
about the volunteer time and the hours that the local councillors 
and the reeves and the aldermen, or alderpersons, and the 
mayors do, especially in small communities, is enormous. I 
know full well. I had a father that was a councillor and a reeve 
for many, many years; a brother that’s a reeve now, and many 
friends that are councillors around the province. And you only 
have to talk to them to know what they’re having to put up with 
and from what they’re doing . . . 
 
And for this provincial government to talk about being more 
frugal and more accountable and having to come together 
because of some plan that possibly a bureaucrat puts together 
some place, is just irresponsible. These folks for years . . . 
councils for years have come together in utilizing shared 
services. There is offices across the province, RM offices across 
the province, that have amalgamated, utilizing the same 
administrators, the same secretaries, many shared services that 
they’re using. 
  



2174  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

So they’re way ahead of this provincial government in coming 
together and seeking out some economies that are amongst 
them, and they know that. And this province’s government 
knows that too. 
 
But however, the provincial governments use this as an 
opportunity to further download under the guise of reform. And 
as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, reform is great, but you have to 
have change, not just for the sake of change, but because it 
makes some sense. And in the terms of many of our seniors 
across the province, including my father, it’s about time the 
government tried to use some common sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I’m proud to stand today and 
speak in favour of this motion and hopefully that . . . I can only 
hope that some of the comments today will hit home with some 
of the members opposite, especially those members in the back 
benches there, that there has been a mistake made in health and 
that they will not let it happen again in agriculture and certainly 
not in local municipal services. And therefore I’m very happy to 
support this motion. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity today to rise and speak in 
support of the resolution moved by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. It’s high time this government stopped 
trying to solve its financial problems on the backs of 
municipalities in the province. It’s high time they took the 
responsibility for their actions and admitted that the problems in 
Saskatchewan health, education, and municipalities, stem from 
the NDP government itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a daily basis we hear this government complain 
about federal government offloading, and almost every answer 
to every question is quickly and cowardly thrown back to the 
feds or the previous government. The finger-pointing never 
stops. But, Mr. Speaker, there is a difference between the 
federal government’s offloading and the offloading by the 
provincial government onto local governments and local 
boards. The federal government doesn’t vehemently deny that 
these cuts are affecting Canadians. The provincial government, 
on the other hand, uses denial as its main defence. They have 
stubbornly dug in their heels and refuse to take any 
responsibility for cuts to school boards, to health boards, and to 
municipalities. And it is partly because of this that I feel I must 
address the private member’s motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, federal transfer payments in the fields of health, 
social services, and education have levelled off and that has put 
stress on the provincial treasury. I admit this. I also admit that 
this government did inherit an enormous debt piled up by the 
free-spending Tory administration of the ‘80s. And we know 
that there are no huge, untapped pools of money anywhere to be 
found to finance pet political projects. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the members opposite can 
continue to hide behind the past. It is time for them to face the 
problems of the present and to find real and workable solutions. 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is on its fifth year. When will  

they accept the responsibility for the decisions made by 
themselves? 
 
It’s time for them to face up to the people living in communities 
all across Saskatchewan and start making better, more 
progressive choices for the people of this province, and to 
include, stop moving everything from rural to urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Instead the right solution has so far seemed to elude this 
government. Instead of learning from mistakes of the past and 
moving on, the members opposite have tried to offload their 
financial woes onto the backs of our local municipalities. They 
introduce poorly thought out legislation and are forced to 
withdraw it when they face severe opposition from RMs, towns, 
and cities, namely SUMA and SARM. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Service Districts Act was a government 
nightmare. They decided that municipalities would have to 
amalgamate one way or another, as the Minister of Municipal 
Government put it, or at least she put it that way once. The next 
time she spoke on the issue, she was saying she would ask her 
government to withdraw it. And I agreed with that very much. 
 
The government’s wishy-washy position on the Bill showed 
exactly how poorly laid out this legislation was. If it wasn’t for 
the efforts of SARM and SUMA, the government would have 
blindly passed a regressive piece of legislation. I can only say 
how happy I am that the members opposite and the Premier and 
the Minister of Municipal Government finally came to their 
senses. 
 
I would like to think it’s because, for the first time this session, 
they actually listened to the people who changes would affect. 
Of course, that would be a complete change of character for the 
long-term, professional politicians on that side of the House. 
 
I don’t mean to be cynical, Mr. Speaker, but I seriously hope 
that withdrawing The Service Districts Act was not just another 
carefully planned manipulation by this government. I would 
hate to think that the municipalities involved in this problem 
were being used as a pawn in this government’s unsavoury 
political games. Mr. Speaker, I’m sad to say that this would not 
be the first time municipalities suffered because of carefully 
crafted government plans. 
 
For example, when the provincial government decided it was 
going to enter the world of gambling, through the introduction 
of video lottery terminals, the question naturally arose: how will 
the profits be divided up and where will they go? The minister 
of Municipal Government at the time, Carol Carson, stated that 
at least 10 per cent of the revenue should go back to the 
communities  a very good statement and a good move. It was 
understood by all that this was to be an unconditional grant to 
the municipalities in which the VLTs (video lottery terminal) 
were located. Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister even agreed at 
that time to this deal. 
 
Since VLT revenues were predicted to be in the neighbourhood 
of $95 million, the municipalities counted on transfers from this 
government to the tune of $9.5 million. But then the  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2175 

government threw a curve ball. The Finance minister told 
municipalities they would have to decide how these monies 
were to be divided up before the provincial treasury would 
actually pay them out. 
 
Their position was that SSTA, SAHO, SARM, and SUMA 
would all have to agree on a formula for dividing up the money 
before they received even one dollar. Well unfortunately for the 
people in Saskatchewan communities, this plan was good for 
the government but bad for them. The government got a chance 
to play a part of a benevolent caretaker while at the same time 
didn’t have to pay out one red cent  possibly a pre-planned 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know how difficult reaching a consensus 
would be. Priorities of these organizations were far from the 
priorities of the NDP and from each other. For example, SAHO 
took the position that since every real source of health problem 
. . . a greater share of the $9.5 million should go to local health 
care organizations. Understandably, the other organizations 
weren’t willing to accept this argument. Perhaps as government 
grants to them haven’t been so deep, they may have been able 
to work out an acceptable plan. As it was, these organizations 
are being forced to fight for every dollar, in a twisted plan by 
the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to some extent it must be said that SAHO had a 
valid point. Gambling can cause health problems even though 
this government adamantly denies it, at least publicly. But I 
know there are members opposite who oppose the 
government’s expansion into gaming. I know there are 
members both in the House today that are absent who didn’t 
support the introduction of VLTs. Still the government got into 
and still they’re taking all the money and none of the 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the SSTA decided that it did not want any part of 
the revenue raised from gambling. And it must be said that the 
SSTA’s position was certainly a principled one. It’s pretty hard 
to justify funding education through the use of games of chance, 
particularly VLTs. 
 
The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association took the 
position that the VLT revenue should simply be sent back 
directly to the municipalities with no strings attached on a per 
capita basis. Well sadly enough, Mr. Speaker, I think they were 
dreaming. This government makes no move without strings 
attached, and the sooner people realize it the better off they will 
be. Mr. Speaker, SUMA said the money should be sent as an 
outright grant back to the same communities that money came 
from. But the provincial government again said no. The 
government was unwilling to see the money go to 
municipalities in any form which might enable them to simply 
give some tax relief to the ratepayers. 
 
Furthermore the government wanted the transfers of VLT 
revenue to be high profile so that the provincial politicians 
could get lots of press and lots of credit. Imagine that, 
provincial politicians wanting applause simply for giving back 
to the communities just what they had taken away tenfold. 
 

What kind of government is this, Mr. Speaker? It’s a sad tale, 
Mr. Speaker, but it ends this way. Since SUMA, SARM, 
SAHO, and the SSTA could not agree, which I believe the 
government knew ahead of time, when they could not agree 
how to divide up the paltry 10 per cent share of the VLTs 
revenues, the money was never paid at all, a premade plan 
within the government. The provincial government simply said, 
since you cannot agree, we will give you nothing. End of story. 
 
The government played a political game, and the people of this 
province lost, especially rural Saskatchewan. And that’s a sad 
reflection of the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this government obviously places no importance on honesty or 
accountability. Instead they spend their time practising the art 
of deception and are very good at it. 
 
That’s exactly what they are doing when they pretend they are 
not offloading onto the municipalities, health boards, and 
school boards. That’s exactly what they are doing when they 
introduce a Bill like The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act. With this Act, the government is strutting 
around patting themselves on their backs for keeping funding 
levels to the same for the last three years. They are keeping 
them at 92 per cent of what they were in ‘93-94. 
 
It doesn’t matter though that inflation keeps going up. It doesn’t 
matter that the municipalities are facing $10 million in cuts. It 
doesn’t matter that the Bill is a bad thing for Saskatchewan 
communities. The members opposite insist on congratulating 
themselves for their goodwill and generosity. Mr. Speaker. This 
is nothing more than a cruel joke. 
 
I know and the members opposite know that the provincial 
government is seriously harming local governments, the same 
people that are very efficient out there. My colleague had 
mentioned earlier that these same councillors, reeves, and 
aldermen work very hard to be accountable, are answerable to 
their neighbours, and keep their own house in order. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, with their short-sighted, urban-based plans 
for rural amalgamation and their disregard for small town 
community-based life, they are hurting every one of our 
communities. In a province built on community spirit and on 
cooperation, this government is sadly out of touch. The 
members opposite have no compassion and no sense of 
responsibility for their actions. And in the long run, it is the sick 
and the elderly and the children and the people of rural 
Saskatchewan that suffer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a government that cared about the people would 
re-evaluate its priorities and put the well-being of the people at 
the top. But unfortunately this is not a government that truly 
cares about the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is the government need to take 
responsibility and needs to start building a strong economy. 
Despite the Finance minister’s wishes, I think we should fight 
to become a have province. I think we should work on 
becoming a prosperous province that has the ability to preserve 
the infrastructure of health, education, and local governments. 
 
  



2176  Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, I offer my full support to the private members’ 
motion. I only hope that somehow, someday, this government 
will finally realize that people do matter and that is the people 
of this province that will make Saskatchewan great  not the 
people here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In briefly 
commenting on my great deal of pleasure and my tremendous 
desire to speak to this motion, I am made aware that just a 
motion or an expression of support for the motion would be 
enough. And I there also adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m not sure, I may have to have this 
motion written out, actually. With leave, we’re going to move 
to motions for returns (debatable). Actually I may have to have 
that written out. I had it written out but I think it’s just outside 
the door. Do I need it in writing? 
 
The Speaker:  The House will just stand temporarily in 
recess. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That this House do now proceed to motions for returns 
(debatable). 

 
Leave granted. 
 
(1645) 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  I’d just ask on a point of order, Mr. Speaker, 
if you would clarify whether or not leave was actually required 
to proceed on that motion  just for clarification purposes, 
please. 
 
The Speaker:  In response, the hon. member from Prince 
Albert Carlton raises a point of order. The question he raises is 
whether leave is required to present this motion. The answer is 
yes, simply put. However it would have been in order to have a 
superseding motion when the question was being debated 
before the House. However once the House carried the motion 
to adjourn debate, then leave is required in order to proceed to 
set a special order for the House, and therefore the order is in 
order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Just a word of explanation, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to proceed through these, and we’re 
going to give members opposite leave to move motions which 
are not standing under their name. Thus we will deal with them 
all. We won’t have to stand motions for those who are not 
present. Otherwise this takes an enormous amount of time as 
you return to it several times. 

We are prepared on this side of the House, we are prepared to 
give leave once, a blanket leave. If that won’t work, then feel 
free to ask leave for each one, but we’re prepared to give leave, 
probably to the member from Moosomin who’ll probably do 
them all. We’re prepared to give leave to the member from 
Moosomin and the member from Wood River to move motions 
that aren’t under their name. 
 
The Speaker:  It is permissible for the House by leave, to set 
its procedures. The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave in dealing with motions for returns (debatable) that leave 
be granted to permit motions for returns (debatable) which are 
in the name of members who are not in their desks at that time, 
to be moved by another member of the same caucus. So the 
government . . . is it clear? Is it clear what the leave is that the 
Government House Leader is asking for? 
 
Yes, let me repeat that so that  this is rather unorthodox  
that the House, if it gives leave, knows very clearly what it is 
giving leave for. It is normal that in motions for returns 
(debatable) that the member in whose names the motion sits on 
the order paper, must be present . . . must be in his or her desk 
in order to move it. 
 
The Government House Leader has asked for leave that if a 
member is not in his or her desk, that another member of his or 
her caucus would be permitted to move that motion and the 
House would therefore entertain it. Is it clear what the question 
is? Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return no. 1 showing: 
 

Regarding health district boards across the province: (1) 
according to the Provincial Auditor’s audited statements of 
each health board, the number of health district boards that 
ran deficits in the ‘94-95 fiscal year; (2) according to the 
Provincial Auditor’s figures, the number of health districts 
that ran deficits in the ‘93-94 fiscal year; (3) the number of 
health districts that expect to run deficits in the ‘96-97 
fiscal year; and (4) whether you plan to honour the former 
Health minister’s commitment to provide our caucus 
copies of the Provincial Auditor’s audited statements for 
each health district. 

 
So moved, seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I may say with respect to I think all 
of these motions for return (debatable), before I take my seat 
I’m going to provide . . . I’m going to table the answers to the 
questions. I think this is the first time this has ever been done, 
but when we . . . if the motions are amended in accordance with 
our suggestions, all answers will be tabled here and now. 
 
As I say, I think this is the first time this has ever been done.  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2177 

You get your answers here and now. I won’t trot out the sorry 
tale of woe that occurred to us when we were in opposition; we 
waited months for these things. So I therefore move, seconded 
by the member from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That we add the words “operating capital, operating fund, 
and capital fund” after the word “ran” in questions (1) and 
(2) and after the word “run” in question (3). 
 

This is just simply for clarity, so it’s clear that you’re getting 
the information for the operating fund and the capital fund. It 
isn’t clear without it. With that brief explanation, if I could 
attract the services of a page, I’ll move that. And I will, before I 
take my seat, I’ll also file the answer. 
 
The Speaker:  I’ll ask the page to return the answer because 
the Government House Leader is anticipating the conclusion, 
and the motion is before the House. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 2 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As previously agreed to 
I move, seconded by the member from Rosthern, that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 2 showing: 

 
Regarding former employee Ms. Chandra Prasad: (1) the 
reason Ms. Chandra Prasad received a severance of 25,000 
after resigning from the position of junior protocol officer 
after working in the Provincial Secretary’s office for nine 
months; and (2) the one that approved Mrs. Prasad’s 
severance; and (3) the formula that was used to determine 
the amount of severance received by Ms. Prasad. 

 
The Speaker:  Again I need to remind the hon. member that 
he needs a seconder for his motion. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I did mention the member 
from Rosthern earlier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of this motion, 
table the answer. We’re prepared to answer this here and now. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 3 
 
Mr. Toth:  Again, Mr. Speaker, as previously agreed, I 
move, seconded by the member from Rosthern, that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return no. 3 showing: 
 

Regarding the approximately 12,000 farmers who received 
gross revenue insurance program (GRIP) bills from the 
government: (1) the number of the approximately 12,000 
farmers who received GRIP bills from the government 
have paid these bills to date; (2) the rate of interest the 
government is charging for those producers who are late in 
paying these bills; and (3) the amount of the largest GRIP  

bill sent out by the government to an individual farmer. 
 

I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This one may be modestly more 
controversial. I will at the conclusion of my comments be 
moving an amendment which will delete the third question. We 
are doing so on the advice of the department who tell us that if 
we answer the third question, we will be divulging confidential 
information about individual files. 
 
An Hon. Member:  We already know it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well you may already know it. But 
it’s one thing to know it; it’s another thing . . . The member 
from Moosomin says they already know it. That may well be. 
But it’s one matter to know it; it’s quite a different matter to 
have the matter a matter of public record. 
 
Some of these things we just go on the advice of the 
department. We’re advised by the department that this will 
disclose confidential information. And therefore I move, 
seconded by the member from Watrous: 
 

That we delete section (3) and substitute the following 
therefor: 
 
(3) The range of the largest GRIP bills sent out by the 
government to farmers. 

 
So delete the one that’s there and substitute that one. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 4 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, as previously 
agreed to, I move, seconded by the member from Rosthern, that 
an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 4 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for SaskPower: (1) the amount 
SaskPower has collected in additional revenue from 
Saskatchewan home owners since the 12 per cent rate 
increase took effect January 1, 1996; (2) the amount 
SaskPower has collected in additional revenue from 
Saskatchewan farm customers since the almost 13 per cent 
increase took effect January 1, 1996; (3) the total amount 
of additional revenue collected from SaskPower rate 
increases since January 1, 1992 to date. 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, as soon as this is passed, table 
the answer. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2147 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2147 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2147 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2147 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2147 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2147 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2147 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2147 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2147 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2148 
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2148 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2148 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2148 
Crofford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2148 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2148 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2155 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Tourism Awareness Week  

Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2148 
Providence Place Protest 

Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2149 
Northern Saskatchewan Children’s Festival  

Atkinson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2149 
Passing of George Leith  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2149 
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 

Children’s Miracle Network  
Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2149 

Ranch Ehrlo Society Sod-turning Ceremony  
Hamilton ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 

30th Anniversary of Ranch Ehrlo  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2150 

Regina Big Brothers Golf Tournament and 25th Anniversary  
Trew........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Political Contributions Disclosure  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2150 
Mitchell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2151 

Possible Wilkie Hospital Closure  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2151 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2151 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2152 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2152 

Closure of Queen City Cleaners  
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2152 
Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2153 

Personal Care Home Licences  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2153 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2153 

Universities Restructuring Report  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 
Mitchell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 

Rural Internet Service Charges  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2154 
Teichrob .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2154 

 
 



 

Business Credit Checks  
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2155 
Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2155 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER  
Ruling on Status of An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act  

Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 
Correction to Previous Statement  

Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2158 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2156 
Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS  
Motion No. 16  Third-party Funding  

Krawetz ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2156, 2158 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2156 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2162 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2163 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2175 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2177 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable)  
Return No. 1  

Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2177 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2178 

Return No. 2  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2178 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2178 

Return No. 3  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2178 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2178 

Return No. 4  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2179 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2179 

 


