
















































May 13, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1561 

 May 13, 1996 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Finance 

Vote 18 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 

left is Gerry Kraus, the Provincial Comptroller. On my right is 

Kirk McGregor, the executive director, taxation and 

intergovernmental affairs. Behind Gerry is Bill Van Sickle, 

who’s the executive director of administration. Behind me is 

Larry Spannier, the executive director of the treasury board 

branch. Behind Kirk is Jim Marshall, the executive director of 

the economics and fiscal policy branch. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good evening, 

Madam Minister, and good evening also to your officials. 

Welcome back here today. 

 

Just a housekeeping matter here. The last time we engaged in 

estimates, I had asked for the expenses related to your trip to 

New York after the budget had been tabled. I wonder if you 

have . . . I know at the time you said you hadn’t had all the bills 

in yet. Would you be able to provide those at this time? I don’t 

know if it was ever answered completely either as far as what 

staff actually attended the trip with yourself in that as well. So 

if you would just please respond. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, no, the bills aren’t processed yet. Just the deputy 

minister attended with me. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It has been 

considerable time now since the trip was taken and also since 

we made our first request for the cost of the trip. At this time, 

would it be too much to ask, at least could you give us some 

idea when we could expect that we get the total cost for your 

trip? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, it’s difficult to say. It’s a complicated process. We 

wait until they all come in. We have to go through the process 

of translating American dollars and Canadian dollars back and 

forth. So it usually takes a significant period of time and it’s 

difficult to say exactly when they will be in. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I think it’s just a simple 

matter of converting U.S. (United States) into Canadian funds. I 

don’t know that it should take over the course of . . . over a 

month’s time, I mean, to translate these bills back into Canadian 

funds from U.S. funds. However, it looks like this will be a 

matter that will come up again in estimates later. I would hope 

that you would be able to have those informations  

for us in our next session, though. However, it seems like an 

inordinate amount of time. 

 

If we might just turn to what has been suggested, a review of 

the income tax system, Madam Minister. I’d like to know when 

such a review might begin on your part and what sort of things 

may be involved in such an undertaking, a review of the income 

tax system, and whether maybe you have some sort of an 

outline as far as what such an undertaking of a review of the tax 

system might cost the taxpayers. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, we don’t control the income tax system so we’re not 

in a position to review it. So it will not be part of any review 

because it’s basically the federal government that controls the 

income tax system. The provinces only have the capacity to add 

on surtaxes or to put in place credits at the bottom. 

 

So beyond that what we have said is we will . . . we’re not 

talking about a major review. We’re talking about consulting 

with people with respect to taxation, but income tax cannot be a 

significant part of it. And that’s been one of our 

disappointments with the federal government because we’ve 

always said that we wanted them to review the tax system. It’s 

really the federal government that controls most of the main 

levers in the tax system. They’re the ones who set the income 

tax bands, they’re the ones who decide what the exemptions 

are, they’re the ones who collect the tax. So really, without the 

federal government, anything a province can do in reviewing its 

tax system is very limited. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  So, Madam Minister, are you correcting me? 

Was I wrong? Did you not undertake prior to the election last 

year that there would be a review of the tax system? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, what we’ve always said, and we said prior to the 

election and during the election and after the election, is we 

want to see the tax system in Canada reviewed, overhauled, laid 

bare, so the public can have input; the public can look at the tax 

system, who pays taxes, who doesn’t pay taxes; is everybody 

paying their fair share. 

 

But  and we have always said as well, as have other 

provinces  that to do a really thorough, comprehensive, 

meaningful review of the tax system you require the 

participation of the federal government because many of the 

main levers, such as the income tax system, are controlled by 

the federal government. So we have consistently called on the 

federal government to overhaul its tax system. 

 

As the member opposite would know, thus far the federal 

government has not been willing to do that. They’ve talked 

about some changes to business taxes, looking at the business 

tax side, and they’ve talked obviously about the GST (goods 

and services tax), trying to change the tax system to live up to 

their commitment to get rid of the GST. But never have they 

agreed to an overhaul of the tax system, which is what this 

government has consistently requested. 

 



1562  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well, Madam Minister, I know we’re always 

being accused of old-time politics and playing games, and it 

would appear to me that in this respect if you’re suggesting that 

you’ve suggested a review of a tax system but then on the other 

hand, it’s beyond your control, well this would seem to be a 

highly political comment and tactic on your part as well. If 

you’d looked at having done a review immediately after the 

election, then perhaps we may have considered that there was 

some legitimacy to what you are suggesting. 

 

On a similar note, the Premier is also putting off reducing the 

size of cabinet until some time in late 1997. And it does raise 

the question of whether or not these sorts of things are being 

done for political purposes rather than to assure that our tax 

system is speedily changed to ensure that it’s helping to create 

jobs as soon as possible. 

 

And I just ask, Madam Minister, why is such a review being 

delayed, albeit as you’re saying here this evening, it would be 

rather limited in scope, given what powers . . . what you have 

control over? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, we’re talking about the ’96-97 budget. In the budget 

we say we’ll look at the tax system in the province for 1997. 

 

What I’m saying to the member opposite is, it’s too grandiose 

to talk about that as a review of the tax system because if you 

look at the average person, the main taxes they pay are income 

taxes. The greatest source of revenue that we get from the 

average person is clearly income tax  over a billion dollars a 

year. 

 

If you look on the corporate side, the main taxes that 

corporations pay are corporate income taxes. We don’t control 

those tax systems. They’re controlled by the federal 

government. So for us to say we’re going to do a thorough 

review of the tax system is not legitimate. We cannot do that 

without the cooperation of the federal government. 

 

We can look at what we control but it is quite limited, is what 

I’m trying to say to the member opposite. And that’s why we 

have consistently, for the last three years, said to the federal 

government, we’re willing to open up our tax system; you need 

to open up yours though because you control most of the levers 

in the tax system. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, as you’re suggesting here, 

it is rather limited in scope as far as what you can undertake in 

the way of a review. But you did maintain that you would do 

such a thing. And it’s one thing to review a system. However, 

thereafter it’s quite another thing to make any changes. And can 

the taxpayers of this province look forward to even some 

limited changes in the near future or are we going to have to 

wait some time for a very limited-scope review and some time 

thereafter for a tax relief? Can you provide some sort of a 

framework here in terms of a timetable, perhaps if you’d like, as 

far as when we might expect some change  even if it be an 

incremental one at best. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member  

opposite, what this government said in its recent budget is, for 

the 1997 budget we’ll look at our part of the tax system. But 

what I’m saying to the member opposite, and I’ll make another 

point to the member opposite as well, is that to say to the 

province, do a thorough review of the tax system, is not 

reasonable because the province doesn’t control the main levers 

of the tax system. It’s the federal government that does that. So 

whatever we do will be very limited in scope. 

 

I would also say to the member opposite, we will look at the tax 

system but we won’t do what the members opposite have done, 

that is say to people in Saskatchewan, don’t worry, we’re going 

to protect your health care. We’re actually going to spend . . . I 

think we’ve been keeping track upstairs of the spending of the 

members opposite, incredible spending, either want more 

money for this, more money for that, but don’t worry, we’re 

also going to decrease your taxes. So we will look at the tax 

system, as we said. People are interested in taxes. We won’t try 

to be grandiose in telling people what can be done because 

when you don’t control the main levers of the system, it’s not 

being realistic to tell people that you can overhaul it. You can’t. 

You can ask some limited questions of it. 

 

We will certainly do what we can, and in terms of tax relief, we 

will do what we’ve always done. This budget had tax relief in 

it. We reduced income tax in this budget. We reduced income 

tax in the previous budget. So as we can afford it, we will 

continue to reduce taxes. We’ve reduced business taxes to 

create jobs and with a lot of success. So as we can afford to 

reduce taxes, our commitment is to do so. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good evening, Madam 

Minister, and I welcome your officials. 

 

I was just listening quite intently to your conversation here and 

your debate on what is within your control and what isn’t. I 

understand that gas tax in this province is partially under your 

control. In fact the provincial portion of it would certainly be all 

under your control. 

 

As you well know, there’s been a great debate in the last few 

days regarding the price of gasoline in the province. So while 

discussing the price of gasoline, people have been asking me, 

Madam Minister, just what portion of a litre of gas, 

percentage-wise, goes to provincial taxes. Could you offer me 

that answer? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The provincial tax is about 15 cents 

a litre, which is very close to what the federal tax is on a litre of 

gas as well. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you tell me 

what the federal tax is, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  14 cents a litre. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you tell me 

also where we rate then as far as the rest of the provinces are 

concerned? Is this the highest, the lowest, or what is it? I’d like 

to know which province has the highest, or imposes the highest, 

gas tax in Canada? 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  It would be the province of 

Newfoundland has the highest gas tax in Canada  sixteen and 

a half cents. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you tell me 

what province is the next highest, please? 

 

(1915) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The province of Quebec is the next 

highest  15.5 per cent. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. What province is the 

next highest after Quebec? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Saskatchewan is the third highest. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Is Saskatchewan’s 

. . . the 15 per cent right on or 15 point something or . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Fifteen even. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

people are asking me that when the price of gas jumps like this, 

naturally the taxes go up also. And so actually the province of 

Saskatchewan benefits tax wise, or general revenue would 

benefit. I’m just wondering if it’s been calculated over the past 

year, for instance when there has been a rise in gas prices, how 

much money in the last year has been . . . if it’s been calculated, 

how much has been taken in and where that money goes to? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. I’m sorry, member, that’s completely inaccurate. The 

tax on a litre of gas remains constant no matter what the price 

is. So there’s no relationship between the price of gas and the 

taxation. It doesn’t change with the price. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

I have a few questions about some of the tax breaks that are in 

place. In your department’s preparations for the budget tax 

expenditures present in the system . . . were obviously put on 

the advice of yourself or of previous ministers in their 

departments. But nonetheless I’d ask a brief question about 

whether there is some sort of an annual review that might be in 

place to assess whether these sorts of tax breaks, or tax 

expenditures if you’d have it, are reaching their targeted 

population. And in addition, I wonder if such a review is 

assessing whether the policies are making their intended 

impact? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I’d like the member to be more specific. I’m not sure 

exactly what he’s talking about in terms of tax measures. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, for example with respect to 

tax expenditures, one which a number of people in the province 

apply for when they’re calculating their taxes for tax credit or 

expenditure on education and health tax . . . that credit is worth 

$200 per filer. And it’s calculated in such a way it appears that 

very few people would actually get that sort of credit. So in this 

instance, I’d like the minister to tell us how many people might  

actually receive this credit from the province. Would you have 

that figure then perhaps? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, that’s an automatic, low income reduction. So if you 

were a low income person, when you fill out your income tax, 

at the very end of it, you automatically get a tax credit which is 

a calculation of the fact that sales tax is not often the most 

progressive tax. And therefore people at the bottom can end up 

paying part of the sales tax that they shouldn’t be paying. So it’s 

a very important measure to ensure the tax system is as fair as 

possible so that low income people do not end up paying a 

disproportionate share of the sales tax. And its target audience 

is low income people. They are the ones who apply; they are the 

ones who get it and therefore it is effective. 

 

And as I say, I don’t know what else you can say about that 

particular tax credit. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, then do you not have the 

figure for the total number of people who receive such a credit 

in the province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  What happens is that there are three 

different tax credits designed to benefit low income people. 

One is the sales tax credit; one is the child tax credit for 

families with children, and another is a senior’s tax credit. And 

they’re all open only to people at the lower end of the scale. 

There are 335,000 tax filers who take advantage of these tax 

credits. The cost to the province is $53 million a year. 

 

And this is something we’re very proud of because it ensures 

that the tax system is a fair system; that there is relief for people 

at the bottom. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, when you were in 

opposition your party was quite vehement about not having 

taxes that were regressive. I believe, in your pre-election paper 

about tax fairness for the 1990s, quite often it condemned the 

previous Conservative government for creating regressive taxes 

and adding to others. And in particular, you had condemned the 

introduction of a flat tax as well as you condemned the Tory 

decision to increase the sales tax. 

 

But getting back to this sales tax, I’d like to know whether, 

since you’ve got to power, has your government ever 

undertaken a study to assess whether that $200 education and 

health credit that is, as you acknowledge, it’s for low income 

families, does that actually cover the amount of education and 

health tax that they are paying? And if you haven’t undertaken 

such a study, I wonder why. Could you provide an explanation 

why you haven’t? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, once again the member opposite is twisting words. I 

don’t know intentionally or he just didn’t quite understand what 

I said. It’s not designed to cover the full cost of low income 

people’s payment of the sales tax. It’s not designed to replace 

all of the spending on the sales tax. It is designed to ensure that 

the tax system is fair and it provides some relief for people at 

the bottom. Does it do that? Yes it does. 



1564  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Now with respect to the fairness of the tax system, we have 

always maintained that we have problems taxing essentials. It’s 

one of the reasons why we oppose the federal Liberal 

harmonization proposal. Because people who support that . . . 

and I’d be interested to hear whether the members opposite do 

support harmonization. Where do they stand? 

 

Because if you support harmonization, what you’re saying to 

people in Saskatchewan is you would like to see the tax, the 

sales tax, provincial sales tax, applied to essential commodities. 

You would like people in Saskatchewan to now be paying sales 

tax on home heating fuel. You believe people in Saskatchewan 

should now be paying sales tax on children’s clothing. You 

believe people in Saskatchewan should be paying taxes on 

books. So what I would really like to know is  the members 

opposite have been quite silent on this  do they support 

harmonization? 

 

We have said we don’t because we do not believe that these 

sorts of essentials should be taxed and we’re not prepared to tax 

them. I’m asking the member opposite, do they support 

harmonization? One would assume  they always support 

what the federal Liberals do  that they probably do. Does that 

mean, therefore, that they support taxing children’s clothes, 

books, and home heating fuel? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, with respect to going back 

to the education and health tax again and the tax credit, would 

you have any idea what is the maximum income one can have 

before you’re no longer eligible for that particular tax credit? 

 

Also, in relationship to tax expenditures arising from credits on 

the E&H (education and health), if we have low income people 

in the province that are paying this E&H tax, and as you’re 

acknowledging here there’s problems with this in terms that 

they’re not getting all of that money credited back through the 

tax credit, does the minister have on average any idea what 

percentage at least of the E&H tax that is being rebated to these 

lower income individuals? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, what I would say to the member opposite is there are 

provinces in Canada that have sales taxes, and everyone except 

Alberta does. The Atlantic provinces have sales tax on a wide 

variety of essentials, and they provide no tax credits at all. So 

these are not parts of everyone’s tax system. 

 

We have it in Saskatchewan because we believe, yes, everybody 

pays their fair share of taxes, but we want to provide some relief 

to the people at the bottom. 

 

It depends on . . . when you fill out your income tax, member 

opposite, you would know how much . . . when the thing phases 

in or out depends on your family circumstances. It depends on 

things like how many children you have, how many other 

deductions you have. So that number will vary. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, also on the tax credit side, I 

wonder if you could provide us with the number of filers the 

department estimates will apply for the investment tax credit of 

9 per cent that you’ve applied on the capital inputs for  

manufacturing and processing? How many firms will be using 

this to apply against their corporate income tax payable? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, that’s a new tax measure. We haven’t got the returns 

in yet. What we do have in though, from that tax measure, is we 

do have companies saying they have moved their operations to 

Saskatchewan because of that tax credit and I’m thinking of the 

canola crushing plant in Floral, for example, as one of several 

examples. 

 

What we do have in from that tax credit is the results. We know 

that in the last year alone there are 3,000 more jobs in 

manufacturing and we attribute a significant part of that 

increase to the fact that there is a tax credit. Because it hasn’t 

been in place long enough, we don’t know how many people 

will take advantage of it. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Surely, Madam Minister, though you have 

some sort of estimates within your department as far as what 

this tax expenditure may cost the people of this province. And 

also, just with respect to that canola crushing plant at Floral, am 

I to take it from the minister’s comments that because of this 

investment tax credit this is the reason why Cargill  I believe 

is the private company you’re speaking of in this case  why 

they in fact located their crushing plant here in Saskatchewan. 

Was their decision based solely on that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, he was asking for the cost of the tax credit. I’d refer 

him to the budget. It’s in the budget. It’s on page 66 and it says 

the estimate for that year is $8 million. 

 

Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, part of our strategy to 

create jobs in Saskatchewan is to take parts of the economy 

where we have a natural strength, which is in processing raw 

materials, rather then allowing the jobs to be exported by 

allowing others to process our products elsewhere. We believe 

that we need to do everything we can to encourage processing 

of these products in Saskatchewan. 

 

Part of the way we’ve done that is to adjust our tax system so 

that, for a small to medium-size manufacturing and processing 

firm, Saskatchewan now has the lowest taxes in Canada. We 

believe this is important to ensure that we can attract those 

businesses here. And we believe the results are there; we 

monitor the results. 

 

There are more jobs. Last job numbers show even more jobs 

coming in this area, so obviously these policies are having their 

effect. They’re working. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, if I could just put the 

question to you again I had with respect to the canola crushing 

plant however by Floral, you had mentioned that perhaps this 

investment tax credit was the reason why this crushing plant is 

going to be located in our province. Is this the sole reason why 

the Cargill company has decided to locate such a plant in our 

province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

opposite, I think the fact that we have canola in the province 

would also be a factor in deciding to locate it here. I’m sure 

they wouldn’t have located it here if we didn’t have canola. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think also 

what played a key part in their decision was the demise of the 

Crow freight rate. If that particular program had not met its end, 

I am quite sure that Cargill would never have located their 

crushing plant here in the province. So there is also that aspect 

of it too that I would mention. 

 

I mentioned earlier though, Madam Minister, a need to be able 

to measure the success of any program, especially like a 

tax-expenditure program. And I’d suggest that the purpose of 

the one we’re referring to here is, and as you have suggested as 

well, one of creating jobs. 

 

But I would think that any program such as this would require 

some sort of a yardstick; some means of being able to measure 

what degree of success the program will have. And would the 

minister be able to just tell us tonight in this House what sort of 

a plan you have in place that would be able to measure how 

successful this very investment tax credit is at creating jobs in 

this province? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, as I said to the member, the yardstick is the jobs. The 

jobs are there. They increase each and every year with each and 

every new tax measure. But, Mr. Chairman, I’m not going to let 

the member opposite get away with what he just said. 

 

First of all once again his facts are dead wrong. The Cargill 

canola crushing plant was in place well before your Liberal 

friends in Ottawa cancelled the Crow benefit. 

 

The negotiations preceded this particular change. And to say 

that because you don’t have a benefit for farmers means that a 

canola crushing plant is going to locate here, is simply not 

accurate. 

 

But once again the member opposite is right back into the old 

pattern, saying that he supports enthusiastically a measure 

which took over $300 million out of the pockets of 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Member, why won’t you start speaking up for 

Saskatchewan instead of always defending the Liberals in 

Ottawa. The Liberals in Ottawa did to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan one of the most unpopular things that’s ever been 

done  cancelling the Crow benefit, costing them about $300 

million a year. And the member opposite stands up and says 

obviously this was a great and beneficial thing to the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government will continue to defend the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. The member opposite can continue to defend the 

federal Liberals. We’ll speak up for the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, there was a great deal of 

attempt on the part of the members opposite to make a lot of 

political mileage out of the demise of the Crow rate. And I 

would just suggest to you that it’s the ingenuity and innovation 

of the farmers in this province that prevented you from being 

able to make the political brownie points out of that that you 

had hoped to be able to take. 

 

But if I could just go back again to some tax questions here 

again. I wonder if the minister could provide us some indication 

as to her budget and her department’s work in forecasting this 

year on some of the figures that are used as assumptions. Like 

for example, does the minister have any idea how many tax 

filers there will be here in Saskatchewan this coming year and 

how that would vary from last year? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Generally there are about 600,000 

tax filers in the province. Between 400 and 450,000 actually 

pay income tax. Our estimate is that there’ll probably be more 

this year because the economy is very strong. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. But in a similar 

vein, I wonder if the minister has any idea of the geographic or 

socio-demographic breakdown of the filers and the taxpayers 

that you’ve referred to. Because I’ve noticed in recent years that 

there’s been a number of people dropping out of the workforce. 

You’re suggesting perhaps this trend is perhaps going to reverse 

this year. But if one looks back at some of the information 

that’s being provided by Revenue Canada in the first two years 

of your government’s administration, there was a drastic drop in 

the number of youth taxpayers. And does the department have 

any calculations on what social or geographic groups our 

taxpayers in this province come from? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, as I mentioned to the member opposite before, it’s the 

federal government that collects the taxes from the province. 

It’s the federal government that does any analysis. They do not 

break it down in that sort of detailed way. So we don’t have any 

breakdown beyond the fact that we are anticipating  we get 

some sense of where the tax returns may go  that they will be 

strong because the economy is in good shape. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I would like to turn to the 

problem of the pension liabilities in the province. In 

Saskatchewan at the moment, we have about $3.3 billion in 

unfunded pension liabilities. And after your wholesale 

retirement of hundreds of civil servants, the number of people 

paying into many of these different pension funds has gotten a 

lot fewer. 

 

Now thanks to your government’s decision to give teachers a 

raise without matching the appropriate funding increase to the 

boards, there undoubtedly will be a lot fewer people paying into 

the very large unfunded liability for the teachers in the 

province. And given these things, Madam Minister, I’d like to 

hear you explain why you’re not being more aggressive in 

dealing with this situation of unfunded pension liabilities. 

 

I know in the past  if I could just go on for one more 

moment, then you could make some comments  but in the  



1566  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

past I see the Provincial Auditor’s often criticized your 

government for not including the pension liabilities in the 

summary financial statements in the Public Accounts. And 

when you finally did this, he did compliment you and 

deservedly so. But then after reading how you used his quote in 

your platform, when he only said that your financial statements 

are accurate and nothing more, I start to worry how you’re 

misusing the auditor’s report. 

 

But that aside, why is it that when you’re telling everyone in the 

province what the sheer size of the debt is, this government 

continues to exclude the cost of its pension liabilities. I heard 

you say, Madam Minister, that part of your job is to explain 

things very simply and clearly to the public. And by excluding 

the pension liabilities when you’re telling the average person in 

the province about our total level of debt, this strikes me as not 

being very clear in this regard. 

 

And would you just explain why you would continue to give the 

public that sort of an inaccurate picture, because it does appear 

to me that it’s for nothing more than political gain. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I would say once again the member opposite is not 

correct. The financial statements of the province are not 

inaccurate. The auditor himself has said the summary financial 

statements that the Government of Saskatchewan provides are 

among the best in Canada, and has gone from saying that 

Saskatchewan in the ‘80s had among the worst financial 

statements in Canada, and we’ve gone to among the best. 

 

So in terms of what is there, it is very open and accountable, 

and it is included in the summary financial statements. 

 

The member opposite would know that this is not a new 

problem. Going way back to when the Liberals were in power, 

the Conservatives in power, there was not adequate funding of 

pensions, and there wasn’t adequate accounting in the past of 

pensions. Nobody put them on their financial statements and 

said, yes, here is a liability. 

 

So what I would say to the member opposite, this is the first 

government in the history of Saskatchewan that has actually 

recorded the pension liability on our summary financial 

statements. So there is nothing . . . there are no political gains 

being played. There’s nothing being hidden. They are right on 

the summary financial statements. 

 

And I said, once again, the auditor says the summary financial 

statements of the province of Saskatchewan are among the best 

in Canada. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, by the very simple fact that 

you’re reporting them and you’re reporting them accurately 

now, I guess now at this point is the point where you have to 

take a step forward and start deciding how to go about at least 

attempting to solve some of those problems. 

 

But if I might just make some mention of the Canada Pension 

Plan here. On repeated occasions, Madam Minister, I’ve heard 

you and some of your colleagues on the government benches  

fire back about the state of the Canada Pension Plan when 

we’ve asked certain questions in the House or in response to 

actions by the federal government. And aside from raising my 

concern that you, in fact, are more interested in federal politics 

than you are about serving the province, it shows an odd 

contradiction. 

 

Could the minister explain why members opposite are so 

concerned about the state of the Canada Pension Plan, but you 

cannot somehow be more concerned about provincial plans, 

getting a course of action and starting to implement it with 

respect to your own funding crisis in the pensions, especially 

. . . Could you just give us some sort of an indication as to when 

you might start to implement any sort of a plan of action? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. I welcome that question. There’s a dramatic 

difference between the Canada Pension Plan and the pension 

situation in Saskatchewan. 

 

The chief actuary of the Canada Pension Plan has said if no 

changes occur in the Canada Pension Plan by 2015, it will be 

out of business. It will not have the money that it requires to 

continue. 

 

So what is being said is changes need to be made in the Canada 

Pension Plan in order to correct it. 

 

What’s happened in Saskatchewan is yes, the pension liability 

is an issue. But in 1978 the then NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government did take action to correct the problem for the future 

so that anybody who’s joined the government  the members 

opposite, the members on this side  are . . . most of us are not 

in the old pension plan. We’re in a pension plan that is fully 

funded and we’re in a pension plan which is very inexpensive 

to taxpayers; one of the most inexpensive pension plans to 

taxpayers in all of Canada. So corrective action has been taken, 

as of 1978, in the province. 

 

What has not occurred at the federal level is there has been no 

corrective action with respect to the Canada Pension Plan, and 

that’s what your federal counterparts are saying as well. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I think a lot of the 

problems related to the Canada Pension Plan also attribute to 

the fact that a lot of money was lent out to many provinces at 

rather low rates of interest, too. So the provinces did have a part 

to play in that certainly as well in terms of under-funding. 

 

But, Madam Minister, with respect to these unfunded pension 

liabilities here in the province again  and as we know we’re 

referring to the defined benefit plans here; not the funded plans 

or defined contribution plans  the Provincial Auditor had a 

fair bit to say, as you know; I’m sure you’ve read since he 

released his spring report. And he made a number of 

observations regarding your department about pensions. And 

we have dealt with some of the concerns already. 

 

But recently you made some remarks that really concerned 

many pensioners in the province about being able to serve . . . 

look out after their best interests. Because in the April 30  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

edition of the Leader-Post you were quoted as saying that the 

problem with some of these pensions will be over and done 

with when the people in these defined benefit plans retire. 

 

And I’m concerned about that comment because it shows, I 

feel, a lack of understanding, because the problem just actually 

starts when these people retire. That’s when you have to start 

paying those people’s pensions and that’s related to those off. 

 

So I wonder if the minister could explain or provide some 

comment, because there was some confusion surrounding the 

subject, and then with your comments that were in the 

newspaper. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, what I said before I’ll say again. The main thing about 

pensions in Saskatchewan is that the change has been made. 

 

That is, as of 1978 the whole pension scheme was changed so 

that anybody who was hired by the government in any way 

since then is on a new pension scheme. The new pension 

scheme is fully funded. The government puts its money away, 

the employee puts their money away. And what the employee 

gets when they retire is just what’s been there and what has 

accrued because of investments and interest. So the problem 

has been fixed in that sense. 

 

I would also like to correct the member opposite about the 

Canada Pension Plan. The Chief Actuary did not say that it was 

provincial borrowing that has caused . . . one of the problems. 

He has listed four factors that have caused the problems with 

the Canada Pension Plan and I would like to read these to the 

member opposite so that he can correct what he’s been saying 

in the past. 

 

The four factors are: changing demographics, that is the number 

of baby boomers who are going to retire beginning in 2011; 

changing economics  the old pay as you go system worked 

fine as long as the economy is expanding very rapidly; 

enrichments to the Canada Pension Plan  it was added on to 

in a way that was not properly funded; and there were 

increasing disability benefits. So those were the four factors that 

the actuary has cited in terms of the problems with the Canada 

Pension Plan. He did not cite problems with the provinces 

associated with the Canada Pension Plan problem. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, at least the first three of 

those concerns that you’ve mentioned there are ones that would 

pertain to our own province’s defined benefit pension. So I’m 

glad to see that there is some recognition that those sorts of 

things are causing problems with respect to unfunded pension 

liabilities because they would be of concern provincially here as 

well. 

 

And back to the issue of the department’s lack of action on 

these pensions. If you look over the Provincial Auditor’s report 

you’ll notice some pretty significant growth in these pension 

liabilities. On page 31 of the fall auditor’s report it showed the 

pension liabilities growing by amounts that vary from 90 

million to close to 300 million in one year  and this all 

occurred just over the past five years. 

Now first off, the growth in liabilities is startling and the 

minister’s response that there is no problem is not factual. My 

question to the minister however is this: can the minister offer 

us some idea of just how much these liabilities will grow? How 

much will they grow by . . . over the next year? Will it be 

another $150 million like last year or are we going to drop even 

deeper into the red? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, we don’t have an exact estimate. All pension costs are 

built into the four-year financial plan. So as you can see, the 

four-year financial plan has spending reasonably flat. If this 

crisis that the member opposite  and I know the member 

opposite loves to talk about crises  were occurring, you 

would see a dramatic increase in spending over the next four 

years, which is not there. 

 

But again, I must correct the member opposite in his last 

statement. He said that the three factors that I mentioned with 

respect to the Canada Pension Plan would obviously apply to 

the Saskatchewan pension system. That simply isn’t accurate. 

The problem with the Canada Pension Plan is a demographic 

problem; that is, there are more and more baby boomers who 

are going to retire and there are fewer and fewer people to 

support them. 

 

That is not true because . . . that would not be true of our 

situation because anybody who joined the government since 

1978 would be in an entirely separate scheme. So they would 

not be in that sense depending on somebody coming after them 

to support them. Their pensions are fully funded. They take care 

of themselves. 

 

The other thing that’s true of the Canada Pension Plan is, the 

actuary talked about the number of enrichments that have 

occurred since 1966, and these enrichments were not part of the 

original scheme and they haven’t been properly funded; that is 

there was no increase in premiums to pay for these. The pension 

plans that have existed in the province have not had 

enrichments tagged on to them as we’ve passed through the 

system, so that doesn’t apply as well. So what the member said 

about the similarities between the Canada Pension Plan and our 

pension plan is not accurate. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, just 

following up on some of the questions being brought forward 

by the member from Thunder Creek regarding the 

Saskatchewan unfunded pension liability. And it’s interesting to 

note, while you brag about the decreases and how you’ve got 

the budget under control, we see an unfunded pension liability 

that has grown by $500 million in the last five years. This, 

Madam Minister, will be a problem for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now you can talk about the defined plan and the fact that there 

are a number of . . . about a handful of members, and I’m not 

exactly sure, maybe you can clarify tonight as to the members 

on your side of the House that are still involved in the old, 

unfunded pension liability and the pension plan and whether  



1568  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

any of them changed and moved under the new plan. 

 

But, Madam Minister, the problem arises in the fact that sooner 

or later someone is going to have to pay for this plan. And what 

happens, whether it’s your government, whether it’s a 

government elected down the road next time around, Madam 

Minister, the Finance minister of the day all of a sudden is 

going to find themselves with a group of retired individuals 

who will be collecting under this unfunded pension liability, 

and that becomes a major liability and it is a draw on the 

general revenue of the province of Saskatchewan because there 

aren’t enough assets to cover the pension funds and how it’ll be 

paid out. 

 

So, Madam Minister, one of the things the Provincial Auditor 

recommended and the committee, the Public Accounts 

Committee recommended, was that you implement a 

commission . . . I believe it was the Gass Commission had also 

indicated this, indicate this, that there should be a public 

commission implemented, put in place, to review the unfunded 

pension liabilities and come up with a plan of action so that 

people, the taxpayers of this province, aren’t left in the lurch 

when all of a sudden there’s a major draw on this unfunded 

pension liability. 

 

Madam Minister, will you do that? Will you implement this 

commission, bring them into place and review this problem? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, you really have to have a sense of humour in 

Saskatchewan to hear the Tories all upset about debt. They 

should know a lot about debt, Mr. Chairman. When they 

became government in Saskatchewan in 1982, the total debt  

all debt, guaranteed debt, Crown corporation debt, government 

debt  all debt of the province was $3.5 billion. By the time 

they’d finished with this province, Mr. Speaker, the debt was 

over $14 billion. 

 

So for them to stand up and say, when by the way is this 

government going to be concerned about the pension liability 

. . . which by the way, you were in office for over a decade; you 

didn’t even book it. You didn’t even put it on your books. You 

didn’t even put it on your books, never mind decide how you’re 

going to spend it. So for people who’ve taken a province from a 

debt of three and a half billion to 14 billion to stand here and 

call to account a government that has taken a $14 billion debt 

and reduced it progressively, so that it’ll be about 12.5 billion 

when this current financial plan is finished, for them to stand up 

and sanctimoniously say, when are you going to deal with the 

pension liability, is a little bit laughable. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Madam Minister, it’s interesting that you 

can stand in this House or this Assembly and talk about 

bringing things under control. Who built up the unfunded 

pension liability had nothing to do with the last decade, had 

nothing to do with Grant Devine and the Conservatives. It was 

there prior to. In fact, Madam Minister, go back to 1989  go 

back to the teachers, the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation) and the concerns they had. The former government 

made a commitment to reducing that unfunded liability, putting 

in an additional amount of funds into the . . . to bring that  

liability under control. And the unions in this province berated 

the Grant Devine government in 1989 for not putting the 

additional funds in. 

 

Now we see . . . I guess a person’s not supposed to use proper 

names in this Assembly, but the member from Regina South 

sure likes getting involved when I’m in the debate. And I 

appreciate that; I enjoy having him getting involved in the 

debate. 

 

But, Madam Minister, what I find very interesting is how one 

party over 10 years created such a massive debt. Take a look, 

Madam Minister. Take a look, Madam Minister. And I see the 

members opposite really getting . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Order, order. The hon. member 

from Moosomin has the floor and he’s having a terrible time 

being heard. So I will ask the members to please come to order. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, you seem to forget that your 

former Finance minister previous, the member from Regina 

East I believe, was the individual who indicated, yes, 

acknowledged, that there was a major debt in the Crown 

corporations prior to 1982. He acknowledged the unfunded 

pension liability. 

 

And also, Madam Minister, who bought all the land in 

Saskatchewan? Who bought the potash holes in the ground, that 

were producing revenue to the province of Saskatchewan, 

became a major liability to this province. The 1.2 billion lost in 

1986, written off in order to get the Potash Corporation into a 

position where it could manage as a company. And look what 

it’s doing today. Look at . . . how much revenue are you 

bringing in because of potash and what it’s done and how it’s 

evolved as a company. 

 

Madam Minister, maybe you should go back a little bit and 

review the land bought under the land bank system and find out 

how much short . . . there wasn’t enough revenue generated on 

an annual basis to pay the interest. In fact take a look in the blue 

book. On an annual basis, there was almost $10 million had to 

be taken out of an additional fund to pay for that land bank 

funding. Where did the money come from? I’m sure you found 

it on a tree. It came from New York just like you did with 

potash, buying holes in the ground. You had a revenue source, 

but no, you had to own the company, ran it into the ground. 

You couldn’t run it. Finally we dispersed it and look what it’s 

doing today. 

 

Now we’re into an unfunded pension liability that you continue 

to say is somebody else’s problem. And I see the Provincial 

Comptroller there shaking his head as well. Well it is a 

problem. Who’s responsible for this, Madam Minister? When 

are you going to start paying attention to your own commission, 

the Gass Commission, that asked you to put in place a 

commission to review unfunded pension liabilities and how 

we’re going to address these? 

 

I suppose, Madam Minister, if you lose the next election and 

you’re fortunate enough to win, if you’re still around two or 

three terms down the road, you’re going to come back and say,  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

well look what the former government did. Whether it’s 

Conservative or Liberal, look what they did; we’re deeper in 

debt. Well it would be interesting . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. We’re on item 1 in Finance and 

the hon. member from Moosomin has the floor. I’m having a 

great deal of difficulty hearing the hon. member and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Obviously we can’t understand him. 

 

The Chair:  Order. I invite all members to join me in 

listening to the hon. member from Moosomin as he puts his 

question. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, when will you establish this 

commission that was basically promised  I believe the 

Premier promised via the Gass Commission back in 1991 in this 

big, open-the-books fiasco which was drawn up to try and get 

the public to realize what you knew, and what the Premier 

knew, all along even back in the mid ‘80s  when will you, 

Madam Minister, establish a commission to review the 

unfunded pension liabilities so that a government elected down 

the road isn’t going to be stuck with trying to address a problem 

that you’re allowing to continue to grow on an annual basis? 

When will you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, first of all, I would say this is the first government in 

this province that has ever properly accounted for the pension 

liability. We have said at some point in the future, yes we will 

look at them and we will pay them. 

 

But for the member opposite to be standing in this legislature 

asking where did the debt come from, let me tell you  and 

these people in the Department of Finance know because they 

were there as you racked it up  each and every year your 

government spent in the 1980s more than a billion dollars than 

you took in. There’s where the debt came from. 

 

You managed to take assets of this province, like the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, and sell it for peanuts, losing in 

one fell swoop $400 million for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

There’s where the debt came from. You were one of the most 

irresponsible administrations in all of Canadian history. There’s 

a couple in Quebec; perhaps Duplessis might be a bit of a 

challenge, I’m not sure. 

 

And when the member opposite calls the Gass Commission a 

fiasco, the only thing that was a fiasco about the Gass 

Commission is he exposed to the people of Saskatchewan what 

the members opposite had done to this province, which is come 

as close as one would ever want to get to bankrupting this 

province. 

 

Mr. Member, I would advise you to not stand here and lecture 

us about debt. You’re the ones who racked it up. We’re the 

ones paying it down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well coming from a university prof, that’s a very  

interesting scenario of how we define economics in this 

province. You talk about writing off a loss in the Potash 

Corporation. Madam Minister. The former government didn’t 

create the debt in the Potash Corporation. The former 

government did not buy Potash Corporation. Who bought the 

holes in the ground? 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Order, order. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I find it very interesting, 

especially having been here prior to 1991. And some of the 

members who are entering the debate today and the resolve that 

they had in trying to address the spending and the fact that the 

former government tried to bring lower spending and cut down 

the expectancy of the public, especially in the public sector, 

when it came to teachers and when it came to health spending 

and what have you, and it wasn’t good enough . . . and how 

we’re going to get waste and mismanagement under way, and it 

would be so much rosier. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, and, Madam Minister, it seems 

to me that while there was a deliberate move at that time in the 

opposition to try and really discredit . . . and they did a fine job, 

I’ll have to admit that, did discredit a . . . did a fine job. The 

fact is we haven’t seen the increases in Health. We haven’t seen 

the increases in Education. The only increase we’ve seen over 

the past few years in this province is an increase in the 

unfunded pension liability plus a pension . . . plus a debt load 

that has gone from 14.6 to 20.  what is it? It’s over $20 

billion total debt  $20 billion total debt. 

 

It’s interesting as well, Madam Minister, that now all of a 

sudden we’ve got a value on assets, so you may make it a net 

debt of 10. Well don’t you think there was a value on assets 

back prior to 1991? 

 

So, Madam Minister, why don’t you just come clean first of all 

and address the unfunded pension liability because, Madam 

Minister, I don’t care what you say today. I don’t care what you 

say tomorrow. Until you get that unfunded liability under 

control, until you rein it in . . . You may not be sitting in that 

chair two years from now, but somebody else is going to be 

responsible for it when it starts to pay out, when people who are 

part of that plan, including the Premier of this province, 

including the Economic Development minister, including the 

member from Regina East, when those members start drawing, 

then their pensions plans . . . The last figures I saw were 

somewhere in the neighbourhood . . . could be over a million 

dollars themselves just for each individual. And how many of 

the public sector out there . . . 

 

So, Madam Minister, how do we address the unfunded pension 

liability unless you’re going to today sit down and address that 

liability rather than continually letting it or allowing it to grow? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. I’ve already answered the pension question I think 

about three times. But the member opposite has raised some 

other points which I would very much would like to engage  



1570  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

him on here. 

 

He talks about the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And 

let’s set aside whether or not we should have kept the Potash 

Corporation public or private. Let’s just set aside that 

consideration. Let’s set aside whether we should have held on 

to our Cameco shares or not. Imagine the business acumen of 

the members opposite who managed to sell shares, the 

government’s shares in the Potash Corporation, when they were 

valued at $18. Today they’re between 85 and $100. Imagine 

people trusting a government that figures out how to sell at the 

bottom. When is the price the lowest possible so that we can 

sell this asset and lose the most amount of money for the people 

of Saskatchewan. Losing $400 million in that particular 

transaction, and still have the nerve to stand up and mention 

Potash Corporation in this legislature. If I were a Tory and I 

were interested in my survival, there are certain words I would 

never say. Debt would be one; deficits would be another; and 

Potash Corporation would be another. 

 

Then look at their most recent record. They were urging, as 

were the Liberals, this government to sell our Cameco shares 

when the shares were about $18. Right, nice bottom  get 

them when the price is good and low so you can lose lots of 

money for Saskatchewan taxpayers. We actually sold the 

Cameco shares when they were selling for $75.50, netting $700 

million for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member opposite is absolutely incorrect when he says 

where’s the new money in health, education, and social 

programs. Over the next four years we’ll be putting 242 million 

new provincial dollars into health, education, and social 

programs. 

 

So I mean, I don’t know where the member opposite is coming 

from. And I guess what’s really distressing to me is it doesn’t 

seem as if they’ve learned anything. I thought they had learned 

from the ‘80s that they didn’t want to do things like sell assets 

and spend the money. 

 

But when we were discussing the sale of Cameco shares, the 

very member asking these questions was reported by the press 

saying exactly what he just said tonight  where’s the new 

money for health, education, social programs. Sell your Cameco 

shares and find new money for health, education, social 

programs. Use one-time money from selling an asset to finance 

long-term programs. If you have an asset and you can sell it, the 

only thing the Tories do with it is spend it. 

 

And then he says, in his previous question, how did we get $14 

billion in debt in this province. Just listen to the members 

opposite. It’s easy to see. The same logic was there in the ‘80s. 

Sell something, spend it, let tomorrow take care of itself. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Madam Minister, you can be sure thankful 

that the former government did disperse of PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) because it wouldn’t have . . . 

the share would not have the value they have today. They 

wouldn’t have. If you’d still own Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, it’d be running up another debt alongside Power 

and telephone and all the other corporations. Even though  

they’re making big money, their long-term debt is still there. 

Potash Corporation would still have that. It would not have that 

value that it has in shares today. 

 

What about the Cameco shares? Where did they come from? 

All of a sudden you get a little windfall in your pocket and you 

take credit for it. You had nothing to do with it, Madam 

Minister. You had nothing to do with the Cameco shares. 

Besides, we didn’t ask you to sell Cameco shares at $18 a share. 

They were up over $70 when we suggested . . . 

 

You were going around crying like a spoiled brat around this 

province, telling people how bad it was. In fact if I remember 

right, and I think it’s been going . . . we’ve been hearing this for 

the last six months. You’ve been blaming nobody else but the 

federal government. It seems that the problems in this province 

have everything to do with either Jean Chrétien and the federal 

Liberals or Grant Devine and the former Conservatives or the 

health districts or the school boards. Nothing, as far as you’re 

concerned, lies at your feet. 

 

Madam Minister, headlines today, at the end of the day the 

problems in health care, Madam Minister, stop at your feet. 

You’re the Minister of Finance. You allocate the funding to 

health care. The problems in education, the Scenic Valley 

health district . . . or school district . . . I’m not sure. The 

Minister of Education . . . I don’t see her around right at this 

moment. But the Scenic Valley School Division just voted for a 

four-day school week. 

 

I would like to ask the Madam Minister if she’s going to okay 

that, if she’s going to give them the ability to put their four-day 

school week in place so that they can address the $278,000 

shortfall that’s coming as a result of your policies, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And you talk . . . And then on top of it we got $77,000 for a 

1-800 sex line. We’ve got a few more dollars for another line 

over here. Madam Minister, get out of everybody’s moral life 

and decide where the real responsibilities are, Madam Minister, 

so that you’ve got the funds to deal with this province. 

 

What have we got to brag about as a province that the Premier 

suggested he was going to eliminate hunger. All of a sudden he 

had to admit a few days ago that unfortunately hunger is going 

to be with us; we can’t do much about it. And a lot of that 

hunger was created through policies that the NDP did in 

opposition to try and stir the pot. 

 

Madam Minister, we get back . . . we can address all these 

issues, but we still have not addressed the one issue that I’ve 

asked you about that you’ve skirted time and time again. When 

are you going to put in place a public commission to review the 

unfunded pension liabilities so that former Finance ministers 

and governments are not left holding the bag while you 

continue to allow that unfunded liability to grow. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite. I’ve already answered that question several times. 

 

I’d like to take the member opposite up on the other points that  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

he raised. The success of the Potash Corporation of course has 

nothing to do with potash prices being at record levels. 

 

With respect to Cameco, he says the NDP government can take 

no credit for the value of the Cameco shares. Cameco was a 

corporation which originated with Saskatchewan Mining 

Development Corporation, a Crown corporation created in the 

1970s by the then NDP government, a very successful Crown 

corporation. So I think we can take some credit for that. 

 

The member opposite though, I mean, where is this member 

going? He says . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Nowhere. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well I think nowhere is possible. 

We have put . . . over the next four years we’re putting 242 

million new provincial dollars into health, education, social 

programs. All we hear from the member opposite is more, 

more, more. And every so often he’ll raise some little item that 

costs $77,000 and he said: you see, I wouldn’t do that, but I 

would use that to fund the $1.5 billion health budget. 

 

The member opposite can’t have it every way. Where is he 

going to get the more than 242 million new dollars for health, 

education, social programs? Is he going to get it by continuing 

to find other things to sell and spend it? Is he going to get it the 

way they got it in the ’80s by running deficits, by racking up 

more debt? 

 

There is no consistency in what the member opposite is saying. 

I do not believe the people of Saskatchewan will see the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan as the people to rely on for 

a quality health care system. I do not believe that for a minute. 

They will run scared at the prospect of a Conservative 

government in charge of their health care system. 

 

And I’d like to conclude, Mr. Chairman. The member says 

where does the Premier get this idea that Saskatchewan is such 

a great place to live? He gets the idea that this is a great place to 

live by living here and by talking to people here, and by the 

very fact that when provinces all across Canada were evaluated 

in terms of their quality of living, this is the best place in 

Canada in which to live. We’re proud of that fact. We’re proud 

of the fact that we live in the best province in the best country 

in the whole world in which to live. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I sure appreciate the fact that this 

is in Hansard because a lot of things that the Madam Minister 

was alluding to what I was saying certainly were not what I was 

addressing to just a moment ago, but suggesting to spend more 

and more and more, take from here and spend it over there 

 

And maybe we . . . we were just discussing it here, maybe one 

of the reasons we don’t have to worry about the unfunded 

liability is because our health care system is becoming such a 

shambles that all the seniors may not be around to collect it so 

it’s not going to be a major problem. I’m not sure. Is that how 

we address it? 

 

But it’s interesting, Madam Minister, you talk about  

Conservatives or Liberals, whether they be federal or 

provincial, giving over the health care system to the private 

sector. Well I see today, and I commend the Minister of Health 

for it, finally bringing down the regulations that allows for 

private care homes to expand from 10 to 40 beds. Because what 

it’s saying, Madam Minister, there are many people in this 

province who are reaching out to back-fill the holes that you 

have created through your choices. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I think if you made . . . the way your 

choices are being made . . . and unfortunately here’s where I 

disagree with the Minister of Health, is his suggestion that the 

funding is going where the services are being provided. I guess 

if you shut down 52 hospitals and as every district is looking 

right now at shutting down the hospital beds, yes people are 

going to have to go elsewhere. So then all of a sudden local 

districts lose their funding. And it’s just an ongoing scenario. 

 

It’s easy for even the bureaucrats sitting here; they live in 

Regina. They have access to health care. All the decisions right 

now are being made by individuals who have access to all the 

health care in the world. They forget about the person out in 

Moosomin. They forget about the person down in the 

south-west, Rose Valley, or north-east, wherever. 

 

Madam Minister, but while we’re discussing this, and I guess 

I’m getting a little off track too because I get back to the one 

question, the question I’m still trying to get a committed answer 

to: how do we address the unfunded pension liabilities? When 

will you put in place a commission to sit down and look at that 

unfunded liability that hasn’t grown because of me, hasn’t 

grown because of the current Liberal opposition, has grown 

because of your policies by over $500 million in the last five 

years. 

 

You balance the general fund but you let the unfunded pension 

liability to grow. Don’t worry about it, just like Mr. Blakeney 

did in 1982. He didn’t worry about the unfunded liabilities 

which grew to an astronomical number. They, in reality, may 

not. As the Provincial Comptroller said the other day, well you 

don’t need the $3 billion today. That’s correct. But when you 

have to start paying it and if there’s a shortfall, every Finance 

minister down the road is going to have to budget for that 

unfunded liability because more and more people  like the 

Premier, like the member from Regina East, like the Economic 

Development minister  will all of a sudden one of these days 

be collecting their pensions and somebody’s got to pay for that 

plan. 

 

When, Madam Minister, are you going to sit down and review 

that plan? And don’t give me this garbage about the Canada 

Pension Plan and how the federal government’s addressing it. 

Let’s deal with the unfunded pension liability in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I’ve already answered that question three times. What 

I would say to the member opposite is, what is going to be of 

concern, as people in this province look back over the last 10 to 

15 years, is not the $3 billion pension liability but the debt of 

this province that went from 3.5 billion in 1982 to over 14  



1572  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

billion in 1991. So it is absolutely beyond credibility that the 

Tories would be standing up in this legislature trying to portray 

themselves to the people of Saskatchewan as concerned about 

the indebtedness of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

If they were concerned about the indebtedness of the people of 

this province, they wouldn’t have a record, as one of my 

colleagues said . . . The Globe and Mail called the Devine 

regime arguably the worst government ever in Canada  ever. 

And the member opposite was part of that government. 

 

So for the members opposite to stand here and to talk to us 

about debt and what it’s going to mean for our children and our 

grandchildren  our children are going to pay the debt that the 

administration that you were part of racked up. That’s what 

they’re going to be paying. 

 

Now with respect to health, you can ask the Minister of Health 

in greater detail. The commitment of this government in this 

budget is to a universal, publicly funded health care system. 

And this is a line in the sand that divides us from the members 

opposite, both sides. Liberals in their federal budget were 

prepared to have three-quarters of their cuts in the area of 

health, education, and social programs. Three-quarters of 

everything they cut in the most recent federal Liberal budget 

was to health, education, and social programs. 

 

(2015) 

 

You can tell what the members opposite would do if they ever 

again became the government of this province  which I can’t 

believe would occur  by listening to them and by watching 

what’s happening elsewhere. 

 

Look at Alberta. A two-tiered health care system. If you want to 

have access to an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), and you 

have the money, great  you go to the front of the line. If you 

don’t, you go to a separate system and a longer line. You look 

what’s happening, you look what’s happening in Ontario, 

where some of the most dramatic cuts are being levelled at the 

people least equipped to deal with them. 

 

Mr. Member, this government is proud of the fact that not only 

have we dealt with the deficit of the province and balanced the 

books and reduced the debt; we have maintained a quality 

health care system and we will continue to do that in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

I’m pleased to hear that we finally got a little bit of 

acknowledgement from you about debt. And the fact that all of 

the sudden that Crown corporation debt has a reality, and you 

take that 3.5 out of the 14 and all of a . . . we’re down to 11 

billion. And then below the 11 billion, if you take the unfunded 

pension liabilities that were there that were beyond the 2.8 that 

were left you in 1992, then you reduce that below 10 billion. 

 

And if you look at all the purchases, Madam Minister, that the 

former government was left with and the debt that arose there, 

Madam Minister, it’s interesting. And also, part of that debt was 

interest like part of your debt is interest. Take a look at every  

year, the interest that was being paid on debt that had 

accumulated. Madam Minister, I find it very interesting. Here 

again, we blame somebody else. 

 

You talk about the line in the sand in health care. Well I tell 

you, you go out to some of the communities I represent. They 

know where the line is. The line has already been drawn. It’s 

either get well, stay well, or farewell. It has nothing to do with 

quality health care whether it’s a universally accepted health 

program. . . . That’s why we have people building private care 

homes around this province, because the line has been drawn, 

and there aren’t any services left for many people. They fall 

between the cracks. So people have finally said, well here’s the 

line; well we’ve found a way that we can . . . where to cross the 

line or whatever it is, we’ve found a way to meet the services 

and meet the needs out there. 

 

But, Madam Minister, you can give all the arguments you want, 

but so far you keep telling me you’ve answered the question. 

You haven’t even come close to answering the question. You 

haven’t even told me . . . come close to even acknowledging the 

fact that the auditor has suggested a commission. I believe 

Donald Gass suggested a commission to review the unfunded 

pension liabilities. When, Madam Minister, will you put that 

process in place? And don’t just build . . . make the commission 

up of some bureaucrats. Get some people out in the private 

sector or outside of the bureaucracy who are not involved with 

any of these pension plans, and get them to look at the pension 

plan and determine how you address that unfunded liability. 

When will you do that? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I’ve already answered that question. But I mean, 

tonight is really a night in which you have to have a sense of 

humour  a member of the previous Conservative government 

standing here and so devoted to the auditor and his report. I 

remember being in the galleries in this House when the Finance 

minister in your regime took on the auditor in one of the most 

blatant, ill-advised, impolite attacks I’ve ever seen on a public 

official. That same auditor said, I can’t tell the people of 

Saskatchewan what the debt is because I can’t get access to the 

books. 

 

So to see the member opposite standing here and reading so 

diligently an auditor’s report, as I say, you have to have a 

tremendous sense of humour when you look at what happened 

to the auditor under them. The auditor didn’t have access to the 

basic information so that he could tell the people of 

Saskatchewan what the debt really was, because if they had 

known, they would never have re-elected those members 

opposite. So, Mr. Member, I think that tonight is a historic night 

when you’ve just waded right back into the past of this 

province. And the more the people of this province are 

reminded of your past, the more these members are going to 

have an opening. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Madam Minister, I find that very incredible 

because if you can tell the people of this province . . . And we 

might be able to excuse you, Madam Minister, because you 

weren’t here. But, Madam Minister, this Premier as an 

opposition leader knew exactly what the debt was. 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

The debate in 1991, the Premier acknowledged the debt was 

14.6. The former premier acknowledged that the debt was at 

$14 billion. We were trying to . . . the former government tried 

to let people know or tried to get people to understand that that 

debt had to be addressed. We were dealing with an opposition 

that was totally irresponsible. And I’ll excuse you, Madam 

Minister, because you weren’t here . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . And I hear the member from Regina South getting into it 

and blabbering from his seat again. 

 

Madam Minister, you should have been in Public Accounts 

three weeks ago and heard what your members are saying about 

the Provincial Auditor, about the recommendations he was 

bringing. We passed motions not even to go ahead, proceed 

with the recommendations because these members  your 

members on the Public Accounts Committee  didn’t want to 

have things opened up. 

 

And now you’re telling me whether or not the former Finance 

minister took on the Provincial Auditor is irrelevant. And it may 

have been wrong at that time, and I don’t disagree with you. 

But all of a sudden, one minute you’re supporting the 

Provincial Auditor; then the next minute the Provincial Auditor 

comes with a report to the committee, raises it before the 

committee, brings forward recommendations. And all of a 

sudden the government members are bringing motions that 

won’t even acknowledge these recommendations. 

 

So don’t talk to me, Madam Minister, about the Provincial 

Auditor and about government members and how they support 

them. And there are many members sitting in the Assembly 

tonight who were in that debate, who stood up and said no; we 

do not agree with this recommendation by the Provincial 

Auditor. And one of the recommendations, Madam Minister, is 

that the government consider establishing a pension 

commission to study the many issues related to its pension 

plans. 

 

That’s his recommendation in his report this year. Madam 

Minister, when will you establish that commission? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 

opposite, I’ve said to him before, that question has been 

answered. But what a wonderful view of history. Now I know 

where the debt came from in the 1980s. It was the irresponsible 

opposition that racked up the debt. Is that right? The 

irresponsible, current Premier was so irresponsible as an 

opposition member that he racked up the debt. 

 

Mr. Member . . . I don’t understand why this member is getting 

himself into this particular argument. The budget before the 

election . . . the members opposite said the deficit was going to 

be, I believe, $265 million. People, economists across the 

province, expressed doubt. The current Premier was so 

concerned that he wrote a letter to the members opposite and 

said I would like to have confirmation in writing as to what the 

deficit of the Government of Saskatchewan is going to be. 

Lorne Hepworth, the then Tory minister of Finance, wrote back 

to our current Premier reassuring him that the deficit was $265 

million. When in fact we got the books, it was over a billion 

dollars. 

So the member opposite says the current Premier knew about 

the size of the debt. He couldn’t have known. Even your own 

Finance minister was saying he didn’t know, or else there is 

another interpretation as to what he was doing. 

 

The other thing is, what the auditor was saying at that time is 

quite different than any criticism he’s ever made of the 

government. He said, well you should look at this, or you 

should do that. He has consistently said that in the summary 

financial statements of the Government of Saskatchewan they 

are among the best in Canada, and we tell the people exactly 

what their responsibilities, their liabilities, their debts, are. 

 

At that time, the auditor himself was saying in the 1980s, he 

couldn’t tell what the Crown situation was like. He didn’t know 

what all of those little entities created without even orders in 

council . . . no public scrutiny of all those little entities created 

over on the Crown side  absolutely no public scrutiny. We 

got in there and opened it up, and it was just awful to see what 

they’d done there  the debts that they had racked up on that 

side that even the auditor didn’t have access to. 

 

So, Mr. Member, if we want to rehash the ’80s, I’m quite 

prepared to do it. But I’m not sure why he thinks this line of 

questioning is going to be to his advantage because the only 

thing that’s becoming clear is that the Conservatives in 1980s 

put this province into a financial mess that will take many, 

many, many years for the people of this province to dig their 

way out of. What’s fortunate is that we are beginning that 

process. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Madam Minister, I said it in 1991, and it 

certainly has come home to be true. And I will acknowledge, 

Madam Minister, that summary financial statements that we 

have in front of us are a positive form of public accounting. 

And I regret the fact that they weren’t . . . in that someone 

didn’t take the initiative even back in the late ’70s, early ’80s, 

to set that out because it would be a lot easier. It would be a lot 

easier for me as a member to follow financing in this province. 

 

But what I find interesting, and I come back to 1991 when the 

former minister brought forward his budget of 250 . . . around 

$257 million shortfall for the year 1991 and then you were 

elected in October. 

 

The interesting thing is, Madam Minister, the number of claims, 

even by the present Premier while in opposition saying, we will 

not allow you to pass this budget. Why, Madam Minister? 

Because they didn’t want to have to show the public that there 

was a nice . . . they had to cook the books and feed the numbers 

differently because there was enough funding there to show that 

that $257 million deficit was achievable. All of a sudden there 

wasn’t a payment from the Crowns, there wasn’t a payment 

from the Crowns in 1991, and the other related issues. 

 

There was debt taken out of the Crown corporations in ‘91 

when you became government added to, to build up to that 

billion dollars. 

 

Madam Minister, it’s easy to snowball  easy to snowball the 

public of Saskatchewan because even today, ask anyone on the  



1574  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

street if they can understand the finances of this province. Even 

ask them if they really know what the finances are of this 

province. You could come in tomorrow and present a major 

shortfall and blame the Liberals and get away with it. You can 

almost get away with anything. 

 

But, Madam Minister, that still doesn’t address the unfunded 

pension liability that the auditor is asking you to put in place a 

commission to address. You keep telling me you’ve addressed 

it. Well I’m not sure where you’ve addressed it or how you’re 

going to address it because I haven’t heard anything yet other 

than blaming the federal Liberals for having to address the 

Canada Pension Plan and some of the other issues. This 

unfunded pension liability is there and will not go away by 

simply putting your head in the sand. 

 

And why will you . . . if you’re going to all of a sudden say the 

Provincial Auditor is coming out and his recommendations are 

something to be adhered to, then why don’t you follow those 

recommendations, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  You know, I think what the public 

does know  the public knows a lot more about finances than 

the members opposite are willing to give them credit for. What 

the public does know though is they would never trust the 

members opposite with the finances of this province. Never. I 

mean never. 

 

Because just realize what you said, Mr. Member. You have said 

incredible things. You have said that this government could 

come in with a budget with any numbers in it and we would 

somehow or another get away with that. This is only the track 

record of a government that used to operate that way. 

 

What would happen is what happened to your administration, 

and the public is far too aware of finances to allow it to happen 

again. Rating agencies all over this country and beyond this 

country would say these numbers don’t stand up. They said it to 

Mazankowski, the last Tory Finance minister in Ottawa. They 

said these numbers don’t stand up. They said it about your 

numbers  these numbers don’t stand up. 

 

The difference is in the ‘80s the public didn’t understand how 

bad the debt was, because they had hidden it; the members 

opposite hid it, a lot of it, in some of those entities they created 

without public scrutiny. 

 

This won’t ever happen in this province again, because the 

moment any government is told by any credible agency that 

these numbers are not accurate numbers, they’re fiddling 

around, people of this province’s antenna will go up and they’ll 

say, we’ve been through that before, and we’ve been through 

that with the Tories. 

 

Just realize what else the member opposite just said. He said, 

well the problem with the 1991 budget was that the minister of 

Finance, Lorne Hepworth, said the deficit was going to be $265 

million, and had he had a chance to put that budget in place, the 

deficit would have been $265 million. 

 

Mr. Member, for the first time in the history of Saskatchewan, a  

government prorogued the legislature without putting a budget 

in place. The Tories themselves chose to end the legislature and 

not pass their own budget. Unprecedented. Unprecedented. 

 

And this, Mr. Member, is why The Globe and Mail has called 

the Tory Government of Saskatchewan arguably the worst 

government ever in Canada. This is why people are telling me, 

in Calgary and Edmonton today there are full-page spreads 

about the shenanigans of the Tories under Devine  still, even 

in a Tory province like Alberta, full-page spreads about what 

happened in that government. 

 

Mr. Member, if we want to stand here all night and talk about 

the ‘80s, I welcome that. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Toth:  I find that interesting, Mr. Chairman. And the 

Madam Minister obviously didn’t spend very much time in this 

Assembly prior to 1991. 

 

The Madam Minister didn’t sit in here when the member from 

Regina North East basically had said that  and the Minister of 

Education and the minister responsible for Northern Affairs and 

a number of other members . . . oh yes, the member from 

Regina Victoria  stood here in this Assembly and said, we 

will never allow that budget to pass. There was just no way that 

budget would pass in the Assembly. 

 

In fact, Madam Minister, we as an opposition may not be a lot 

of members, there may not be a lot of members on this side of 

the floor, Madam Minister, but your budget could be debated to 

the point that it would never see the light of day. And if you 

think that these members do not have that kind of a resolve . . . 

we may be fewer than what the opposition was in that day, but I 

remember the member from Regina North East and he was a 

good debater, he was, when he was standing here and criticizing 

the former member’s budget. And we realized at that time, 

Madam Minister, we may as well throw in the towel because 

there was nothing gained by trying to sit in the Assembly, 

nothing gained whatsoever. Whether it was right or wrong, 

there was no alternative  there was no alternative. 

 

And the member from Regina South, I believe, was here in a 

capacity of an EA (executive assistant) to the present Premier at 

that time, learned a little bit more from the ‘91-95 period, and 

then comes as a member and sits in the back and continues to 

chirp. I’m sure there are times when he’d like to be back 

working in the EA’s office because I’m positive he was making 

more money as an EA than he is as an MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly). 

 

Regardless, Madam Minister, if you were here, if you 

understand how this . . . and you’ll get to understand how this 

Assembly can really operate if you really want to test the will of 

the opposition. The will of the opposition in those days was 

such that they didn’t want the budget before the public so the 

public could really give it the scrutiny that they wanted to in 

order that . . . it would be so that when they came and took 

over, they could make these false, grandiose accusations 

claiming that, oh look what we found. And I can see the  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

member from Regina North East is just enjoying this 

thoroughly because I learnt from him. He was a great orator and 

a great teacher. 

 

Madam Minister, you still haven’t answered the question. 

We’ve done all this debating tonight and you’ve . . . I guess part 

of it’s my problem for getting off and raising all these other 

concerns as well. We haven’t answered that question. I guess 

the next time we’re up in the Assembly we will again debate 

unfunded pension liabilities. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member 

opposite, I have answered that question. 

 

Mr. Member, in a parliamentary system, a government that is 

relying on its opposition to pass its budget has a very frail 

understanding of the political process. Once again what you’re 

saying is the problems of the ‘80s was because you had an 

irresponsible opposition that wouldn’t allow you to pass your 

budget. You were the majority. You were the ones who 

supposedly were running the government. You couldn’t pass 

your budget because your own government began to 

disintegrate before your eyes. 

 

Your House Leader resigned, your House Leader resigned, and 

your House Leader said, I can no longer sit with this 

government and this party because of what it stands for. Your 

government didn’t pass its budget because it began to 

disintegrate before the eyes of the public. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Chairman, I think we need a 

while to absorb this new, refreshing view of history that we’ve 

had tonight. I’m going to move we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials first, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 

evening I have with me Ernie Lawton, the assistant secretary of 

Indian Affairs; Donavon Young, the assistant secretary of Metis 

Affairs; and John Reid, the executive director of policy and 

planning. And I think we’ll be joined in a while by Gord 

Nystuen, the secretary of the Secretariat. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, or Deputy 

Speaker. Again, thanks for the opportunity to discuss this 

budget with you and I also want to welcome your officials this 

evening. We’ll be again concentrating on the Metis perspective 

this evening and again indicating that the Indian part of the 

discussion will come at a later time. 

 

I’d like to spend a bit of time on the actual organization, the 

Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, which of course your 

department is responsible for. One of the key problems that this 

particular organization has is, because the provincial  

government doesn’t recognize them constitutionally, the federal 

government doesn’t recognize them constitutionally, you can’t 

discuss certain issues with them because they’re involved with a 

court case and you don’t generally negotiate with any 

organization or people that you’re involved with because of the 

court case. You really don’t look at the population stats because 

it doesn’t reflect your policy when dealing with a certain group, 

and on and on and on. 

 

However the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, one of the things 

that they’ve been having a difficult time in is of course lack of 

funding. They believe that the funding and the commitment 

from the government is coming way too slow. In fact their year 

end was March 31 and they’ve not yet received any funding 

from the government to date. 

 

And of course the Metis Nation are in desperate need of that 

type of money, and from what I can gather, this type of cash 

flow problems happened every year. And I would ask the 

Minister of Indian and Metis Affairs what type of problems that 

you do have in allocating this money, and can you give us a 

commitment as part of the Indian and Metis portfolio is that you 

would ensure from this day forward that the Metis Nation 

would not encounter these problems again in the future years 

and the future allocations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’m pleased to report to the member 

that I met with the MNS (Metis Nation of Saskatchewan) 

executive recently and we did talk about the funding. We 

wanted to have a discussion with them first about the funding 

changes before we moved to actual allocation of funding. 

 

I’ll point out that they were cut 17 per cent by the federal 

government and 10 per cent by ourselves, so there’s no doubt 

that they have somewhat less funds in the direct funding area to 

work with, although we still anticipate that they will have some 

uptake in the gaming area that has not yet been fully fleshed 

out. 

 

As far as the population stats go, it’s certainly an area we’re 

discussing. They’ve put forward a proposal that would cost in 

the realm of 500,000, and in the framework of the current 

funding they already receive from both the federal government 

and the provincial government, that would be equal to their 

whole, entire funding allocation. So one has to be very 

thoughtful about whether in fact that is the best and most 

productive use of that money. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess when you . . . again, you go back to 

the point of the money coming on time. I think that’s a key 

thing. We talked about interim supply here a couple of nights 

ago, and the purpose of interim supply was to provide money to 

the people that were affected by government and that were to 

receive money by government. And yet the Metis Nation of 

Saskatchewan, whom you’ve said would not be treated any 

differently or with special services and all that, they haven’t got 

their funding yet. So the key thing here is, are we going to see 

them get their funding on a regular basis, on regular times and 

the time that they’re supposed to be getting it, as of March 31 

of each year? 

 



1576  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I guess I can only confirm that we did 

have a discussion with them about this and made a commitment 

to them to flow that money through as quickly as the paperwork 

can be completed. It was really due to the late budget and also 

discussing with them, wanting to meet in person and discuss 

with them, the changes in funding levels before we allocated 

the funding. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Was that same problem with the schools? 

Obviously the schools were told they were going to be getting 

some money cut back, the hospital boards were also advised 

they might get money cut back, and so were the municipal 

governments and every organization that were told they were 

going to be cut back. I do not believe that they had a problem 

with their funding arriving on time so that they can continue 

their operations. My point is that if the same time was not 

allowed, or the same privilege was not allowed to the Metis 

Nation, why wasn’t it? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  None of the funding that is provided in 

this area is guaranteed in the sense of it being an operating 

funding like a school board has per number of pupils or 

anything like that. The funding is not allocated in that way. It’s 

allocated within a policy framework, and we’ve had 

considerable discussions  particularly since the tabling of the 

federal policy on aboriginal self-government  we’ve had 

substantial discussion on which things are the obligation of the 

federal government to provide and which things are the 

obligation of the provincial government. And subsequent to that 

policy framework and our own internal discussions, there have 

been some shifts in allocation in various areas, also with the 

slightly less money. 

 

But this is not finalized yet because we’re still having ongoing 

discussions about the application of the policy framework to the 

budget. And it won’t be, I don’t think, totally finalized for a 

couple of months yet. So what we’re doing is in this particular 

area, because we have had a long-standing relationship with 

them, we’ve just made a decision to go ahead and allocate a 

portion of that funding soon. But in other areas there will be 

areas where we will not be funding again people who we 

previously funded. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So I guess the . . . to answer the question  

I’m trying to be as fair as I can here  I guess the point is, is 

because there are some cuts coming down from the federal 

government and cuts coming down from the provincial 

government, that the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan cannot get 

their funding. When you say they’ll get it soon I’d like to get a, 

you know, a date, you know, to clarify a date. 

 

And because all these cuts are coming and we’re not sure who 

is going to be cutting what and so on and so forth, that in the 

meantime this organization, who are being cut and who are in 

desperate need to have some kind of cash flow, will have to 

suffer further delays in getting their cash, will probably have to 

pay some interest and debt on some of the overdrafts that I’m 

not sure if they have but I imagine that they do have, simply 

because we are trying to negotiate with the federal government 

on the fact that how much is going to be cut from who, when, 

and where. 

So really I think that’s a very poor excuse and that we should 

try and move a little bit faster in terms of allocating these guys 

their proper and due dollars as soon as their budget runs out, 

which is March 31. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We were just discussing whether or not 

there might be a misunderstanding about the nature of the MNS 

funding. 

 

Now this is not core funding for the purposes of running the 

organization; this is funding under the tripartite agreement with 

the federal government that’s based on particular work plans 

that are mutually agreed to by the MNS, the federal 

government, and the province. So it would be pending resolving 

the work plans that the money is granted. It is a grant. It’s not 

core funding to the organization. 

 

And now that interim supply is passed, we certainly are moving 

ahead with the paperwork, to get it processed, so I think it’s just 

within a very short time frame that they’ll have what they need 

to meet their obligations. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So in reference to that question, I guess the 

real thing is what exactly does the province contribute to the 

Metis Nation each year. I’m talking about all the grants, the 

educational grants, the enumeration grants, the tripartite grants, 

the GDI (Gabriel Dumont Institute) grants, all that type of 

information. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Last year SIMAS (Saskatchewan 

Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat) alone provided 350,000 to 

MNS and its affiliates, and that would be other locals that were 

doing various kinds of events. 

 

But the figures I don’t have, but we certainly could provide to 

you if you want us to assemble them, is to include other things 

like housing, GDI, those kinds of things that we don’t fund 

directly. They’re funded through the Department of Education 

and other people. 

 

And then I would also say that, as citizens of the province, they 

would also have access in relation or proportion to their 

numbers to all of the programs of general application that are 

available to all citizens as well. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the other thing is, there 

has been a number of discussions and meetings on reference to 

the Gaming portfolio and you have here that there is an 

agreement between the province and the Metis Nation to 

negotiate some of the gaming cash. And I was wondering, 

what’s the situation in terms of all the revenues and the 

breakdown of that particular gaming between the first nation, 

the Metis, and the provincial government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We have a commitment to revenue 

share in the gaming area. The only matter that’s under 

discussion right now is the amount, the procedure for delivering 

the funds, and the criteria under which funds could be allocated 

to the priorities within that area. We have a team set up of two  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

representatives from MNS, one from SIMAS, and one from 

Economic Development, who are currently discussing that. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess once all that process gets set up, who 

will be controlling the proceeds of the agreement? You know, 

obviously they want to get the thing moving because it all of 

sudden become . . . if it’s government controlled again, they 

may have problems, you know, waiting for their allocation. So 

if it begins to get set up and everything is chugging along, who 

would have the control of the process, and who would be in 

charge of the decision making in terms of representation and 

number of people, etc.? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well really the kind of thing we would 

be looking at as we go through our discussions is 

representation, accountability, good priorities, non-political use 

of the funds. Those would be the kind of things we’d be 

looking for as the discussions go on. 

 

But aside from that, we’re of an open mind on the matter, and 

we are negotiating in good faith on how this would be done. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I think that one of the key things that the 

Metis people are having a problem with and also the Metis 

Nation  they’re probably the ones that are dealing with this 

thing on a regular basis  is the fact that they need to organize 

effectively, you know, as a special interest group. I don’t want 

to say a special interest group for the lack of a better word, 

because obviously they’re recognized in the constitution. 

 

But they’re having a very tough time doing anything in terms of 

discussing land issues, discussing self-government, discussing 

economic development, social agencies, and the whole bloody 

bit because they simply haven’t got, you know, adequate 

sources of revenue. They haven’t got adequate control of those 

revenues. 

 

So I think when you talk about this gaming agreement, what 

type of agreement have you got? Is it true that 5 per cent of all 

the revenues from the VLTs (video lottery terminal) in this 

whole process will be going to the Metis Nation? Was that 5 

per cent being shared with other groups? And how much is 

going to first nations? And kind of the breakdown of that 

particular agreement. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  VLTs are not part of this equation. The 

revenue sharing is based on casino development, and so it 

would be based on all the casinos  Regina and the four other 

casinos that are being established in the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  What’s the breakdown on that particular 

agreement? Like suppose they made a hundred bucks after a 

year. What portion of those revenues go to the Metis Nation? Is 

there a sign-on bonus? Will both the Metis and the treaty being 

. . . getting a sign-on bonus? Is there a larger portion for other 

groups, and what happened to the other interest groups that are 

also involved with, you know, with gambling, like for example, 

exhibition parks and different people involved with gambling? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There’s some basic principles by which 

the revenue sharing was developed, and of course first nations,  

as proponents and developers in the gaming industry, have tied 

up a considerable amount of their revenue in the actual 

capitalization of the casinos. I suspect that in fact the Metis 

Nation may see liquid cash sooner than some of the first nations 

will because they have had to actually capitalize the investment 

on these facilities. 

 

As far as the other groups that receive benefits from the fund, 

it’s been done on a principle of people who are impacted by the 

shifts in gaming revenues. So exhibition associations were 

affected, broadly based charitable revenues, and targeted 

particularly to more vulnerable sectors within the social 

development sector. But the actual details have not been 

announced yet and we would not anticipate any money to be 

flowing until later this year after the government has a budget 

approved. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So I guess, in essence, we can talk about the 

dollar value of this particular project, that everything is off the 

table in terms of the sign-on bonus, if there is one, for the 

Metis, a sign-on bonus if there is one for the first nations group. 

I guess in terms of a percentage of the revenues, that’s also up 

in the air in terms of, you know, whether you’ll be replacing 

these dollars with the current allocation that you give or is this 

in conjunction with the current allocation? These are the three 

questions that I’d like you to answer, please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again, these are intended to be 

additional dollars. The cuts that we had in SIMAS were no 

different than the cuts experienced in many areas of government 

as we tried to assemble the money  and I’m sure you’re 

familiar with this refrain right now  to back-fill the $114 

million that was removed by the federal government. So 

everybody anted up a bit to participate in that effort. 

 

But the gaming dollars would be new dollars into that pool. 

And certainly their priorities and our priorities would be to look 

very carefully at the ability to utilize some of those dollars to 

invest in economic development partnerships and to actually get 

on to some job creation and investment opportunities through 

that vehicle. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess the other issue is the treaty land 

problem in northern Saskatchewan. There’s a lot of different 

areas where the Metis people have some value of a certain piece 

of land, and has there been any choices or discussion made with 

the Metis Nation in reference to land claims? Is there any value 

in them pursuing that on a provincial perspective? Does the 

provincial government support the issue of Metis land claims? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well this is one of those tricky areas 

that you’ve mentioned before in your comments where it’s in 

court and I really can’t comment on it. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay. I guess the question here is, how much 

exactly in terms of acreages or hectares have the Metis Nation 

laid a claim on in north-west Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I hope this is an adequate answer, but 

it’s Green Lake to the southern shore of Lake Athabasca on the 

west side of the province. It is a huge tract of land. 



1578  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, I’m wondering if the moneys spent on programs for 

Indian and Metis nations are kept separate in your books and in 

your records? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Certainly they are where there’s a 

dedicated program, but in the instance of services received by 

any citizen of the province, no, we wouldn’t be able to 

differentiate there. Only where there’s, you know, perhaps 

funding to an educational institution, to a special community 

service, to treaty land entitlement, places where there’s, you 

know, a special focus of it. But otherwise we did not keep track 

of the funding province-wide based on a person’s status, no. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I was noticing in 

the Estimates that the support for the aboriginal organization 

issues was downsized from $1.009 million to $550,000. Could 

you give me a breakdown of that and explain it, please? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There’s 314 million less to Indian and 

Metis organizations, 70 million less to  oh, pardon me, 

70,000 less. Let me start again. Wouldn’t they be thrilled. 

 

Okay  314,000 less to Indian and Metis organizations; 70,000 

less to the aboriginal employment development program; and 

75,000 less to Indian and Metis management authorities. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you 

explain to me basically what effect that’s going to have on the 

people? What do these various programs involve? 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Probably the most important thing to 

mention, that it’s not in the service delivery area. It’s in the area 

of the funding to fund some of the bilateral and tripartite 

processes. But we’ve tried to protect the funding that actually 

goes into the community for programs. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Could you explain to me what the bilateral and 

tripartite programs are? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  They’re essentially forums for 

discussion. We have bilateral discussions, and bilateral means 

either for ourselves . . . with ourselves and first nations. With 

the tripartite it’s ourselves, the federal government, and the 

Metis. 

 

And really it’s the method by which we come together and have 

discussion around matters of mutual concern. And just the very 

fact of doing preparatory work for the meetings, getting 

together at the meetings, there’s expense involved. And that 

money would have been used to fund those kind of activities. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are they broke down and a certain percentage? 

With the bilateral one is that 50/50 or is there a different 

percentage for each group? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We’re just discussing what would be 

the best way to answer your question because we’re not really 

sure exactly what you want to know. 

But maybe I could just explain that with the FSIN (Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) we only at this point have a 

bilateral process. With the Metis we have a tripartite process. 

And then we also provide funding to the Aboriginal Women’s 

Council, the treaty Indian women, and the Metis women 

because they have experienced some greater difficulty in being 

represented in the processes. So we have provided funding to 

those three women’s groups as well. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I have some 

questions on the interim supply. I understand that there actually 

hasn’t been any money yet given to the Metis Nation from this 

year’s budget. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It would be accurate that we have not 

yet forwarded the tripartite funding but we are in the process of 

doing the paperwork that would release those funds. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, we have had two sessions of 

interim supply now where we’ve been voting off money to give 

to these people. And we were told and we quite recognize that 

every group was needing their money, and we felt that it was 

our job as opposition to ensure these people receive their 

funding on time. Could you please explain to us how this could 

happen that a group of people that would desperately need their 

money haven’t got it, whereas there are other organizations 

must have or I’m sure they would be complaining by now. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There’s actually many people that do 

not necessarily get funded year to year, and it’s always within 

the context of policy and budgetary decisions that there’s a 

decision on whether people are funded or not. And this year, 

because of the cut and because the provincial government has 

been involved in policy discussions based on a response to the 

federal government policy, again we have not totally 

determined yet all of our funding priorities, so that created 

some slowness in this area. And there’s no doubt that they do 

need the money and that we do need to get it released as quickly 

as possible. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. We’ve listen to 

the Minister of Finance explain to us how important it was to 

make sure that we voted off one-twelfth of the funding, and that 

that was how the money was going to be spent, and it was going 

to be given to them. I really feel like either we were misled or 

the people out there were misled. 

 

You say they’re working on it very . . . they’re working on it. 

How soon does it mean that the people will actually have some 

money in their hand? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well one learns after a while, I guess, 

in this kind of work, never to second guess the system. But I 

suspect it would be in about a week. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

good evening and welcome to your officials. Just a point of 

clarification on that funding you were just so kindly explaining 

 with the funding being cut by almost 50 per cent, does that 

mean that there will be that much less ongoing conversation, 

discussions, and meetings, whether tripartite or bilateral? Since  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

consultation is a very important process, I just wanted that 

clarified. Does that mean less talking now with these people? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The difference, for example MNS from 

last year, would only be a difference of 15,000. It is a difference 

but it’s not an overwhelming difference. There’s no doubt that 

on the first nations end of things, they are more adequately 

resourced from the federal government. And given the federal 

government’s policy that they’re responsible for on-reserve 

funding and we’re responsible for off reserve, we may in fact 

have to make some decisions that require the federal 

government and first nations to pick up a bit larger share of the 

costs. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, my 

questions are sort of around the social services end of this, and 

although partly they belong to the Social Service minister, I 

hope that possibly you can help me with some of them. And 

these questions I’m asking are pertinent to certain situations 

that I’ve had brought to me so I’m asking you for this 

information. 

 

Are Indian people under 18 years old, living off reserve, able to 

receive social assistance in this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Definitely, since the federal 

government revised its policy last year. It used to be that you 

had to be off reserve for a year before you switched onto 

provincial social assistance. But there was a policy change and 

now people immediately switch onto provincial social 

assistance. 

 

Could we get a clarification  are you speaking just off 

reserve? 

 

Ms. Julé:  Yes. I’m speaking specifically of people that have 

chosen to leave their reserves for reasons that they can’t in fact 

live on the reserve any more. And I don’t want to go into it 

because they have very good reasons for not wanting to return 

home. And I understand that there were some of these people 

that are on the streets basically, and needing some assistance. 

And they were told that they had, in order to get any kind of 

assistance or so on, that they had to go back to the reserve. Is 

that in fact this government’s policy, or what’s the case here? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  No, that wouldn’t be accurate. In fact 

my office spends a lot of time helping various people get their 

assistance. But that’s more to do with a lack of understanding 

of how the system works. 

 

We certainly do have a policy within Social Services to try to 

repatriate people with their families, but that’s done in a 

cooperative mode. It’s not just saying, go back home; it’s done 

in conjunction with the parents and with the young person in 

question. So I’m not sure what . . . and there would be no way 

of knowing without working on the individual situation to 

know what their particular situation was. But certainly they 

would be eligible. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. So, for instance, 

someone who is 17 years old, if in need, would be able to  

receive social assistance if they were off reserve. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  That’s my understanding. Now I’m not 

a specialist in the total application of social assistance but as a 

general rule, yes. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Another question I 

have pertains to health needs, for instance hospitalization, or 

the right to education for people that are of Indian status. 

Would these people . . . who would fund their health needs at 

this present time, hospital needs and that kind of thing if they 

were hospitalized? Who pays for that if these people are off 

reserve? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Off reserve it’s the province. Now 

there’s some exceptions. Where a university student might be 

attending university, their home band often pays for their 

education, but for the most part it would be the province if 

they’re off reserve. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

does the federal government pay any portion of hospitalization 

for off-reserve Indians? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There is a list of benefits called 

non-insured benefits that, whether they’re on or off reserve, all 

people are entitled to, and that includes eyeglasses, dental, 

prescription, and prosthesis. And I think this is an area that the 

federal government is currently debating whether they’re going 

to continue in this area. And there would certainly be people 

who argue that some of these things are covered under the 

medicine chest provisions of treaties. But currently, both on and 

off reserve, these services are covered by the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just one question here. When a on-reserve 

treaty Indian goes into the hospital for certain services, is the 

federal government billed for that, or does the provincial 

government cover those health needs? How does that work? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This is done in the form of being part 

of the formula for the funds transferred under block transfer 

from the federal government. So they assume that they transfer 

a certain block of money to the province, and in return for that 

the province provides the same insured services to all the 

population in the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So in essence what you’re saying today is 

that if I was living on a reserve and I was a treaty Indian and I 

come into Saskatoon and went to the University Hospital and 

got cured there, you know, for whatever illness I had, that you, 

as a province, would then bill the federal government for 

services rendered to me. Or does that all come in the same 

block funding you speak about? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  You’re right. It comes as part of the 

block funding, and they’ve sort of purchased a block of services 

on behalf of that population. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So in essence the block of funding that you 

speak about is specifically designed to help you compensate for  



1580  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

medical services to the treaty population, the first nations of 

Saskatchewan. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  That’s accurate. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So the second part is, when you look at the 

Constitution of Canada, the Metis people are not included in 

any specific block; they’re just lumped in together with the rest 

of the population. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It’s certainly the federal government’s 

position that they do not have specific fiduciary responsibility 

in a self-government sense as they do for first nations. It’s their 

position that they do not have that for Metis people. 

 

And basically the province is not the captain of that particular 

ship. We would like very much if the federal government would 

recognize their responsibility in that area. You will know that 

there was a test case where the Inuit tested it and became 

included in that definition, but there never has been a test case 

for the Metis. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So explain this as simply as you can because 

I have a tough time walking and chewing gum at the same time 

here. 

 

The federal government gives you block transfers in health. A 

certain portion is for Saskatchewan population, and a separate 

portion is for the status Indians. Now of the total block funding 

you get for health care, what is that amount and what portion of 

that’s for Indian and what portion is for the rest? Is there a 

specific breakdown of that? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  They just do it on the basis of all 

citizens of the province. I guess what they’ve done is moved 

from providing it separately to providing it in a total population 

number. So they wouldn’t divide up how many of those people 

are Indian, how many are Metis, and how many are anything 

else. It would just be the total population. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, in 

relation to the block funding, my understanding of block 

funding is that it is a lump sum given to the provinces for the 

provinces to determine completely how they would distribute 

that money for any department, for any service, in any way that 

they see fit. I was never under the impression that block funding 

would have any kind of regulations, you could call it, attached 

to it. That a certain portion of that federal money would have to 

be given to the Metis, to any department, or whatever. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There are criteria within the CHST 

(Canada Health and Social Transfer) that you have to meet in 

terms of providing services of general application to all the 

citizens, but they aren’t specified by virtue of Indian or Metis or 

anything. They’re just . . . but the services that have to be 

provided with that block of money are specified. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Could you tell me  

what those criteria are or what is included in that that has to be 

looked at? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We could probably provide that 

information for you but the one comment I would make is this 

is moving pretty far off of SIMAS estimates. This is really 

moving into Finance and into other areas which we are not as 

familiar with the details. I mean we would know generally how 

they apply but these are the kind of details that really Finance is 

more able to provide. 

 

If you want us to provide you written responses to some of 

those questions and you just state clearly what your question is, 

we would be able to do that or you can decide to bring it back 

when you have Finance here. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the other thing I want to 

point out is when we look at some of the agreements that you’re 

making in terms of your employment strategies, there is no 

question in my mind that we have to increase the numbers of 

Metis and Indian people in the workforce. I think the native 

people in the province, being such a small number in terms of 

the general population and an ever-increasing number, you 

know, I might add, we had to deal with that particular group. 

 

I think the other thing is when you look at the FSIN being 

highly organized, you look at the Metis Nation being 

under-funded, there begins to be disparity in numbers. And I 

guess, is there a specific target date or a target number that you 

have set for different dates to meet your effort of increasing the 

aboriginal participation in the workforce, in the health care, in 

government and so on, so forth? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Our goal has always been as a policy to 

have the representation of Indian and Metis people in the 

workforce be representative of their presence in the population 

at large. And there’s a number of initiatives, for example the 

employment equity policy that was adopted, I think, a year ago 

or a little over a year ago in all the Crowns and executive 

government where they’re all required to have equity plans now 

that specify what they’re doing in those areas. We’ve certainly 

done a lot in terms of the mining sector. Certainly this casino 

agreement had very specific provisions and has had quite a bit 

of success in the area of employment. Money is certainly 

targeted towards a lot of training initiatives because training is 

still the best way to get anybody into a job. 

 

And then we have a lot of work being done in the partnership 

area where health boards and other employers are making 

commitments to undertake their own internal examination of 

how they can improve the access and the inclusion of first 

nations and Metis people within their workforces, within their 

service delivery, and within the economic development 

opportunities that may spin off from health boards and other 

activities. 

 

I’m actually very supportive of these new partnership 

approaches because you’ve been around a long time, Buckley, 

you probably know there is periods where there was the old 

Liberals supernumerary program, and then there was . . . oh, 

sorry, hon. member, and then there was the quota systems and  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1581 

what not. And really when you look at the numbers over time, 

they really didn’t produce the kinds of results that I think people 

hoped for. 

 

And one of the real advantages of the new partnership 

agreements is both of the partners come to the table with the 

true intent to understand how they can do better and to work 

together on it. And I’m going to be watching them very closely 

to see whether they’re producing the results we hoped for. But I 

think we have a better chance with this approach than we’ve 

had in the past. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, I thank you for that. And they say if 

you’re named, then you’re out of here, so I guess I’m allowed 

one more time. 

 

I look at the effort of increasing the numbers. And certainly if 

we use the amount of 50,000 in terms of the Metis population 

in the province, that accounts to roughly what, 5 per cent of the 

population? And yet we see some of the problems, you know, 

in jails where 80 per cent of the population is of native ancestry. 

We see the problems of unemployment where many of the 

unemployed are native people. 

 

So we both realize that we have to have a commitment to the 

Metis people and the Indian people. There’s no question about 

that. But where I think we differ, Madam Minister, is a fact that 

I think we should be more focused on what we want to do. 

 

And several weeks ago we talked about having the Crown 

corporations participate in increasing those numbers. And we 

see some tremendous work being done by SaskEnergy. And I 

guess a true effort of ensuring first nations and Metis people in 

participating for Crown corporations and government work is to 

make these efforts politics-proof. 

 

No matter what government is in power, these businesses and 

these positions will be held or owned by the aboriginal 

community and they can continue to participate equally. 

Legislation can change but a well-developed plan can certainly 

water down potential political interference. 

 

Right now we can talk about increasing the number of the 

people in the workforce. That is just simply an effort on your 

part. It’s not required in terms of the mandate of your 

department? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again I’ll go back to the fact that the 

mandate of our department is employment development. And 

that . . . there’s two things that really primarily happen there. 

One is that inventory is maintained so we can . . . when people 

ask us, do we have some names to suggest, we do have an 

inventory of names to suggest. 

 

But the other part is to really sign these partnership agreements 

because we couldn’t begin to create the number of jobs that 

people would have access to by having access to a large 

employer. So it’s really important that where there’s major 

employers in the province, that Indian and Metis people be 

brought into full participation with those major employers. 

 

As far as the jail issue goes, I think the Government of 

Saskatchewan is probably at the leading edge of governments 

across Canada in terms of moving into new, restorative justice 

and sentencing option types of approaches. And of course those 

are all just beginning so we won’t see the results for awhile, but 

we certainly are as eager as anyone is to see people having 

opportunities instead of being in jail which is very costly and 

unproductive. 

 

On the education front, yes, it’s government’s responsibility to 

do a percentage of this, but we are not the school boards, and 

school boards also have to embrace  as I know many of them 

are  the need to retain more students within the school 

system, to provide a more relevant education, and to generally 

make it work better. So it’s going to be incumbent on health 

boards, on school boards, on municipalities, all the major 

structures in our society  business  to make sure that they 

help provide those opportunities. 

 

From the economic development point of view, one of the main 

barriers, as you’ve indicated, for Metis participation is the lack 

of investment equity. And hopefully, the gaming revenues will 

help them overcome some of that barrier. 

 

Government’s main mandate within its own sector is the 

employment equity policy that we passed which we could 

forward a copy of that to you, but that applies again to all the 

Crown corporations and executive government. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  In reference to your point about that applying 

to all the Crown corporations, the government was serious 

about opening the door to start the process of increasing the 

number of native employees and also having the companies 

participate. 

 

We see one Crown corporation doing one job in one town with 

one group. If the government is really quite serious about the 

effort to increase the amount of native people in employment, 

what’s the relationship with the different Crowns? We have 

SaskTel, we have Sask Water, SaskPower — is there one 

Crown better than the rest? And if there is, wouldn’t that 

insinuate that there’s some inconsistency with the policies 

amongst the Crown? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Every Crown has its own management 

and its own union and normally the way these things are done is 

through a joint union-management committee. So there is no 

one method that’s enforced upon each of the work units. That’s 

up to them to figure out how they’re going to meet the goals 

they set out for themselves to achieve a representative 

workforce. 

 

It’s too bad I don’t have it with me tonight. When I was here for 

the Women’s Secretariat estimates, I did have all the figures for 

employment within government for women, for aboriginal, etc., 

but I don’t have them with me here tonight. 

 

One of the things I would mention is we also have a policy on 

all our boards, commissions, and agencies to be representative. 

And I think we’ve done very well in that area as well. 

 



1582  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

But if you’re interested in the figures, I can get them for you, 

but I don’t have them with me tonight. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess it appears when you have a 

discussion with, say, for example, SaskEnergy or SaskPower, 

obviously you’re going to have the unions involved in the 

discussion about increasing the numbers. Is this effort designed 

to lump the unions and the first nations and the Metis together? 

Because really if we look at it, you have to really begin to talk 

with FSIN and Metis Nation as to how they feel about unions. 

 

And the second part of the question is, in essence if there is a 

job position opened, seniority is still the rule of thumb in terms 

of whether you’re aboriginal or non-aboriginal. If you have 

worked for the government longer, you obviously would have 

that position first. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Seniority maybe part of the factor but 

it’s not the whole situation. It’s got to do with everything from 

qualifications, to entry into the job, to promotion, to seniority. 

 

But what has happened, which is a very positive development, 

there’s the aboriginal government employees network, which 

has 500 members, and they have recently signed an agreement 

with the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) 

to work together with the union on removing barriers to 

employment. They’ll be looking at all matters such as seniority, 

initial intake, promotion, career paths, those kind of things. 

 

I think what a lot of people are finding right now is, as people 

strive for more and more equity, it’s important to keep up our 

efforts on the education front as well, so we make sure that 

we’ve got those good candidates that really have a real 

opportunity to get those jobs. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, a 

couple of responses or questions that were brought to me and I 

want to bring them up tonight and maybe get some responses in 

case you aren’t sure where we’re at. In getting back to specific 

land claims, or something with regards to specific land claims, 

I’ve got a letter from the rural municipality of Wolseley. I’ve 

had one from the Golden West RM. Concerns that RMs are 

having. I’m sure these aren’t the only RMs, but two RMs in my 

area specifically that are dealing with some significant land 

settlements and are looking at losing a fair bit of land. 

 

And I’m wondering, Madam Minister, what has taken place, 

what has transpired, what has your department done in 

conferring with the federal government regarding land claim, 

these specific land claim settlements, and the taxation problems 

that will arise when this land enters up under specific land 

claim? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This is a matter that we’ve met several 

times with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) on and that we’ve also met with Mr. Goodale 

on. And I would just urge you to do whatever you can to help 

the federal government understand that this is a serious matter 

for Saskatchewan municipalities and any influence that you can  

contribute to this discussion would be appreciated. Because we 

have a reasonable arrangement under the treaty land entitlement 

of 22 times tax loss compensation, but under specific claims 

they’re only prepared to acknowledge five times which is not 

enough for the municipalities to create a fund that can replenish 

the tax loss that takes place. So it is a concern. 

 

We’ve approached the federal government many times at both 

the bureaucratic and the political level. I’ve met with Ron 

Irwin, minister of Indian and Metis affairs, on this, met with 

Ralph Goodale, and they have the feeling that this is not a 

serious matter because they have not, I guess, been hearing 

enough from municipalities about it. So anything that either the 

opposition or yourselves can do to improve their hearing would 

be appreciated. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And the reason I 

am raising it is because I want to know exactly what your 

government has done and is doing. I realize we’ve had this 

discussion on other occasions and other years, and certainly it’s 

an ongoing thing, and until it’s settled, people will not be 

satisfied. Certainly rural municipalities and . . . and even if you 

will, Madam Minister, if your districts, municipal districts Act 

should happen to go through or you went to larger districts, it 

really does not do away with the problem that this piece of 

legislation on the specific land claims settlement is going to do 

to the province. 

 

So I want to assure you, Madam Minister, that this caucus is 

more than prepared to work with you and I’m sure the official 

opposition are prepared to work with you as well because this is 

a problem to Saskatchewan people. It’s a problem that comes 

back to rest on myself as a rural resident, as a rural taxpayer, 

and taxpayers across this province. 

 

So I would only indicate to you, Madam Minister, then, and to 

your colleagues and certainly to members in your department 

that have been intimately involved in this whole process, that 

you do everything within your power and, if you will, even 

encouraging the Premier of the province in talking to the federal 

Prime Minister, the Prime Minister of this country, and making 

. . . reiterating to him that this is not a small matter, that this is a 

major problem. And it’s time we got back to and we addressed 

it. 

 

If you will, Madam Minister, maybe it’s appropriate as well for 

this Assembly to, if you will, pass a resolution that says that this 

Assembly is supportive of the proposal put forward by the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities that specific 

land claims receive the same treatment as the compensation for 

the other reserve status, or land that’s going to fall under the 

reserve status. So  or treaty land entitlement claims  and so, 

Madam Minister, I assure you tonight that we’re more than 

prepared to back you. 

 

And it’s imperative that each and every one of us . . . and while 

I . . . in my responses to these RMs (rural municipality) and my 

firing off letters to the federal minister are important, I’m one 

member, and the member from Souris-Cannington is one 

member. You’re one member. It’s still important as well, I 

think, that this Assembly if you will . . . if that’s what it takes. 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

And I think it’s very important that while you’re in debate with 

your colleague in Ottawa, Mr. Irwin, or the Minister of 

Agriculture . . . which in some cases I wonder if the present 

Minister of Agriculture federally really even knows anything 

about the West any more in some of the policies that he’s been 

bringing forward. 

 

And if as you’ve indicated, that he seems to think this isn’t a 

very serious matter, well, Madam Minister, maybe it’s time he 

came out and sat down with some of the RMs. I have 

encouraged the federal minister, Mr. Irwin. RMs have asked for 

a public meeting. I’ve encouraged them to come out to this 

province, to sit down with RMs, to look at them. The RM of 

Wolseley for example is . . . I just don’t remember the number 

of quarters, but I know I was in the RM office just the other 

day, and it’s a substantial chunk of land that they lose to native 

land, Indian land entitlement and specific land claims, which 

means a substantive tax base that’s lost. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I’d indicate to you that I’m more than 

prepared  I think my colleagues are  to stand up and give 

you whatever support you need and whatever it will take for the 

federal minister, the Prime Minister, anyone involved in 

Ottawa, to realize that this is a very important and very serious 

matter. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I would encourage you to hold to your 

guns and to get your colleagues, the federal minister . . . or the 

provincial Minister of Agriculture . . . the former minister of 

Social Services I think wants to enter the debate. Get his 

support; I think he’s offering it tonight. And, Madam Minister, 

we just tell you that there is support in this Assembly for this. 

And I just want to encourage you. If a resolution will help, 

bring forward a resolution. I’d support you in that, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well your idea of a resolution is one 

that deserves consideration. The Premier wrote to the PM 

(Prime Minister) nine months ago, and I guess he wasn’t 

reading his mail that day. 

 

The federal position is based on kind of a narrow legal 

interpretation that the land was illegally surrendered, and 

therefore the federal government is merely reclaiming, 

reacquiring, land that was illegally surrendered. So their view 

would be that the municipalities never had the right to those 

taxes in the first place. So it’s kind of a narrow legal discussion 

that’s taking place. 

 

But we are, I think, just about at our wits end for what else we 

can do to get any action on this because I do agree that, whether 

it was illegally surrendered or not, municipalities have gotten 

used to this tax base and will now feel the absence of it. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 

believe there was an agreement, and I don’t know . . . in fact 

I’m not exactly sure if there was anything signed on paper. But I 

think there was an understanding prior to the last federal 

election that there would be the same consideration given to 

specific land claims as there were to land entitlements. And I’d 

just like your response to that. 

It seems to me that there was some discussion, and there was a 

fair bit of an understanding that that would come into place. But 

once the election was over, all of a sudden it disappeared. And 

I’m not sure. Is that something we can argue or go back to and 

just say there was an understanding prior to? Madam Minister, 

are you aware of that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We have no evidence of that, but 

certainly the fact that we may be heading in the next year into 

another federal election, it might be something that candidates 

might want to consider having a position on in the areas where 

people would care. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 

I’m going to move away just a bit from that topic, but I 

certainly indicate that, bring forward a resolution and we’d be 

more than ready to support you in that. 

 

The other thing, Madam Minister, is in dealing with reserves in 

this province. And I’ve had a number of native leaders come to 

me, one of them specifically, the Pheasant Rump Reserve down 

in the area west of Moose Mountain Provincial Park; Cote Band 

up at Kamsack. It has to do with housing, and I just don’t 

remember if the member from Athabasca raised some of the 

questions. I know there was some debate going on regarding 

university and education and what have you. But band housing 

is a major concern, and I’m wondering what is in place right 

now? Is there anything provincially, or is this all federal 

jurisdiction? 

 

And if I’m hearing from the bands themselves . . . and one of 

the problems that’s really arising, Madam Minister, is many of 

the band members are very concerned about the fact that there 

have been land entitlements, and there have been land 

settlements. There’s been cash coming out to the bands, but at 

the end of the day there’s nothing. There are people on the 

reserves . . . and you can go around a number of the reserves in 

the province. And like I say, the Pheasant Rump individuals just 

came to me recently, Cote Indian Band. Substantial chunks of 

change have been offered to the band, been given to them, and 

yet band members themselves are finding that they are without 

the housing that they were expecting would be part of . . . and 

would be derived or arrived at once some of this land settlement 

money was in their possession. 

 

And so, Madam Minister, I wonder if you can respond to that 

and if these are some of the issues as well that your department 

is bringing forward with the federal government in passing on 

the fact that they have a responsibility in managing this funding, 

not just handing a chunk of change to a band, but making sure 

that the funds are used to meet the needs of band members. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well although the quality and quantity 

of housing concerns us a fair bit, because of course if people 

don’t have a place to live, then they have to move whether they 

want to or not, but housing is a capital agreement signed 

between the Indian bands and the federal government, and we 

really have no involvement. 

 

But I’d like to clear something up on the TLE (treaty land  



1584  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

entitlements) front. The bands can’t spend any money until after 

they’ve acquired all of their equity acres. So I don’t think 

there’s any bands yet that really have cash in hand aside from 

the money that must be spent on land. And only after they’ve 

fulfilled . . . a certain percentage of that allocation has to be 

spent on land, and it’s only after all of that is fulfilled that then 

money would be flowing. 

 

And certainly I’ve had discussions with various investment 

bodies in Saskatchewan to be a bit proactive in terms of being 

available with good investment advice as well as hopefully 

sound opportunities. But it's not really quite at this stage yet. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, would your department know 

whether the Pheasant Rump has the ability to begin to 

administer some of these funds or to provide the housing that 

many of the band members are expecting? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well you’ve apparently raised a sticky 

wicket there. Pheasant Rump is in court. It is a band that has a 

specific claim. It’s not under TLE. And it looks like the money 

is there. But because the books aren’t open, there’s a lack of 

surety about it. And the Department of Justice has offered 

mediation services to go in and try to work some of these 

matters out. 

 

I might say though that not every band is looking to those funds 

for housing. 

 

For example, one of the bands in the province made an 

agreement with Indian Affairs to receive their housing 

allocation up front and they built about 10 years worth of 

housing all at once, which is going to be paid off with the 

money that would have come in each year to build one or two 

houses at a time. And in that way they’ve managed to meet a 

housing need much sooner through more creative application of 

funds that they would have received at any rate, and they made 

that arrangement with Indian Affairs. 

 

So there are bands looking at different ways of doing it, or else 

in some instances borrowing money from a first nation trust to 

repay with the funds that are received, for example, for 

accommodation for people. 

 

So there’s different kinds of creative financing that can be used 

to achieve some of this housing without it necessarily having to 

come out of these funds or having to come directly out of a 

special housing program. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, you mention that there are some 

legal problems right now that the band is facing. Is the Pheasant 

Rump Band under third party administration or whatever  I 

forget what, there’s a term, analogy for that  do they have 

control or is it somebody else on the outside that’s basically 

helping or administering their funding? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I guess all we can say at this point that 

there’s concern, but a final decision hasn’t been made. 

 

Mr. Toth:  But would your department or would the 

provincial government be involved? Have you been approached  

by any bands whatsoever and some of the problems that they’re 

facing such as Pheasant Rump? 

 

It’s interesting, I’ve received a letter, and this is what one of the 

band members say. He titled it “Town Lights on the Lone 

Prairie”, and he was talking about the fact that so far all they’ve 

seen is a few street lights, a sewer system, and a street system, 

but there’s no housing. No place for people to live. 

 

(2145) 

 

They’ve got the lighting, they’ve got this . . . and a sewer 

system that’s pushing sewer uphill instead of you’d think going 

downhill. Like, it was fairly interesting talking to this 

individual. 

 

But I know one of the problems we face, and there isn’t a 

reserve around the province that doesn’t have that, there’s a fair 

bit of  I think politics in this Assembly here can be fairly 

aggravating at times; I think politics on reserves  really 

there’s a fair bit of politics on reserves that creates a real 

problem. 

 

But what I’m wondering and asking, Madam Minister, is the 

province . . . does the province get involved in any of the 

administration, or helping, or putting forward ideas regarding 

administration, or disbursement of funds, or meeting needs of 

individuals? 

 

I understand one of the concerns that’s been raised over the past 

number of years is the number of people in this province, the 

native people, who are falling onto the welfare rolls of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I am aware of the fact too that, 

even on this specific reserve, I think there are some problems 

regarding welfare fraud. Now would that be provincial; is that 

federal? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  No, anything on reserve is federal 

related or else directly under the first nations control. 

 

Now one of the comments I would make  and I don’t want to 

go too far afield here  but as we know, there’s many very 

small towns in rural Saskatchewan that, unless you can 

establish an economic base, essentially there’s not a viability 

there. And as more and more reserves get focused on economic 

development, and sort of their long-term objectives, there may 

be a question I think in some of their minds whether they can 

sustain some of the communities if an economic base cannot be 

found, either through development of an industry or a natural 

resource that’s recurring there or some other mechanism. 

 

So as the bands move into more and more self-determination, as 

far as authorities that used to belong to Indian Affairs but are 

being reassigned or given over to the bands, certainly they will 

be having to grapple with many more of these questions in a 

much more substantive and accountable way than likely was the 

case when they were essentially treated as wards of the federal 

government. I mean we really are in a time of transition here. 

 

And all I can really say on this particular topic is that we should 

all offer whatever support in the process of sorting these things  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

out that we can. Because it’s partly a learning experience and 

partly partnerships, hopefully, that can be formed with rural 

municipalities and other people for some joint service provision 

and other types of arrangements. Because they do have some 

budget capacity there and they do have an ability to contribute 

to the whole municipal area as well. And I know there’s been 

some joint policing agreement, some joint fire protection 

agreements and other things. So there is some opportunity there 

to work more closely together and get some mutual benefit out 

of that understanding that can develop there. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, if a status Indian leaves a 

reserve because he can’t find adequate housing, and moves into 

a local community, who’s responsible for the welfare? If that 

person comes and seeks welfare, who is responsible for that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The province. 

 

Mr. Toth:  So as status Indians leave the reserves looking for 

adequate housing, or to meet some of the needs that they may 

be not finding on the reserve, then the province is left carrying 

that load. And I guess that becomes a problem for us as well. 

And that’s another issue in raising with the federal government 

in the fact that maybe it’s time they sat down and really got 

serious about settling some of these claims, getting them 

settled, as well as looking at ways in which they can offer some 

support to a lot of the reserves and making sure they can set up 

proper administration so that the funding is used to build for the 

native people of this province and the Indian people. 

 

I know many Indian people who really want to go ahead, who 

have sound economic ideas and have put forward some really 

sound economic platforms and are working very hard to, in 

many cases, move away from any dependence on government. 

So I think that’s another area, Madam Minister, that we need to 

encourage as a province, need to encourage the federal 

government not to just settle land claims and treaty land 

entitlements or specific land claims, and throw their hands up 

and say, okay, we’ve done all we can, and then throw the 

money in a pot or throw it up in the air and let each reserve get 

the funding that is coming to them, and then walk away. 

Because I don’t know if many of the reserves are really set up 

with the administrative level to properly administer the funds so 

that the people, the status Indians on the reserves, are going to 

receive the adequate funding, to receive the housing, to receive 

the education. 

 

And if the federal government doesn’t make sure some of this is 

in place, then what’s going to happen? It’s going to fall back on 

us as these individuals leave their specific reserves because they 

feel that they have nothing offered there. Then it comes and it 

falls on the taxpayers of the province as they move off the 

reserves into other locales to find the housing and to find the 

support. So that’s another issue, Madam Minister. We need to 

really work together to reiterate the fact that we just don’t throw 

money but we have some designed policy that indeed addresses 

many of the problems that we face out there. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  As I often joke with the chiefs, that the 

best accountability systems in the world can’t protect you from 

a government that doesn’t spend money wisely. I think we’re  

dealing with about 800 million a year in interest payments on 

the debt acquired in a similar situation. So the very fact of 

having accountability systems and good administrators, etc., 

does not always protect you from folly. But hopefully the active 

interests of band members and chiefs and others in these 

processes will contribute overall to success, and I’m sure that 

that’s their intent. But as in the rest of the community, good 

government always depends on also the people requiring it from 

their government. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 

understand, and I think I’m correct, that the Secretariat is 

responsible for the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework 

Agreement? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, that’s right. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Do you negotiate with federal counterparts and 

the first nations people for the amount of money to be paid for 

specific parcels of land? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Our basic responsibility was in 

negotiating the broad financial agreement with the federal 

government and the first nations. And we would only get 

involved if there’s Crown land involved. If it’s private land, it’s 

really up to them to make whatever purchases that they wish to. 

 

Ms. Draude:  By “them” I take it you mean the first nations 

people. 

 

What type of time span are you expecting that it will take to 

fulfil the obligations in the province under the TLE? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The financing covers the 12-year 

period, but they can continue to purchase land after that time 

period. The speed at which we can get it done really depends on 

the speed at which third party interests can be satisfied, because 

we have a willing buyer, willing seller policy. And sometimes it 

takes quite a while for the sellers to feel that their concerns are 

met as far as either their future ability to lease the land or other 

arrangements. 

 

And so sometimes the desire for some consensus makes the 

process take longer but we try to move it along as quickly as we 

can because we think this is a very large bit of outstanding 

business that it would be best to get done and get it behind us 

and move on with all the other areas that need attention. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The willing 

buyer, willing seller policy is creating some problems in 

different areas. Now I understand that some of the bands from 

the South are going up North or to northern parts of my 

constituency looking for land. Is this the type of situation that’s 

happening more often now? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think that just reflects their real estate 

thinking. They’re looking for a better deal and the land was a 

little too costly adjacent to their reserve, which they would have 

preferred, I think, in the instance you’re talking about and have 

had to just go further afield in order to get affordable land. 

 



1586  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  Am I correct in believing that land taken into 

the TLE status can’t have any type of encumbrance on the title 

 meaning mortgages, caveats, easements, that type of thing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well all the land that’s acquired in this 

way because it’s reserve land . . . and it must be free of 

encumbrances. This has been a difficult problem that’s been 

around for many years, is how to protect the land for the 

communal use while still enabling borrowing to be done at the 

bank and what not. And I think what’s happened is some of the 

banking institutions are getting involved with bands and 

looking at financing on a slightly different basis than just using 

property as an asset. But there’s no doubt it is a problem in 

terms of financing, but it also protects the land for future 

generations. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to get 

into the idea of the banking problems. But first of all I’d like to 

ask you — I finally have the right person to ask — about the 

easements for water rights for local conservation development 

areas. It’s a concern that many C&D (conservation and 

development) areas have. And because they’ve spent a lot of 

time and money getting easements for right of way to get onto 

the land, to maintain the ditches and maintain the waterways, if 

that is purchased by a native band, is there any way that those 

easements can be taken off. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The differentiation here is whether or 

not the land purchased already has developed infrastructure like 

drainage ditches, etc. If it was undeveloped, that would be a 

different situation. But where there’s developed infrastructure, 

they would have to consider the conservation authority as a 

third party interest and would have to negotiate an agreement 

with them about the disposition of those infrastructures. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess I’ll have to ask for a clarification 

because the infrastructure could mean as little as riprap culvert 

some place, but there’s still a lot of problems that could be 

involved with flooding in the cases of years like this. So how 

can the C&Ds be expected to be able to go onto this land and 

maintain their works if they have no right of access onto it? So 

are you saying to me then that they could negotiate their way 

out of this easement? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, that’s right. 

 

Ms. Draude:  The C&Ds, they will no longer be liable any 

more? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes. Because they had the agreement 

for access they would still be liable because no one is 

preventing their access to do whatever they have to do. 

 

Ms. Draude:  But then how can the land actually be taken 

into TLE status if the easement remains on that land? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’m not sure why it’s a problem. I mean 

there’s easements for power lines and other things. And the fact 

that they’re on a reserve doesn’t change the fact that they’re 

looked after or that someone has to look after them. I’m really 

not sure what the ownership of the land has to do with it. 

(2200) 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’m wondering if, in order to take the land into 

the TLE status, if all the easements have to be removed, then 

the area authorities would no longer be able to get onto the land 

to maintain the structures. And what happens if flooding is the 

result of the structures not being maintained and the water 

would go off land that didn’t belong to the . . . and it’s TLE 

status. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The easements aren’t removed; they’re 

just renegotiated, if you want to put it, with a different landlord. 

It doesn’t change the fact of the access or the person who was 

always looking after them, looking after them. It doesn’t change 

any of that. All it changes is who you have the agreement with. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess that’s what I was waiting to hear  

then the easement could still remain on there. And previous to 

this you told them that they couldn’t have any kind of 

encumbrance on the title in order to go into the status. So I’m 

just confirming that, yes, area authorities can have an easement 

even if it belongs in TLE land. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again, essentially it’s just they have an 

easement now with whoever the landowner is, and they would 

have the easement with the first nation instead but it wouldn’t 

change anything else. And in order for them to be able to take 

the land into TLE they must have satisfied that requirement as a 

third party interest, so there’s kind of no way not to satisfy that 

concern. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Okay, that’s just what I needed to have 

clarified then, that there will still be an easement; there still will 

be a right of access by the conservation development areas. 

They’ll still have that on the title. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  If they’ve negotiated it. I mean if there 

has been any kind of infrastructure they would have had to have 

negotiated it, so yes. 

 

I was just talking over whether we’re just having a 

communications glitch here. And the point that probably should 

be clear is that it doesn’t just automatically happen. The 

conservation authority, as a third party interest, has to negotiate 

the easement onto the reserve property. It wouldn’t just sort of 

automatically be assumed that everything would be as before. It 

would have to be negotiated on. But the safeguard for the 

conservation authorities is that it would not be given reserve 

status unless that agreement had been worked out. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. That doesn’t 

mean that there will be any pressure on the conservation areas 

to change the original easement or any of the agreements that 

had been made with landowners? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We can’t speak for them, but certainly 

it’s been my experience in meeting with bands and discussing 

problems with third party interests that, for the most part, 

they’ve bent over backwards to be accommodating to a whole 

range of interests. So you know, we wouldn’t know about the 

individual situation  that’s really up to them. But I have every  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

faith that they would be as good on this matter as they have 

been on anything from community pastures to other issues. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So then is a conservation easement one of the 

few things that we’ll be able to carry over with a piece of land 

when it goes into TLE status? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  If it’s negotiated, yes, and if it is 

sufficient infrastructure to qualify as a third party interest, there 

could not be reserve status granted unless there is an agreement. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. As far as mortgages will go, if land 

is purchased by a band, and it would of course have to be 

purchased then without any mortgages on it, and it’s held in a 

fee simple or some status until it’s put into TLE status, in that 

time, in that 18-month period, if the band puts a mortgage on it 

themselves, or through a holding company, then I understand 

that they can’t transfer it into Treaty Land Entitlement until that 

mortgage is removed. Am I right? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, that’s correct. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there any kind of deterrent in place so that 

this land will not be mortgaged, so it can be put into status 

earlier? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I guess two pieces here. If there is a 

mortgage on it, it can’t go into reserve status. But also, unless it 

goes into reserve status, under TLE, the money that goes for 

compensation to the municipality wouldn’t be forthcoming. So 

they would then be directly responsible for all of those costs 

separate from the TLE agreement. So there’s a lot, I guess, of 

self-interest in completing the process to reserve status because 

otherwise the tax loss money wouldn’t be forthcoming, and 

they’d basically be responsible for it then. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. That was my 

next question, then, that as long as the mortgage is there, they 

are still paying taxes to the RM. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Correct. 

 

Ms. Draude:  A final question, and that is: who is 

responsible for paying education for status natives both on and 

off the reservation? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes. On reserve it would be the federal 

government; off reserve, it’s us. And the only exception to that 

would be post-secondary, of which a very large percentage is 

covered by the federal government. But there are also instances 

of people who are not . . . sometimes there’s not sufficient 

funds, and they would then apply for regular student loan. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Madam Minister, the question 

I’m going to ask is, do you support the Metis rights that they’ve 

been talking about? I’m talking about the Metis land claims; 

I’m talking about the inherent right to self-government; I’m 

talking about the general way they were treated, the Metis were 

treated, over time. I’m talking about the Manitoba Act; we’re 

talking about the whole process of land. Do you personally 

support the effort of the Metis to get a land base and to look at  

the inherent right of self-government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I would have to say that we’re here 

tonight to speak to estimates. And certainly if we’re in the 

middle of an election campaign I would give you my personal 

views, but we’re here on estimates tonight. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And the reason why I’m trying to do that is 

to tie estimates into the commitment. The key thing here is, in 

any community that you have, obviously there’s not going to be 

one total answer to some of the economic problems in northern 

Saskatchewan. And that’s where a lot of the Metis people are as 

well and throughout southern Saskatchewan as well. 

 

But the only way a people is going to survive, and that people is 

going to flourish, Madam Minister, is if they have access to 

land; if they have direct access to the land and the resources on 

that land. 

 

And in northern Saskatchewan, when you sell a large piece of 

land, most of the land in the North is owned by the government; 

it’s Crown land. So in the event that you do sell a piece of land 

to an Indian band under the TLE agreement, where does that 

money go? 

 

How much do you suspect you might derive from the sale of 

northern Crown lands? And instead of having the government 

pay 30 per cent of the land, which you would normally do under 

a regular purchase of private land, you would in essence gain 70 

per cent of the sale of Crown land. Can you respond to some of 

these points? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’m not sure that we’re 100 per cent 

clear on your question here. If the land in question was being 

purchased under TLE, Crown land, then the money from those 

sales would go into the General Revenue Fund. And really it 

would be impossible to estimate till we’re further along through 

this land claim process how much land that will actually 

involve in the North. But I’m not sure if that was your entire 

question. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  No. I imagine just the fact that you do have 

some idea how much land is being looked at in northern 

Saskatchewan from the TLE. And my point is, do you have any 

kind of guestimate as to how many acres of land that any 

northern Indian band or southern Indian band might have 

interest in in northern Saskatchewan that the Crown owns? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This is a fairly complicated question 

because of the ability to take land in many different ways. For 

example, Peter Ballantyne, which is the second largest 

settlement in the province, is only taking 820 acres. But they’ve 

selected their land strategically and they’ve selected 

communities. And so they have not been selecting a large tract 

of land. Canoe Lake, about 20,000 acres; and English River, 

about 30,000 acres. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Is there a value of that land? Like what are 

you selling it at? Is it a per acre? What’s the roundabout figure 

are you using? And what’s the value of the land, total sale? 

 



1588  Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The Crown land figure was set in the 

agreement and we’re just trying to recall what the agreement 

was. It was actually specified in the TLE agreement. It’s not 

arbitrary. There was a figure established. If we can locate it for 

you we will. And we could even go on with another question if 

you like and we’ll just keep checking to see if we can get the 

actual figure. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, I think the thing I’m trying to get at, and 

I understand it’s been raised before, but the whole issue is, in 

northern Saskatchewan we talk about the Metis land claim that 

you have in front of you, Green Lake north. And on the other 

side you say okay, because the federal government has the 

federal obligation to treaties  which we all understand and we 

all, you know, understand these dues got to be paid  but the 

question I have here is that, when you buy northern Crown 

lands, instead of the provincial government having to fork over 

30 per cent of the sale, which I think is the funding arrangement 

that you have, and when you buy a piece of private land in the 

South, 70 per cent is covered by the federal government and 30 

is covered by the provincial government  I’m assuming that’s 

the arrangement in terms of payment. Is that correct? 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It is 70/30 but there is an additional 19 

per cent for anticipated cost savings when land is transferred 

from provincial to federal when there’s a community involved. 

Because that whole community then becomes the responsibility 

of the federal government rather than the provincial 

government. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Actually, I guess in reference to the 70/30, 

you mentioned 19 per cent. I need a bit more clarification on 

that. What is meant by the 19 per cent? Like for example, I’ll 

take a community in my constituency, Patuanak. They live right 

next door to a small hamlet. Actually Patuanak is broken in 

half. There’s about 200 people on the hamlet side and another 

maybe 8, 900 on the Indian band side. What would happen if 

the Indian band wanted to assume ownership of the hamlet? 

Would you allow that to happen, and is this the example where 

you’re talking about 19 per cent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Okay, all this complicated math; 70/30 

in the case of where there was a transfer of a community from 

provincial responsibility to federal, may shift to a 51/49 kind of 

arrangement to recognize the cost saving when all those costs 

are moved over under the federal government. 

 

But in any instance, like take for example, one situation where 

it has happened, Peter Ballantyne wanting to buy Sandy Bay. 

There is a northern municipality there and it’s up to the 

individuals in that community to decide whether or not they 

want to participate in that transfer. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So I guess, in essence, that if the band wants 

to buy Sandy Bay, the mayor and council says no, we’re not for 

sale, then obviously they’re not for sale. I’m talking about the 

community. So you’re saying that bands could potentially buy 

up communities in terms of assuming ownership of these 

certain towns? 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It’s not the mayor and council make 

that decision. It’s the individual property owners. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So if one property owner says no, then 

obviously you can’t pick lots and properties in town. You’ve 

got to be . . . obviously have some kind of rhyme or reason to 

this whole process. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well this is an interesting topic here. In 

Deschambault  too interesting actually for this time of the 

night but  in Deschambault 99 per cent of the people decided 

to go with the band and one person said no. So there is one 

person who’s not a member of the band. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay. Now if I understand this correct, now 

the Indian bands can actually assume ownership of 

communities in the instance where the communities and the 

local landowners say yes, you know, you can assume us. Then 

obviously your responsibility as a provincial government would 

lessen in terms of financial means because you’re no longer 

supporting municipal governments in the North. 

 

And secondly, the question about general purchasing of land, 

not communities, in the North. So if the English River Band 

buys 10,000 acres and you sell it at so many acres, in essence 

the provincial government could, you know, profit a great, tidy 

sum on this whole process in terms of saving some municipal 

governments, in terms of sales of Crown land. 

 

Am I correct in assuming these two statements? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The thing you have to keep in mind on 

this high math here is that as well as receiving some money for 

the sale of Crown land, we’re also a financial participant in 

providing the money to buy the land. So the province would be 

putting in all together about $285 million into the actual process 

of purchasing the land around the province. And only a portion 

of that would be Crown land; a lot of it would be private land. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Well I’m having an awful time 

understanding the math here. 

 

Instead of a certain sale . . . the sale of Crown land that you are 

selling to the federal government which in essence is the Crown 

land in the North, is being settled through the federal 

government. Instead of it costing you 30 per cent, you’re 

gaining 70 per cent of the sale of that land so . . . and you’re 

also gaining from the sales of . . . or from the savings of 

operating municipal governments in the North that are being 

purchased by these Indian bands. 

 

So I can’t understand the rhyme and reason and logic behind 

your statement, the fact that it’s costing you 285 million. In 

essence I think you’re going to be making more than 285 

million over a period of time. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Okay. Well back to what I mentioned 

earlier, that not by a long shot is all the land involved in the 

North. The largest amount of it is in the South and it’s private 

so this money would go largely to private persons who, for  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

various reasons, have either decided to get out of land 

ownership or have decided that it’s a good deal for them. 

 

In the North, the cost is not just the land purchase. A lot of the 

money is money that the bands pay directly to the third party 

interest to resolve their interest in the land. So the actual land 

itself is only a portion of the cost. It’s the resolving of third 

party interest and compensation to individuals would be part of 

what the bands pay for. And we wouldn’t receive that. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, obviously we’ll be going at this again 

a different day. The key thing here is, what’s really difficult for 

me to understand as a Metis person in the House and certainly 

looking at the Metis people in general  and again we’re going 

to commit points to the Indian people as well, as time permits 

 what I have a difficult time in explaining is that throughout 

the years, the Metis people, right from the Manitoba Act in the 

early years, were guaranteed 1.4 million acres of land and 

settlement of Rupertsland, the whole bloody bit. 

 

The key thing here I’m trying to impress upon you, Madam 

Minister, is that you look at the history and how the Metis 

people were treated, they were not treated fairly at all. There 

were promises made. The whole issue about script being 

purchased and sold the same day. The list goes on and on as to 

the injustice that the Metis people have suffered throughout the 

years. 

 

Now it’s 1996. The current trend continues. Not only do I feel 

is your government not recognizing the rights of the Metis 

people, you’re not dealing with the land issue. You’re not 

dealing with the fact that when it comes to northern land, we’re 

not going to deal with the Metis people; we’re going to 

continue to ignore the Metis people. And the list goes on and 

on. 

 

And to add insult to injury, Madam Minister, we have one small 

group of people that are working through the Metis Nation of 

Saskatchewan to try and bring recognition to these issues, and 

we’re under-funding them, and we’re grossly under-funding 

them. And to top it all off, we don’t even respect their March 

31 deadline. It’s been two months, almost two months, since 

they’ve had any funding. Obviously they’re not getting their 

funding on time. So at the very least, Madam Minister, will you 

commit to something today for the Metis people that we can 

take back  a tangible document; even something as simple as 

a Metis Act. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I guess because it’s before the courts, 

again I can’t discuss it. But we do not normally fund people to 

launch court cases against the government. I mean it’s just not a 

thing that’s done. 

 

And perhaps because the first nations have always had a reserve 

system, there are many more locations in which they have 

definable communities. There would be instances in the North, 

surely, that are substantially Metis communities, and I think 

there will be, once we settle this issue of this outstanding court 

case, some further discussion on those matters. But it does 

create a barrier, at the moment, to discussion. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
General Revenue Fund  
Finance  Vote 18  

MacKinnon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1562 
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1567 

General Revenue Fund  
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat  Vote 25 

Crofford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1575 
Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................ 1575, 1579, 1587 
Draude ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1578, 1585 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1578 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1579 
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 
 

 


