













































April 15, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 867 

 April 15, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 

behalf of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the names on the petition are from Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Weyburn, Lampman, Regina, and various other small 

communities in southern Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise today to present 

petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition are from numerous 

southern Saskatchewan communities and the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise today to present 

names of petitioners from throughout Saskatchewan regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Rouleau but they also are from Whitewood, 

Kipling, and Regina. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the Plains Health Centre. The 

petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The petition is signed by people throughout rural Saskatchewan, 

in the South particularly, and as far north as Archerwill. 

 

Ms. Draude: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer  

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, from 

White City, from Yorkton, Corning, and Lumsden. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present a petition of names from concerned citizens regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by many concerned citizens 

from the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Carlyle, Melville, and Regina. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues and the people all throughout Saskatchewan on day 

no. 30 to present petitions on behalf of saving the Plains Health 

Centre. 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

mainly from the Estevan area, some from Regina, of course 

from Regina Albert South constituency and Regina Elphinstone 

in particular. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

cause the government to undertake measures to remedy the 

problem of big game crop damage; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

  



868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Justice regarding public 

notification process for released sex offenders: (1) how 

many meetings has the minister held and/or attended 

regarding implementing public notification process in the 

province of Saskatchewan; (2) who was in attendance at 

those meetings; (3) how many other notification processes 

from other jurisdictions have been studied to date; and (4) 

how many provinces have a public notification process in 

place presently? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker:  Before we proceed to the introduction of 

guests, I would like to welcome on behalf of all members of the 

Legislative Assembly some special guests who are seated in our 

Chamber. We are honoured to have members from the 

Canadian Forces and the Canadian Forces Liaison Council 

present for Reserve Force Day. 

 

Now I will outline today’s Reserve Force Day program which is 

being held to honour the Saskatchewan men and women of the 

reserve force component of the Canadian Forces. In a moment I 

shall invite the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, the 

Leader of the Third Party, to pay tribute to the reserves. I shall 

then ask the Minister of Intergovernment Affairs to say a few 

words and introduce some special guests on the floor. 

 

Following these introductions, 20 members of the Assembly 

will introduce the reserves by units and then we’ll proceed to 

other introductions. 

 

I will now call on the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish to 

join you in my words of welcome to the many distinguished 

visitors who have joined us in the Assembly today. We are 

indeed fortunate to have with us General Baril, the commander 

of the Army, and many senior officers in the Canadian Forces at 

this very special event. 

 

Also, I’d like to welcome two very distinguished Canadians, 

Mr. John Craig Eaton, national Chair of the Canadian Forces 

Liaison Council  perhaps Mr. Eaton could just stand to be 

identified; and the provincial Chair, Mr. Paul Hill, and his wife, 

Mrs. Carol Hill; and delegates from across Canada. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And why not have one of the most 

important, General Baril, stand up and be recognized too, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to  

say again, just a few brief words in tribute to the Saskatchewan 

members of the Canadian Reserve Forces, who have served 

with such distinction and dedication. 

 

A few moments ago, I had the privilege of joining His Honour 

and General Baril for the inspection of the troops. I said then 

and I repeat in the House today, that it is but the voluntary, 

part-time nature of this service which sets reservists apart from 

their full-time career counterparts in the Canadian Forces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this distinction is not one of quality, for the efforts 

put forth by everyone is, as we can all agree, of the highest 

calibre. Rather this is a distinction of quantity, because as I see 

it, the duties performed by the reserve forces are in addition to 

the day-to-day demands of home and work. And the quantity is 

the distinction. The fact that a relatively small province like 

ours can boast over a thousand members of the naval, air, 

communication reserves, the militia, the cadet instructors cadre, 

speaks very, very highly to our population’s well-known spirit 

of volunteerism. It is a tribute to our caring, compassionate, and 

cooperative society that we have so many citizens dedicated to 

extending the warm embrace of freedom to people throughout 

the entire world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout the entire aspects of our history, even 

before we became a province, Saskatchewan people have 

served their fellow human beings and our country in this 

commendable way. They have rallied to the colours in large 

numbers in both world wars and in Korea. They have served on 

many United Nations’ peacekeeping operations, including the 

recent missions in the former Yugoslavia. 

 

And over the course of history, several volunteers have won the 

Victoria Cross for valour in battle. This is indeed an outstanding 

record, one of which we can all be very, very proud. 

 

But in closing, Mr. Speaker, I point out that the Greek 

philosopher Aristotle taught us the following: 

 

Dignity does not consist in possessing honours, but in 

deserving honours. 

 

Not in possessing them but in deserving them. So wise. Those 

we honour today are more than deserving of our respect and 

deep gratitude. 

 

On behalf of all Saskatchewan people, let me express our 

sincere thanks to our reserve forces for their courage, their 

determination, and their willingness to sacrifice personal 

comforts for the pursuit and maintenance of freedom and justice 

and democracy everywhere. We are all very, very proud of 

them. God bless each and every one of them. 

 

Thank you, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly a pleasure to 

rise today to say a few words in tribute to the dedicated men 

and women who are part of Canada’s reserve forces. Without  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

 

wanting to echo too much of what the Premier has already said, 

I would just like to add my voice to those recognizing the effort 

and dedication put forth by these great citizens of Canada. 

 

As we’ve already heard, the reserve forces in Saskatchewan 

have a proud tradition predating even the province itself. I don’t 

think we can ever underestimate the commitment of these 

people who volunteer a good deal of their spare time to 

ensuring Canada’s Armed Forces remain strong and proud. 

 

These so-called citizen soldiers are an important part of that 

tradition. Reservists have served overseas on a number of 

peacekeeping operations. As we see on the news every night, 

such assignments can be onerous and dangerous. These people 

are at times putting their own safety on the line to try and bring 

some civility to other parts of the world where the people are 

not as fortunate as we are in Canada to live in peace and 

security. For that, a day such as this is but a small token of our 

gratitude. 

 

I also want to take this time to pay a small tribute to those men 

and women who lead cadet squadrons in our province. There 

are 67 such squadrons in Saskatchewan, and in fact I am lucky 

enough to have the H.M.C.S. (Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship) 

Qu’Appelle Sea Cadet training facility located in my own 

constituency at Fort San. 

 

I was a cadet in my youth and I know firsthand how fortunate 

those youths are who decide to take part in the cadet program. It 

builds character and leadership abilities, attributes these young 

people will carry with them for the rest of their lives. 

 

So once again, welcome to all those reservists we honour today. 

And on behalf of all of my colleagues in the official opposition, 

I want to say you all have our deepest thanks and respect for all 

your hard work and dedication. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Premier, Leader of the Opposition, distinguished guests, I am 

pleased to have the opportunity to add my remarks today 

honouring the many brave Saskatchewan men and women who 

have worked with our province’s and our country’s reserve 

forces. 

 

Today is Saskatchewan Reserve Force Day, a day to pay 

respects to those who have lost their lives in the past and to 

thank those who continue to diligently work toward keeping 

peace in our country and those abroad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s reservists have been an integral 

part of Canada’s defence force for the past number of years, 

dating back to when Saskatchewan was first a province in the 

North-West Territories. Through two world wars, the Korean 

War, and more recently in peacekeeping missions throughout 

the world, Canadian reservists have participated in 

peacekeeping missions in Korea, Pakistan, Egypt, Israel, 

Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Cambodia, El Salvador, the former 

Yugoslavia, Mozambique, Somalia, and a number of other 

countries  the list goes on and on  working diligently to  

protect democracy and do whatever possible to avoid war. 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, reservists do not return home to their 

friends and family, which is one of the horrible tragedies of 

conflict in war. 

 

I would like to say thank you, Mr. Speaker, to those who fought 

so valiantly and gave up their lives to preserve the freedoms 

that we all enjoy today and sometimes take too much for 

granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also today like to commend the many 

employers in our province and throughout Canada who 

recognize the significance of our reservists and provide time for 

militia military training and tours of duty for their reservist 

employees. 

 

Today, as we remember those who died in conflicts of the past 

in order to make the world safe for democracy, we might give 

some thought as to how we continue to make democracy safe 

for the world because, Mr. Speaker, as Harry Truman said in 

1966 and I quote: 

 

For it is all too obvious that if we do not abolish war on 

this earth then surely one day war will abolish us all from 

this earth. 

 

Thanks to all the reservists, whether naval, militia, air reserve, 

communications reserve, cadet instructors cadre. Thank you for 

all your work and dedication toward this goal. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I join with yourself, the 

Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and the Leader of the 

Third Party, in welcoming our visitors to the Assembly this 

afternoon. 

 

M. le président, je joins avec vous, le premier ministre, la chef 

de l’opposition, la chef de le parti troisième, pour dire 

bienvenue a nos invités distingués. 

 

Canada’s Armed Forces have greatly contributed to protecting 

the ideals of peace and freedom around the world. The 

generosity and high principles of our citizens were shown by 

the promptness with which we responded in both world wars 

and the Korean War. Canada could have said  as others did 

 this is not our fight. But we didn’t, and many paid the price, 

whether at Somme, Ypres, Dieppe, Juno Beach, or Kamyong 

 

The same willingness to defend others characterizes Canada’s 

peacekeeping record. Last year I had the privilege of hearing 

Major General Lewis MacKenzie speak after his return from 

Bosnia. He related that whenever a UN (United Nations) 

peacekeeping force is needed, the country in need receives a list 

of those countries willing to contribute, and they tick off which 

countries they prefer. He stated, Canada is always the first 

choice. And it isn’t until the countries find out how many troops 

Canada can contribute, that the rest of the list is checked off. 

 

Peacekeeping forces would not have been possible without the  

  



870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

reserves who have stepped forward to play an important role in 

these dangerous but vital missions of peace, including many 

reservists from Saskatchewan. 

 

Canada has a proud history of doing its duty. Today provides 

another opportunity to remind people, and the people of 

Saskatchewan, of that little-known record and especially the 

role of the Armed Forces Reserves. Members of the naval, 

army, air, and communication reserves in Saskatchewan, 

together with the cadet instructors, are not only a vital part of 

Canada’s Armed Forces, they are, at the same time, valued 

members of their provincial and local communities. 

 

It was my privilege earlier today to host a luncheon for senior 

military officers and for the Canadian Forces Liaison Council, 

which is holding its annual conference here in Regina. This 

organization promotes good relations between reservists and 

their civilian employers. It demonstrates that citizen soldiers are 

not only valuable for the Armed Forces, they’re also better 

employees who bring special skills and experience to their 

civilian jobs. 

 

For many years, the Government of Saskatchewan has had a 

policy of leave for military training for its employees, and we’re 

proud to make this contribution to Canada’s defence forces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s now my privilege and pleasure to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of the House, some 

distinguished guests from the Canadian Forces, the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police, and the Canadian Forces Liaison 

Council, seated behind the bar of the House. I’d ask them to rise 

and be acknowledged when I call their names: 

 

M. le président, c’est mon plaisir de vous présenter et par vous 

aux deputés au l’assemblée, quelques invités distingués des 

Forces Canadiennes, de les Gendarmes Royals Canadiens, et le 

Conseil de Liaison des Forces Canadiennes qui sont assis en 

arrière de la barrière de l’Assemblée. Quand je les appelle, je 

leurs demanderai de se lever: 

 

The Commander of Canada’s Army, Lieutenant General 

Maurice Baril, commander of the Land Force Command in 

Saint-Hubert, Quebec. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Major General Rick Linden, chief of 

reserves and cadets for the Canadian Forces. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Major General Clive Addy, 

commander of the Canadian Army in the West, land force 

western area, based in Edmonton. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Brigadier General Robie MacDonald, 

reserve adviser for the army. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Representing the senior air reserve 

adviser, Lieutenant Colonel Pierre Chevrier. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Brigadier General Ken Quinn, deputy 

commander of land force, western area. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Colonel Sandy Fairbanks, the senior 

legal reserve adviser. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Captain John Dalzell from 

Saskatoon, the senior naval officer in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Colonel Robert Chisholm, 

commander of Saskatchewan district for the army. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Representing the wing commander of 

the 15th Wing, Moose Jaw, Lieutenant Colonel Sandy Milne. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Chief Superintendent Andre 

Gauthier, commanding officer of the Depot Division, Canadian 

Royal Mounted Police. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Chief Superintendent Rob 

Leatherdale, representing the commanding officer of the F 

Division, Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  From the Canadian Forces Liaison 

Council, it’s my pleasure to introduce, as has been already 

introduced but I’ll ask him to stand again, Mr. John Craig Eaton 

of Toronto, national Chair of the council. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Paul Hill of Regina, provincial 

Chair of the council for Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Colonel Luc Bujold, national liaison 

officer for the council. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  And the provincial Chairs, liaison 

officers, and national staff of the Canadian Forces Liaison 

Council from across Canada. I’d ask you if you’d all please rise. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  And finally, His Worship, Mayor 

Boughen, mayor of Moose Jaw, home of Saskatchewan’s 

military base, 15 Wing, and the world-famous Snowbirds. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and with 

your permission members of the Assembly will now introduce 

reservists from across the province who are seated in the 

galleries this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker:  I now call on some members of the 

Legislative Assembly to introduce our reserves according to 

their units. 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, members of Her Majesty’s 

Canadian Ship Queen in Regina are seated in the east gallery. 

The naval reserve in Regina was established in 1923. In 1942 it 

was commissioned as H.M.C.S. Queen by permission of King 

George VI in 1942 and named after Queen Elizabeth, now the 

Queen Mother. H.M.C.S. Queen is one of the top naval reserve 

divisions in Canada and is tasked to provide a crew for a 

maritime coastal defence vessel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce the members of 

H.M.C.S. Queen. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

members of Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship Unicorn in 

Saskatoon are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. Established in 

1923, H.M.C.S. Unicorn is named after one of the first vessels 

to enter Hudson Bay in search of the Northwest Passage and it 

was commissioned as a ship in 1941. During the Second World 

War, Unicorn served as a Royal Canadian Navy recruiting 

centre. Several times in recent decades H.M.C.S. Unicorn has 

been recognized as the top naval reserve division in Canada. 

Many of its members have served with the Canadian Forces 

around the world. 

 

It is my privilege to introduce members of the H.M.C.S. 

Unicorn. Would you stand, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 

Saskatchewan Dragoons from Moose Jaw are seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery. This unit traces its history back to the 1880s 

as a mounted rifle patrol. It fought as infantry in the First and 

Second World Wars. In 1950 it became an armoured unit and in 

1968 an independent reconnaissance squadron. The 

Saskatchewan Dragoons are now a wheeled reconnaissance unit 

skilled in cross-country driving and field craft. 

It is my privilege to introduce members of the Saskatchewan 

Dragoons. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, members of the 10th Field 

Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery, from Regina, are seated in 

the west gallery. Militia artillery began in Saskatchewan in 

1910. Volunteers from Saskatchewan field batteries served with 

distinction in both the First and Second World Wars. In the 

Second War, 18th Field Battery from Regina became an 

anti-tank unit. After the war, the regiment again became a field 

regiment. Members of the Assembly appreciate the efficiency 

of the 18th Field Battery in firing gun salutes at the opening of 

the legislature and on other special occasions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege, and I would add, Mr. Speaker, 

that it is my distinct pleasure as a former gunner, to introduce 

members of the 10th Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery, 

Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, members of the 64 Battery of 

the 10th Field Regiment from Yorkton are also seated in the 

west gallery. Like their colleagues in Regina, the gunners from 

Yorkton share in the proud traditions of the Royal Canadian 

Artillery and have served the United Nations peacekeeping 

missions abroad. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce members of the 64 

Battery, 10th Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery from 

Yorkton. I ask them to please rise and be acknowledged. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the North 

Saskatchewan Regiment from Saskatoon are seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery. 

 

This infantry regiment was formed in 1970 but it traces its 

origins to a rifle regiment formed in Saskatoon way back in 

1907. Renamed the Saskatoon Light Infantry, this regiment 

took part in the invasion of Sicily and Italy in 1943 and the 

north-west Europe campaign in 1945. 

 

Soldiers of the North Saskatchewan Regiment have served in 

Germany and on several United Nations missions. The North 

Saskatchewan Pipes and Drums played at our ceremony this 

afternoon. 

 

It is my privilege to introduce members of the North 

Saskatchewan Regiment from Saskatoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of “B” 

Company of the North Saskatchewan Regiment from Prince 

Albert are also seated in the Speaker’s gallery. This company 

has a long history in our province as it perpetuates the Prince 

Albert and Battleford Volunteers formed in the 1880s. With  

  



872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

their counterparts in Saskatoon, members of “B” Company train 

all year to maintain their infantry skills. 

 

It is my privilege now to introduce members of “B” Company, 

North Saskatchewan Regiment from Prince Albert. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of Royal 

Regina Rifles are seated in the west gallery. 

 

The predecessor battalion of the regiment was formed in 1905, 

the year Saskatchewan became a province. During the First 

World War the unit received many battle honours. In the 

Second World War the Regina Rifle Regiment landed on the 

Normandy beaches on D-Day in 1944 and it reached further 

inland than any other unit. 

 

The regiment was honoured in 1982 when the Queen granted 

the title “Royal” and appointed Princess Anne as the 

colonel-in-chief. 

 

Members of the regiment have served with distinction in United 

Nations peacekeeping in the former Yugoslavia. It is my 

privilege to introduce members of the Royal Regina Rifles. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to introduce members of the 16 Service Battalion from 

Regina, seated in the west gallery. 

 

Formed in 1965, 16 Service Battalion provides combat service 

support to all units in the Saskatchewan district  transport, 

supply, maintenance, administration, finance, cooks, and 

military police. Without the drivers, technicians, and other 

support personnel of 16 Service Battalion, the Army Reserve 

could not function. 

 

It’s my privilege to introduce members of the 16 Service 

Battalion from Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce a group today as well. It’s the members of the 

Saskatoon Detachment of 16 Service Battalion in Saskatoon, 

who are also seated in the west gallery today. 

 

The men and women of this detachment maintain the vehicles 

and ensure the supplies of the militia in Saskatoon. The unit’s 

motto, “Flexible and Enduring”, is appropriate for their task. 

 

It is my privilege again to introduce members of the Saskatoon 

Detachment of 16 Service Battalion. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 

16 Regina Medical Company are seated in the east gallery. The 

unit started with a field ambulance which served in France in  

the First World War and in north-west Europe during the 

Second World War. 16 Medical Company provides first aid, 

medical examinations, and field ambulance services to all 

reserve units. Its members also take training in hospitals, 

ambulance, and basic trauma life support. 

 

It is my privilege to introduce members of the 16 Medical 

Company from Regina. Would you please stand. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of 

Saskatoon Detachment 16 Medical Company are also seated in 

the east gallery. They provide first aid and medical support to 

the units in Saskatoon, and were granted official detachment 

status in 1993. 

 

It is my privilege to introduce members of the Saskatoon 

Detachment of 16 Medical Company. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 

Saskatchewan District Headquarters are seated in the east 

gallery. Located at the Regina Armoury, Saskatchewan District 

Headquarters is responsible on behalf of the Land Force 

Western Area for all army reserve units in our province. 

 

Members of the headquarters coordinate administration, 

personnel, training, operations, chaplains, legal services, and 

public affairs. There are also headquarters staff in Saskatoon 

and Dundurn. 

 

It is my privilege to introduce members of the Saskatchewan 

District Headquarters. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 

Militia Training Detachment, Dundurn, are seated in the east 

gallery. Camp Dundurn, south of Saskatoon, was established in 

the 1930s as a depression relief project and work camp. During 

the Second World War it became a major training centre for the 

Canadian Army and Air Force. It is now an ammunition depot 

and the militia training centre for Saskatchewan. Exercises and 

individual training for all Saskatchewan soldiers take place 

year-round in Dundurn. In 1995, training for United Nations 

peacekeeping operations brought soldiers from all over western 

Canada to Dundurn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce members of the 

Militia Training Detachment, Dundurn. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, members of the 15 Wing 

Detachment, Dundurn are also seated in the east gallery. They 

operate the firing range at the camp, a vital part of the 

year-round training for our reserve soldiers, and they maintain 

an enviable safety record in doing so. 

 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce members of the 15 

Wing Detachment, Dundurn. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, seated in the west gallery 

are members of 15 Wing, Air Augmentation Flight from Moose 

Jaw. This unit, Mr. Speaker, was formed in 1975 as the first 

trial unit of its kind. The purpose of the Air Augmentation 

Flight is to provide trained personnel for the air force in a 

variety of occupations. These members work side by side with 

their regular force counterparts at 15 Wing, Moose Jaw, which, 

of course, is Saskatchewan’s major base. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that you too would want to join me in 

welcoming members of the 15 Air Reserve Augmentation 

Flight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of 734 

Communications Squadron from Regina are seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery. Communications squadrons are the 

successors of signals regiments. They provide radio, field 

telephone, teletype, computer, and information processing 

services to the Canadian Forces. In 1990, 734 Squadron became 

the first total force unit in Canada when it combined reserve and 

regular force personnel into one organization. 

 

It is my privilege, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and to all 

members of this Assembly, members of 734 Communications 

Squadron. I ask them to rise. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of 737 

Communications Squadron from Saskatoon are seated in your 

gallery. Like its sister unit in Regina, 737 Communications 

Squadron provides a variety of technical services and skilled 

personnel for the Canadian Forces in the Saskatoon area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce members of 737 

Communications Squadron. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 

Cadet Instructors Cadre are seated in your gallery. These 

reserve officers instruct and train young people in our cadet 

corps. Nearly 3,000 Saskatchewan boys and girls belong to 67 

cadet corps in 49 communities across our province. The cadet 

movement is one of Canada’s largest and most effective youth 

organizations. In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it includes six sea 

cadet corps, 20 army cadet corps, and 41 air cadet squadrons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce members of the 

Cadet Instructors Cadre. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in the east  

gallery and on the floor of the House are former reservists of 

the Canadian Forces. 

 

Many citizens of our province have served in the navy, army, 

air force, or communication reserve. They have given 

generously of their time and talents outside their regular 

employment and often at a considerable cost to their leisure and 

family time. Employers will testify that reservists, present or 

former, bring extra skill and commitment to their full-time jobs. 

Saskatchewan has been well served by its reservists in the 

Canadian Forces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce former 

Saskatchewan reservists present today in the Chamber. Please 

stand. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I thank all hon. members for your 

introductions of the reserves. And to continue now with 

introduction of guests, I will recognize the hon. member for 

Redberry Lake. 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask all 

members to welcome students from Blaine Lake composite 

school, Blaine Lake, Saskatchewan. We have 19 students, grade 

11 and 12, sitting in the west gallery. They are accompanied by 

teachers, Mr. Ron Jeppesen and Mr. Gerry Tkachuk. 

 

I ask all members to join in welcoming these teachers and 

students from my constituency of Redberry Lake. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Melfort Mustangs Hockey Champions 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For those that 

were not predisposed to watch golf over the weekend, you 

probably know why I rise today, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud 

to rise and congratulate my own home town team, the Melfort 

Mustangs, on their recent provincial victory on Friday played in 

the Regina Agridome. 

 

In a most dramatic finish, the Melfort Mustangs have captured 

their second Junior A SJHL (Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 

League) championship title in five years. In a 5 to 3 victory 

over the Yorkton Terriers, the Mustangs ended the series four 

games to one. 

 

Coach Kevin Dickey can be very proud of the team that will 

represent all of Saskatchewan against likely Neepawa or 

possibly St. James, Manitoba for the Anavet Cup championship 

slated to begin April 20 at the Northern Lights Palace in 

Melfort. 

 

Please join me in congratulating the Melfort Mustangs on their 

provincial victory and to join in welcoming you to the Royal 

Bank Cup scheduled for Melfort the beginning of May. 

  



874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Maidstone Trade Fair 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, it may be hard for some 

members of the Assembly to believe that I attended a function 

during the weekend where I had to be quiet. Well for part of the 

time, anyway. I am talking about the 12th annual Maidstone 

Trade Fair and silent auction which was held at the Maidstone 

arena. 

 

There were 75 exhibitors at this event which is sponsored by the 

Maidstone Chamber of Commerce and the Maidstone and 

District Historical Society. This shows that the entrepreneurship 

spirit is just up and going in businesses in the north-west, and 

business is alive and thriving. 

 

Items and services included agricultural, commercial, arts, 

crafts, financial, and recreational. Other activities included Paul 

Runalls family entertainment, the Maidstone band, and the 

magic of Jamie Swettenham. 

 

Approximately 1,500 people attended the trade fair, which is 

excellent considering the population of Maidstone is 1,000. 

 

I would also like to recognize the corporate sponsors which 

included Wilhelm Gibbons & Greenwood, solicitors; Maidstone 

Pharmacy; Kelly’s Auction Service; town of Maidstone; Alm 

chartered accountants; Waseca Credit Union; CIBC (Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce); and Step by Step home 

hardware. 

 

Congratulations to all organizers and participants for putting on 

a successful event. Thank you. 

 

National Soil Conservation Week 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of 

Saskatchewan’s most precious resources is our soil. I would 

like to recognize this week’s designation as National Soil 

Conservation Week. It is extremely timely, because right now 

many farmers are preparing to head out into the fields for spring 

seeding while others are surveying the damage from spring 

flooding. 

 

The success of Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry is directly 

tied to the soil conditions in the province. For this reason 

researchers and farmers are continually looking for innovative 

ways to make our land sustainable while trying to balance the 

costs. 

 

The need to protect our soil has drastically changed farming 

practices in Saskatchewan in recent years. Now we see more 

stubble left over in the winter. More and more farmers are using 

the direct seeding method along with minimal or zero till. 

 

Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association recently 

recognized the efforts of some who are leading the way in 

conservation practices. Ken Allport from the Kyle area and the 

Seager Wheeler farm in Rosthern were honoured for their 

farming methods. We can all take notes from them. 

I encourage all farmers across Saskatchewan and Canada to 

take some time this week to think about how we can improve 

our farming methods to ensure our land and soil is preserved for 

future generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon Youth Orchestra 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, earlier in this Assembly I praised 

the performance of the South Saskatchewan Youth Orchestra at 

the first Banff International Festival of Youth Orchestras held 

during the Easter week. The Saskatoon Youth Orchestra was 

also present at this prestigious festival, Mr. Speaker, and it 

performed with the same exuberance and professional 

excellence as did the other orchestra from Saskatchewan. 

 

The young players, under the direction of Wayne Toews, played 

a very spirited, mostly modern, and incredibly difficult program 

of works by Mahler, Dvorak, Bartok, and Lyadov. I was happy 

to hear as well a work by the Canadian composer, Godfrey 

Ridout, an appropriate selection for a Canadian orchestra. 

 

The Saskatoon Youth Orchestra was established in 1958 by 

Murray Adaskin and reorganized in 1983 by Mr. Toews and 

George Charpentier, the associate music director. Since then it 

has maintained a prominent profile on the Canadian music 

scene. I know many of the musicians in this orchestra, and I can 

attest to their musicianship and their dedication to their art. 

 

Two points very quickly, Mr. Speaker. One, the two 

Saskatchewan orchestras were the only representatives from 

Canada at this festival, a fact of which we can all be very proud. 

And two, the orchestra’s ability and their director’s guidance 

deserve our applause and our support. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Conference 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation wrapped up an extremely 

busy conference in Regina with a special ceremony. First I 

would like to congratulate the newly elected president and 

vice-president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 

Carol Moen takes over as STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation) president on July 1. Carol is a Swift Current teacher 

who has served the past two years as STF vice-president. Doug 

Willard takes over as STF vice-president. Doug is presently 

teaching in Rosthern. Of course Dwain Drew now becomes past 

president of the STF, and I would like to thank him for his 

dedication and hard work. 

 

Finally I would also like to congratulate four distinguished 

Saskatchewan educators on their honorary life membership with 

the STF. Dr. Terry McKague of Regina spent 23 years with the 

teachers’ federation and has taught at the University of Alberta 

and the University of Regina. He also served on the U of R 

senate and spent two terms there as chancellor. 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

 

Harold Schultz of Saskatoon has been involved in education for 

than 40 years. He taught in Kinistino, Rosthern, and Melfort 

and was a founding member of the Saskatchewan Middle Years 

Association. 

 

Gary Genge of Saskatoon dedicated himself to the STF in 

various administrative positions for 20 years. He helped set up 

the Saskatchewan School Based Administrators Association. 

 

Walter Wenaas, now of Calgary, taught in Shaunavon, Biggar, 

and Estevan. Walter also was a very active member of the STF. 

 

I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating these four individuals for their lifetime work in 

developing Saskatchewan education. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Spiritwood Area Doctor Retiring 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Last Saturday evening I attended a retirement 

function for Dr. Ray Michaud. He has practised medicine in the 

community of Spiritwood for the past 35 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 150 guests in attendance roasted and toasted 

the doctor with stories of those 35 years. My father was the 

hospital board chairman in 1961 when Dr. Michaud was 

granted his hospital privileges. I know that they had a good 

working relationship although they were not always in 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although Dr. Michaud spent many of those years 

as a one-man practice, he was active in the community as a 

member of the Lions, the Knights of Columbus, the curling rink 

executive. He chaired or was the president of the extendicare 

association, the separate school board, the arena board, and the 

district parks and recreation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish there was time to tell the stories about the 

equipment failure, family support, and other interesting 

activities that went on during those 35 years, but there isn’t. So, 

Mr. Speaker, the people in Spiritwood on Saturday evening, 

along with his family, paid tribute to Dr. Michaud. I ask today 

that the members of the Assembly do the same. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

South-east Volunteer Recognition Awards 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we speak 

well of volunteerism in this province. Yesterday I had the 

privilege of attending a volunteer recognition awards ceremony 

held in my home community of Kipling; actually it was the 

south-east part of this province. People from the areas of 

Weyburn and Estevan, and Carievale, Redvers, Moosomin, 

Kipling and all the way to Odessa, Vibank, gathered in Kipling 

to recognize a number of people who had contributed so greatly 

to their communities, whether in sport, recreation, or culture. 

 

I think it speaks well of this organization that a number of years 

ago as governments looked at cutting back grants, decided that  

they might find another alternate means whereby they may keep 

this recognition awards ceremony going. And so I want to 

extend congratulations to the south-east volunteer recognition 

awards group for their hard work and efforts in recognizing the 

work of volunteers across the area. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Allan Cup Championship 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, this past week the town of Unity 

in my riding hosted the 1996 Allan Cup championship for 

senior amateur hockey in Canada. Since 1914, the Allan Cup 

has been accepted as a championship trophy for senior amateur 

hockey in all of Canada. It is an honour for any community to 

host this prestigious event. 

 

I would like to congratulate the four teams that competed in 

Unity. The Stony Plain Eagles from Stony Plain, Alberta; the 

Truro TSN Bearcats from Truro, Nova Scotia; the Unity Miners 

from Unity, Saskatchewan; and the winners of the competition 

 the Warroad Lakers from Warroad, Minnesota. 

 

The Warroad Lakers have now won the Allan Cup three 

consecutive years in a row. They represented 

Manitoba/Saskatchewan, and as far as we know, they are the 

only American team ever to compete for the Allan Cup. This 

week was one of exciting competition, good sportsmanship, and 

fun. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the many volunteers who made 

the Allan Cup such a successful community event  the 12 

members of the committee who did the organizing; the chamber 

of commerce who sponsored a special luncheon; the Royal 

Purple for the dance lunch; Unity students who made posters 

and put them up in many businesses; the Twenties and Thirties 

Clubs for looking after the dance; the Kinsmen for a pancake 

breakfast; the local legion for helping at the opening 

ceremonies; and all the others who made the week’s event such 

a great success. This is a wonderful example of rural residents 

working together to promote and achieve a momentous 

accomplishment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskTel Strike 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister in charge of SaskTel told reporters last week that the 

union is threatening to bring home unionized employees who 

are overseas on international projects if the strike is not settled 

within two weeks. She added such actions could jeopardize 

SaskTel’s chances of getting contracts with other countries. The 

minister also indicated that she hopes the union will reconsider. 

 

Will the minister explain what steps she will be taking to get the 

two sides in this dispute back to the bargaining table, other than 

hoping? 

 

  



876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, this government believes 

in the collective bargaining process. We believe in the integrity 

of that process. We respect the rights of the union members to 

take job action if they feel that’s necessary. 

 

I did make those comments relating to the reputation of SaskTel 

International in the international field if they had to abandon 

projects. The union members are well aware, the union 

executive, of the implications that kind of action would have. 

 

We expect this temporary lapse to be . . . talks to resume at the 

bargaining table in the near future. And we believe in allowing 

those events to take their course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, given the comments of the 

minister, it is evident that SaskTel International’s reputation 

may be at stake if overseas workers are forced to abandon 

projects and return home. This could have serious consequences 

on future projects, and hoping the union reconsider such a move 

is simply not good enough. The only way this strike will be 

settled is at the bargaining table, as the Labour minister stated. 

 

Will the minister explain what plans this government has to 

ensure the international reputation of SaskTel is not jeopardized 

because of the current labour dispute? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we know the employees 

of SaskTel, unionized and otherwise, to be productive, 

intelligent, and reasonable people. And we are sure and 

confident that this dispute, and any of the ramifications arising 

from it, will be solved in a reasonable and intelligent manner in 

due course. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Districts Funding 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saturday’s Regina Leader-Post contained an article which 

focused on the plight of the South Central Health District. 

 

This district recently received word that it will receive almost 

$1 million less in funding this year over last. And when you add 

inflation, increased costs for medical supplies, the district 

actually faces about a $1.4 million shortfall. 

 

This district CEO (chief executive officer), Lee Spencer, says 

he is surprised because his district, and I quote “. . . was 

considered underfunded for the services it provided . . .” 

 

Will the minister explain how a health district which has 

already been underfunded can be expected to provide further 

proper health care services with such a dramatic cut to its 

funding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well speaking of the South Central Health 

District, Mr. Speaker, last week we had this member up in this 

House saying that some of the employees wouldn’t get their pay 

cheques today. And I said to the House that you have to be very 

careful listening to information from this member, because that 

member was suggesting that that centre, the Radville Marian 

Centre, was not receiving funding from the health district, 

which is not true. And that member was suggesting that that 

health district was not receiving funding from this government, 

Mr. Speaker, which was not true. 

 

Now I want to say to that member, Mr. Speaker, that when it 

comes to health care funding, this government is replacing 

every dollar that the Liberals have taken out of health care, to 

the tune of about $50 million in this province this year. Our 

recent budget back-fills 100 per cent what the Liberals have 

taken out of health care. And we don’t need any lectures from 

this member about how to fund health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, I might want to point out to 

the Minister of Health that it’s himself and the minister in 

charge of SaskTel who are continuously standing up in this 

House and having to apologize for not being correct with their 

facts and figures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the South Central Health District is one of 19 

which will receive less funding this year. Their situation merely 

echoes that of other districts, such as the Prairie West Health 

District, which faces a $391,000 reduction in funding according 

to a news release. And I’ll send a copy of that news release over 

to the Minister of Health and the Premier so that they could 

follow along. 

 

To use another example, the Pipestone Health District will 

receive a decrease of some $291,000. Mr. Speaker, rural 

districts must receive a proper level of funding, as the Pipestone 

board chairman, Dave McCall, states in a news release. And I 

quote: “The future of the hospitals in the Pipestone District will 

be threatened.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has been warned countless times 

that what they’re developing is a two-tiered health system. 

 

Will the minister explain why, Mr. Speaker, when he and all of 

his government are elected to represent the needs of all of 

Saskatchewan residents, they are abdicating their responsibility 

to rural families? And I’d like to send across the Pipestone 

Health District news release, so there again they can follow 

along. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member from Wood 

River likes to point out that when I got something wrong I 

apologized in the House the next day because my information 

was wrong. Now he says that the minister in charge of SaskTel 

continuously apologizes for making errors because she made  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

 

one error, like I did, and also apologized. 

 

But the member gets up in this House, and he says one day that 

people aren’t going to be paid, and they get paid. And I don’t 

think the member will apologize. The member gets up another 

day, and he says that somebody got a $17,500 raise, and it turns 

out the next day that the person wasn’t working for three 

months the previous year, and that’s why their income went up. 

 

And I have a whole list of errors that this member and the 

Liberal Party have made in this session, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 

not going to hold my breath waiting for an apology from them. 

And nor are they going to apologize for the fact that the federal 

Liberals have taken $50 million out of the health care system. 

No, they won’t apologize, Mr. Speaker, but they will be 

apologists for the Liberal Party in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

because of the cut-backs to the rural districts, more people are 

travelling to our major centres for treatment. This will 

undoubtedly put more pressure on the health care facilities that 

exist in Regina and Saskatoon. Now with this in mind and the 

fact that our senior population is growing rapidly and will 

require greater medical attention — about one in three people 

are treated for cancer — will the minister explain how he can 

justify closing a facility such as the Plains Health Centre, given 

the cut-backs to the rural, but also into the large urbans now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well of course the problem with the 

member is, Mr. Speaker, for a long time he complained about 

conversion of rural facilities and said, but nothing was ever 

converted in the cities. But then when the Plains Health Centre 

was being consolidated with the two other hospitals in Regina, 

he complains about that. 

 

That member knows full well that the services of the Plains 

Health Centre are going to be continued in the other two 

hospitals in Regina, Mr. Speaker. And when he gets up and 

suggests to the people that the services are going to be taken 

away, like the member from Humboldt was saying a few weeks 

ago that you wouldn’t be able to get a CT (computerized axial 

tomography) scan in the city of Regina, which is incorrect, I say 

to the member that the member is harming his own credibility 

more than anything else, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess what I’d like to say to the member is, if he believes 

that people in his riding in rural Saskatchewan do not have the 

right to choose to get health care services where they want to 

get health services, and if he believes that those services 

shouldn’t be paid for, that member should get up and say so, 

Mr. Speaker, because he knows that the seven largest districts 

have 61 per cent of the population, but provide 94 per cent of 

the surgeries. 

 

Those include his constituents, and if he’s saying they don’t 

have the right to get surgery, he should say so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Possible SaskTel Privatization 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my question this afternoon is for 

the minister responsible for SaskTel. Madam Minister, the 

SaskTel strike appears to have reached a stalemate. However, 

there is no mood right now among taxpayers for giving 

government employees a wage increase when so many other 

Saskatchewan families are having to get by with less. 

 

With long-distance competition on the way, maybe it’s time to 

give strong consideration to privatizing SaskTel. 

 

Madam Minister, is SaskTel being considered for privatization 

under the current Crown review process? And also, can you 

assure us that the appointment of your new boss, Don Ching, 

will not stand in the way of a possible privatization of SaskTel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 

opportunity to answer that question, wherein the review of the 

Crown sector in this province, which will be taking place, has 

been announced, and the parameters for that review have been 

publicly announced. There will be . . . part of the process will 

be public input into the review. Of course the objective of this 

review is to look at the Crowns and their future role in the kind 

of business economy that we find ourselves in, and the 

objective being to strengthen the Crowns and the role of the 

Crowns. 

 

And I think that the member opposite should be proud of the 

fact that, as a Crown, SaskTel has provided the very best 

service in telecommunications in any jurisdiction in North 

America, Mr. Speaker  individual line service from border to 

border. While there’s 370,000 party lines still in existence in 

other parts of Canada, the Crown, SaskTel as a Crown, has 

played an exemplary role in developing communications in 

northern Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, and all kinds of 

areas where a bottom-line-driven, private company would not 

have been so motivated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Workers’ Compensation Consultant Costs 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 

Mr. Speaker, is to the minister responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board. Mr. Minister, many employees . . . or 

employers, rather, are still very concerned about the increases in 

Worker’ Compensation rates, increases that are caused by 

rapidly rising administration costs. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 the Workers’ Compensation 

Board spent $164,000 on consultants’ fees. Now that’s 1991, 

Mr. Speaker. According to new figures we have received from 

the minister’s office, the Workers’ Compensation Board paid 

consultants over $868,000 last year. Now that’s five times as 

much as in 1991, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, why have the consultant fees in Workers’ 

Compensation Board risen so much under your government’s  

  



878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

administration? Isn’t this one reason why the Workers’ 

Compensation rates in Saskatchewan are forced to go up so 

much for our employers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

have thought that this process would have appealed to members 

of the Conservative Party and the third party. 

 

What in fact they’re doing is economizing and saving money by 

out-sourcing. The alternative to this is for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board to have these highly specialized skills  

actuarial skills are one of them  these highly specialized skills 

on staff all the time. This system, which is out-sourcing these 

services or hiring these services where you need them, is much 

cheaper. I would have thought that out-sourcing would have 

appealed to members of the third party who are so gung-ho on 

privatization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

a supplemental question for the minister in charge of the 

Workers’ Compensation Board today. Mr. Minister, one of the 

companies that got a lot of this consulting action is a numbered 

corporation, 603315 Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1994, this numbered company got $26,000 in consulting fees 

from the Workers’ Compensation Board. However in 1995, 

they were paid over $224,000 in consulting fees by the 

Workers’ Compensation Board. Now that’s more money paid to 

this one numbered company in 1995 than all of the consulting 

fees combined back in 1991. 

 

Mr. Minister, what type of work did this numbered company do 

last year to return  in return, rather  for nearly a quarter of a 

million dollars in consulting fees just for one season? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The Minister of Labour’s estimates 

will be before the House relatively shortly if we stick to the 

schedule we have. That’ll give the members opposite the 

opportunity to ask questions of this sort. It really is unrealistic 

to expect  even if the minister were here  it is really 

unrealistic to expect anyone to have in the top-of-mind stuff, 

information about numbered companies. 

 

The Minister of Labour’s estimates will be here within a few 

days if I remember the schedule correctly. That is the proper 

time and place to ask questions about that, and having been 

forewarned, I’m sure he’ll have the information present when 

he comes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  I have a further supplemental for the minister 

in charge of the Workers’ Compensation Board. Minister, for 

your information, the minister in charge of the board sent us a 

letter which he answered in response to our letter to him. He  

knows exactly what’s going on here and he should have 

transported that information over to you. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, one of the other consultants hired by the 

Workers’ Compensation Board last year was none other than 

Mr. Donald Ching. It’s nice of course that Mr. Ching was able 

to find a way to keep food on his table during that period of 

time when everybody else thought he was unemployed. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what kind of consulting work did Don 

Ching do for the Workers’ Compensation Board? And what 

other government agencies and departments hired the windfall, 

Mr. Don Ching, as a consultant while he was between jobs 

supposedly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again I repeat my advice to the 

members opposite: these questions are better asked during 

estimates when the minister will have the information and will 

have his officials here to assist them in providing accurate 

information on what sorts of service are provided. 

 

So I advise the members opposite to keep a hold of the 

questions. The minister will now be sort of forewarned and I’m 

sure he’ll have the information ready for you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Social Services Office Transfer 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as many 

members of this House will recall, five years ago the Devine 

administration undertook a plan called Fair Share 

Saskatchewan. This was a plan that was soundly criticized, and 

deservedly so, because of the fact that it was based solely on 

politics. 

 

What we have today is a government trying to enact its own 

version of such a plan, except that instead of moving 

government positions into rural Saskatchewan, positions are 

being centralized in our two main centres. 

 

One example is the central office of the community living 

division of the Social Services department and its eight 

employees, which are being forced to move from Moose Jaw to 

Regina. Will the Minister of Social Services explain why this 

move is being made? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to respond 

to the member’s question if her colleagues would care to listen 

to the answer. Mr. Speaker, in terms of the work that’s 

performed by the community living division and the change of 

administrative structure, what is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the administrative structure  not the program structure but the 

administrative structure  is being integrated here in Regina. 

Those employees who now live in Moose Jaw and work in 

Moose Jaw will continue to live in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 

Some of those employees who have been commuting to Moose  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

 

Jaw will continue now to commute . . . or stay in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is though, passing strange that that party who, 

before the election, who before the election members will 

recall, said to the people of Saskatchewan what we would do is 

bring in a whole crowd of Texas auditors and go through every 

department of government and audit them down and shrink 

them down, now when integration is occurring in the 

organization of government, what does this member do? Gets 

up and complains. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services is 

quoted in the April 6 edition of the Moose Jaw Times-Herald as 

stating, and I quote: “It happens in this case that there aren’t any 

large savings.” 

 

While in another Herald article, Social Services spokeswoman, 

Virgina Wilkinson indicates she doesn’t know if there is a cost 

saving by the transfer. 

 

If in fact the minister and his department officials have no idea 

if there will be a savings, will the minister please explain why 

he authorized this same move in the name of efficiency? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member to 

note my words. What is happening here  and if the member 

from Wood Mountain would be interested to be quiet in his seat 

that he might listen, Mr. Speaker; note my words, member — 

the move of the administration of community living is to better 

foster the integration of services within the Department of 

Social Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the community living division is charged with 

delivering services province-wide, particularly to the 

handicapped, particularly to the mentally handicapped. They are 

being integrated. The administration portion is being integrated 

to provide a better integration of the kind of work that should be 

done and can be done by this division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we have a Liberal caucus who tells us on 

one hand that we should be taxing much less and yet on the 

other hand that we should be spending much more, and on the 

other hand we should be changing nothing in government. Mr. 

Speaker, they’re going to have to get with the program, that we 

need to be building towards the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, the transfer of the central office of 

community living from Moose Jaw to Regina is of great 

concern to community leaders in Moose Jaw. Chamber of 

commerce president Lynn Starkey says, and I quote: 

 

What concerns the chamber is, if we are going to lose 

something then we should be told why it’s moving and 

what the net benefit is. 

 

Will the minister explain if in fact there is a plan? And if so, 

why is it that rural communities are the losers and our two 

urban centres appear to be the winners time after time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, there is a plan and this 

government has outlined that plan  it is to position ourselves, 

Mr. Speaker, to take on the 21st century; not to be acting like 

the dinosaurs, who want to take on the 19th century, from the 

Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of this administrative move, this will 

provide  I repeat again  a better integration of services, 

therefore better services to the people of all of Saskatchewan, to 

community living division, to the group homes that are 

scattered throughout our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Possible Flood Conditions 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As everyone in this 

House is well aware, spring flooding is causing a great deal of 

concern about rising water levels in Eastend, Weyburn, and 

many other areas in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Will the minister in charge of Sask Water explain what 

measures the province has in place to deal with the areas 

already flooded, and areas where flooding may take place? And 

have these measures been reviewed to ensure they are still 

adequate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 

opportunity to respond to the concerns expressed by the 

member opposite about the flooding situation, which varies 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Sask Water is, as has been their practice, issuing regular 

bulletins as thaw occurs and river levels rise, to alert 

communities. I have one such advisory here that is dated April 

12 which warns of potential flooding in Crooked Lake and 

Round Lake five to six days hence in order to give 

municipalities and communities time to respond. 

 

The provincial emergency operations centre at 1855 Victoria 

Avenue is on 24-hour alert to assist Emergency Measure 

Organizations and municipalities in responding. There are 

provincial resources available at the request of local EMOs 

(Emergency Measures Organization) or municipalities, and 

municipalities have all been communicated with individually 

and given the telephone numbers that they can call for 

immediate response. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A great deal of the 

concern that exists in rural Saskatchewan surrounds the fact that 

flood damage could have a devastating effect on our rural road  

  



880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

system, which is already seen as less than adequate. Will the 

minister explain if she is preparing any form of assistance in the 

event that water bodies crest this week, as some are predicting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, as always, the 

Department of Municipal Government and this government 

administration stands ready to assist in all sorts of disasters, 

including repair and clean-up after flood. Last year we did have 

such a program; so far this year there have been no requests 

from municipalities to date for compensation for damage. If and 

when there is, we will respond. 

 

However, as the member knows, particularly on the east side of 

the province, because of the lateness of the thaw and the 

amount of snowfall, we don’t expect as serious problems as we 

did last year. But we stand ready to respond. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Computer Expenses 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

an order in council here dated April 2 and it indicates an 

authorized purchase of computer equipment for SaskPower 

totalling $3.9 million. Given all the recent downsizing at 

SaskPower and the elimination of valuable rural programs, 

would the associate minister in charge of SaskPower be able to 

explain just how they can justify that expense? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Once again, those are detailed 

questions which one cannot expect the minister to have, if the 

minister were able to be present. I would advise the members 

opposite to raise these sort of questions in Crown Corporations; 

the officials are there, they can provide you with complete 

questions. 

 

This is not necessarily the best place, Mr. Speaker, to give the 

lesson, to give the opposition some advice on the question 

period, but they should be more topical questions and questions 

of more general import. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Maybe the 

Government House Leader could answer this, and it’s not quite 

as detailed. 

 

But the order in council indicated that that three point million 

dollar computer purchase was from an Ontario firm. Would the 

minister explain why this government went out of province for 

just such a purchase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again, let me say in general terms, 

there are now interprovincial protocols about government 

procurement and there is something called a NAFTA, an 

international North American Free Trade Agreement. 

 

Following from that, based on the theory that we ought to give 

Canadian firms the same rights as you give North Dakota firms, 

there is something called an Agreement on Internal Trade which 

requires us and all provinces with respect to procurement to 

treat Canadian firms equally. 

 

So there is a protocol in place, and I think it’s generally 

followed by the provinces. Again, more detailed discussion of 

this particular contract might be better placed in Crown 

Corporations Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 69  An Act to amend 

The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Recess 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly do now recess for 45 minutes to 

honour the members of the Armed Forces Reserves and 

that this Assembly do reconvene at the call of the Speaker, 

ringing the bells 5 minutes in advance of reconvening. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker:  Just before we recess, if I can take just a 

moment to invite all members and guests to the Speaker’s tea in 

honour of our reserves. This will take place in room 218, which 

will be just to your left as you leave the chambers. 

 

And as for the rules of the House, I would ask all members and 

guests to remain seated until the Speaker has departed. 

 

This House now stands recessed until . . . I’ll ask the 

Sergeant-at-Arms to ring the warning bells to call members 

back at 25 minutes to 4, and at 3:40 that the House will 

reconvene. 

 

The House stands recessed. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 15  An Act to amend 

The Child and Family Services Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. We are going to 

be assisted this afternoon by Mr. Neil Yeates, who is the 

associate deputy of the Department of Social Services; and Ms. 

Bonnie Durnford, who is the associate executive director of 

family and youth services, Department of Social Services. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to 

 

Clause 2 

 

Ms. Julé: Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Chairman, as 

I indicated in my remarks yesterday concerning the general 

intent of the Bill, I wish to move an amendment to sub-clause 

(3.3) of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would like to explain briefly why I am moving 

this amendment. Mr. Chairman, the Bill as a whole creates a 

completely new legal procedure, a new legal hurdle which a 

person must jump over if he or she is to have the right to take 

legal action against someone who has alleged that child abuse 

or child neglect has occurred. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I accept the need that there must be some legal 

protection for persons whose obligation it is to report instances 

of child abuse, but I also recognize the need to protect the civil 

rights of persons who are not guilty of child abuse but who are 

the victims of false or malicious reports, or reports with no 

reasonable basis in truth. 

 

The minister’s Bill says that a person who has been the subject 

of such allegations cannot even begin legal proceedings against 

his accuser without first obtaining leave of the Court of Queen’s 

Bench. 

 

The Bill goes on to say that an application is to be commenced 

by notice of motion served on the respondent, meaning the 

person who made the allegation. In practice, this means hiring a 

lawyer and filing documents at the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

This will usually entail a legal bill of several hundred dollars. 

 

The Bill goes on to say that the applicant must establish, either 

by affidavit evidence or otherwise, that the person  meaning 

the respondent, the person who made the allegation of child 

abuse  made the report maliciously and without reasonable 

grounds for his or her belief. This in effect means further legal 

expenses for the man or woman who is alleged to have 

committed the child abuse. 

 

In my opinion, if we as the government are going to step in and 

create a new legal hurdle, a new legal roadblock, then we must 

make sure that the rules regarding the awarding of the court  

costs associated with that legal proceeding are fair. The 

minister’s Bill provides for costs to be awarded against the 

applicant for leave if his application fails. I think it’s only fair 

that the subsection should also provide for costs to be awarded 

for the applicant for leave if his application succeeds. 

 

In my view, if the applicant meets the test found in sub-clause 

(3.2) and the judge rules that the respondent, meaning the 

person who made the allegation of child abuse, made the report 

maliciously and without reasonable grounds for his or her 

belief, then it’s only fair that the applicant should get his or her 

costs, his or her legal and court costs, for that application. We 

have to be even-handed in our treatment of this issue. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I will be moving this amendment very earnestly. 

It in no way weakens the protection provided for people who 

report child abuse with sincere and earnest intentions. They 

have, and they deserve, protection. But I want to make sure that 

we also protect the civil and human rights of the person who is 

wrongly accused of child abuse. We can do this by passing my 

amendment. I realize that the Saskatchewan rules of court 

already provide that court costs may be awarded in a manner 

that the court sees fit, and the minister thinks this is sufficient. I 

disagree. 

 

In my opinion, if we are expressly going to say what happens in 

terms of costs if one side wins, why not expressly say what 

happens in terms of costs if the other side wins. 

 

I therefore move as follows to: 

 

Amend clause 2 of the printed Bill by adding, immediately 

after the words “any portion of the costs of the application” 

where they occur in subsection 12(3.3) being enacted 

therein, the following words: 

 

“; if leave is granted, the court may order the respondent to 

pay all or any portion of the costs of the application, either 

at the conclusion of the application or the action”. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have another 20 copies in case the Clerk 

needs them, of my amendment. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chairman, I’ll make just a very few 

comments. The member from Humboldt and I had an 

opportunity to discuss the issues here. I think there is no 

disagreement on what we intend to achieve, and it is the manner 

of how we achieve it and how we build in those protections that 

she addressed in her comments. 

 

Mr. Chair, it is our view, and after having some legal advice 

and the advice of people working very closely in the field, that 

in fact while the member’s amendment would be in harmony 

with the direction we want to take, that we in fact believe those 

protections already exist. And that in fact at this point, to ask 

the court that has heard from this applicant to rule against . . . or 

rule costs to a responder who has not been in that court situation 

to defend him or herself would not be appropriate. 

 

Let us understand that in this piece of legislation what we are 

saying is that if someone feels that they have been falsely  

  



882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

accused, falsely accused of a child-abuse circumstance, then 

they would need first, before launching their own legal 

counter-suit or a suit against, they would first need to go to the 

court to receive leave from that court to proceed with the suit. 

 

In that circumstance, the person who feels him or herself to be 

falsely accused is in the presence of that court. The person who 

launched the initial complaint is not there. This is a matter of 

seeking leave then to move to a further legal action. 

 

Now if that court gives leave, the person is granted permission 

to launch a legal action. When that action is heard, that court, 

that hearing, will have all present and all sides will be heard and 

a judge will rule. At that time, under the rules of court in 

Saskatchewan, the provision that the member wishes to put in 

this piece of legislation already exists and that court will award 

costs as that judge sees fit. 

 

It seems to me unreasonable then that the initial leave 

application could be a point at which that judge could award 

costs to someone who is not in fact a part of that application. 

What this amendment would do would give the judge the power 

to award costs to that person. We do that as, in some ways, a 

fence, a protection, a discouragement from frivolous 

applications to leave. 

 

And I’m also told, Mr. Chair, by the officials that are with us 

and others, that this provision is entirely consistent with leave 

applications in many other circumstances. It is entirely 

consistent. I would want to reassure the member and the 

members opposite that the provision to award costs to, in this 

case, the respondent does exist, but it would happen at what we 

believe is the appropriate time, not at the time of asking for 

leave to launch action. 

 

And so therefore, Mr. Chair, we’ll not be supporting the 

amendment. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

Mr. Minister, I guess the amendment that I have put forward is 

for . . . more than anything else, is to give a clarity to all parties 

concerned about what and where the costs would be presented 

to them. And if in fact this amendment is put in, that clarity 

would be there at the onset of any kind of actions being taken. 

And so I don’t see why the clarity cannot be put in with this 

Bill, in fact, when it does nothing more than promote fairness. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let us understand 

that if someone in our province makes an accusation through 

the proper channels to the proper authorities, I think we all 

understand that we need to make that accusation only after 

we’re firmly convinced and convicted that something is going 

on here that we need to raise as an issue. 

 

However, any one of us making that kind of an accusation 

against a fellow citizen understands that at the end of the day 

we have to be accountable for that action. If I make a complaint 

against another citizen and that citizen feels that I’m doing that 

for some malicious purpose, that citizen has the ability to 

address me through the courts. 

 

What we’re doing here is putting that one other step in place. 

Before that person can come to me through a lawsuit, that 

person would need to go to a court. Now all that’s being 

discussed here, therefore, is the ability to gain leave to launch 

the suit  just leave. We’re not in this action determining guilt 

or innocence, whether the action was malevolent or bona fide. 

It’s simply a matter of leave to proceed. Now at that end of the 

day, if that leave is granted, the lawsuit would be heard, and the 

court that hears that lawsuit has entirely within its power to 

award all the costs. 

 

Now I accept the point that individuals in our province should 

be made well aware of the consequences of taking action. And 

one of the consequences potentially, if one launches a malicious 

action, is that you in fact may be found to have acted 

maliciously by the court, and there may be attendant penalties 

and there in fact may be costs assumed. But I think any of us 

who would enter a legal proceeding will be aware of that. 

 

Our contention is that  at this point, in seeking leave to 

proceed  this is not the point in time that a court should award 

damages to, in this case, the respondent, because that person’s 

guilt or innocence has not been tried, not been tested, not been 

found. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, leave is 

only granted to someone in this case if there is sufficient 

evidence to convince the court that  like at the onset of the 

court case  that suit is in fact valid. 

 

Now I think that it’s very hard to bring forth evidence always of 

whether or not a suit is valid depending on the kind of abuse 

that has taken place. If it was physical abuse and there was 

some evidence of that, I can see where in fact that evidence may 

be easier to present than whether its psychological or emotional 

or neglect sort of abuse would be there. 

 

So this, the way it is, I see as a problem, in it may deter people 

from reporting that actually end up knowing of abuse maybe 

other than physical abuse, because they don’t have evidence. 

And if they don’t have evidence, they’re going to have to pay 

court costs, more than likely. So it really deters people from 

reporting, and it will become a major dilemma for people as to 

whether to report or not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, it would be my conviction 

though that . . . well first of all, in terms of a court granting 

leave to proceed, the threshold level for evidence and so on, I 

think, is much, much lower than it would be in the circumstance 

where someone is actually being tried for accusations of child 

abuse and so on. 

 

We’re here simply talking about leave to proceed. But I also 

want to say to the member that I have a fair confidence in our 

court system and in our judges, who in most cases, I believe, 

can sort very quickly the bona fide from the malicious. 

 

I do not see this in fact as a deterrent to people who want to 

report child abuse. In fact I see it as just the opposite. I see it as 

another protection for those who would launch a concern or a 

complaint. In the current circumstance, you see, if you launch a  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

 

complaint, you immediately open yourself to the possibility  

to the potential and the possibility  of being sued. And there 

is at least one, there has been at least one, public example where 

that in fact has happened. 

 

A counsellor who made what they felt was a very bona fide 

accusation or concern was then in turn immediately sued. This 

just gives one more protection to those who, bona fide, want to 

express their concern, to raise a complaint. Now if someone’s 

raising a complaint that isn’t bona fide, that is totally malicious, 

they will in due course, I think, pay the penalty for that. 

 

We want though, not to deter people from making that initial 

complaint because their fear of being frivolously sued in return. 

 

(1600) 

 

Ms. Julé:  But we also want to make sure that if a person 

who has been maligned by making that malicious report needs 

to protect themselves, that they don’t have to be afraid, 

especially if they don’t have the funding for court costs, that 

they don’t have to be afraid to go to sue because it can really 

ruin their life. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just let me respond one more 

time. I would just re-emphasize the point that I’ve tried to make 

— that yes, at the end of the day, costs will be assigned, and 

they will be assigned by the courts. That power is entirely 

within the ability of the courts today, and it should be there. 

 

But it is premature to suggest that costs should be awarded at 

this stage. We think that’s premature. This is only the provision 

where one asks for leave to pursue the action. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Right, I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’d just like 

to ask you one more question. With the presentation of my 

amendment, to me this really does spell out clarity for everyone 

beforehand. What would be the major problem you see on your 

part for allowing this kind of an amendment to come in when in 

fact it would provide only a great help for people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just again to focus what’s 

happening here. This Bill that we’re working on makes the 

provision that if someone has been accused of child abuse or 

abuse of some other nature, that the accused person cannot 

simply in response launch a legal action against the accuser 

without first moving to the courts. 

 

All this does is to ensure that court grants leave to proceed. If 

the court grants leave and the suit proceeds, then guilt or 

innocence will be determined. It is at the point of guilt or 

innocence that we believe costs should be assigned, and not 

before, not before the case has been heard. And in this case the 

respondent or the person who initially launched the concern 

complaint has an opportunity to defend and explain his or her 

position. That’s the point where we believe the costs should be 

assigned. 

 

On this, I’m sure you and I, we do not differ in our goal. We do 

not want either malicious complaints nor do we want malicious 

suits. But the court will decide that, and the court has within its  

provisions the ability to assign costs today. We believe that 

those are sufficient. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a few 

minutes ago you made the statement that the respondent is not a 

party to the leave of application. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I apologize to the House. My 

officials have reminded me, since I made that statement, that is 

not true  that the individual would be part of that hearing. But 

the judge in this case in not ruling on the guilt or the innocence 

of that circumstance. The judge would only be ruling on the 

ability to move forward with a suit. Only . . . (inaudible) . . . So 

I apologize for the member. That was my inexperience with the 

law. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one final comment. 

I would earnestly ask you to accept this for the sake of clarity, 

and I will leave it be, I guess, at that. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:05 p.m. until 4:15 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  7 

 

Osika McLane Draude 

Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 

Gantefoer   

 

Nays  20 

 

Van Mulligen Shillington Tchorzewski 

Goulet Kowalsky Crofford 

Calvert Koenker Trew 

Lorje Teichrob Cline 

Serby Stanger Murray 

Kasperski Sonntag Jess 

Murrell Thomson  

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a few 

more questions, and they refer to 3.1 of clause 2. It reads: 

 

An application for leave shall be commenced by notice of 

motion served on the respondent and the minister in any 

manner set out in Part Three of the Queen’s Bench Rules. 

 

Mr. Minister, how much do you expect one of these 

applications to cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we do not have with us the 

precise costs. I’m sure we could get them. I understand it’s all 

set out by the Court of Queen’s Bench, that there is a schedule. 

Our estimation is it may be in the order of $30. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How long will it take for 

an application to be processed, approximately? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The information I have, Mr. Chair, is it 

could be in three working days. 

 

  



884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. How long will . . . or how, rather, will 

the minister be served with a notice? How will you be served 

with a notice as minister? What address would a person serve 

the notice to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Essentially, Mr. Chair, through the 

minister’s office, Legislative Assembly Building, Regina. 

 

Or apparently it can be done through representatives of the 

department throughout the province, through the Department of 

Justice officials throughout the province. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What are the estimated 

costs to the department of these applications? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there may be some costs. I 

guess it’s hard to put a number on it. There would be some staff 

time costs within the Department of Social Services, perhaps 

within the Department of Justice, but it would be staff time of 

staff that are serving us now. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I asked that 

question is because if in fact a person is under the care of the 

Department of Social Services one may presume that in fact 

you, the Department of Social Services or the Government of 

Saskatchewan, would in fact incur these costs. Is that correctly 

said? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, perhaps I could ask the 

member. . .we’re a little confused in her question. When she 

talks about people under the care of the department, could you 

define who it is that you’re referring to there? 

 

Ms. Julé:  Well if the application is submitted by a person, 

for instance a person who wants to sue that’s under the 

department’s care, then it seems to me as though that person 

would not have the financial ability to pay for the application 

and so it would be under the Department of Social Services’s 

responsibility to pay it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, in that circumstance I think 

maybe what the member is talking about is someone who may 

be in receipt of social assistance, welfare. In that case, that 

individual would have to find a lawyer who would work on 

their behalf. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The lawyer’s fees then 

for that person, because one would need a lawyer of course as 

you’ve just said, would that expense be incurred by the taxpayer 

or the Department of Social Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, not particularly, Mr. Chair. We 

would not have a special funding for that purpose. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I see then that those people may be 

excluded from proper representation. And it would be really not 

very fair to those people, and very difficult for them to present 

their case. I think we may run into a problem with Human 

Rights with this, if that was the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think the member is  

sensitive to concern, but the fact of the matter is, under social 

assistance we don’t fund any civil actions. And that would be 

true of all potential civil actions for those who are on social 

welfare. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, as it is right now, anyone under the 

department’s care is entitled to legal aid services whereby 

somebody has to pay for those services. And so I would see 

very much so that you would be responsible, or the department 

would be responsible, as would the taxpayers, for taking care of 

those costs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes. Mr. Chair, just to be clear. I want 

the member to be clear that we’re not here talking about people 

in our care; we’re talking about people who would be receiving 

social assistance benefits, and in fact that legal aid now is 

available, but only in the circumstance of criminal or family 

law. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, if you look in Saskatoon, will this be 

taken care of in Court of Queen’s Bench, or will it be looked at 

in Unified Family Court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Ms. Julé:  No further questions, thank you. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to on division. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 15  An Act to amend 

The Child and Family Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill be now 

read for a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To my 

immediate right is Craig Dotson, deputy minister of Education; 

to my immediate left, Ken Horsman, assistant deputy minister; 

immediately behind Mr. Dotson is Mae Boa, executive director 

of finance and operations; and behind me is Michael 

Littlewood, director of third-party funding and legislative 

services. In addition, we’re joined by Gerry Sing Chin, manager 

of school grants; Margaret Ball, assistant director of facilities  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

 

planning; and John McLaughlin, executive director of the 

Teacher Superannuation Commission. 

 

(1630) 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome to all 

people who have been introduced. I think I know everyone 

except for Ms. Boa. I don’t know if I’ve had the pleasure of 

meeting you. Welcome. 

 

Madam Minister, a lot has happened in terms of restructuring 

the Department of Education into two departments, and my first 

question will deal with a general sense and say, what has 

changed as far as the vision now for your department? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The answer is nothing has changed in 

terms of the vision for the Department of Education. There’s 

been no change in terms of goals, objectives, or vision. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Your department has always looked at, as far 

as following public policy objectives, the development of the 

Directions in education report and the other reports that we 

have — currently are using — have developed over a process of 

time. When we look at specific public policy directions now, 

are you seeing anything in terms of the public wanting you to 

change policy at the moment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As you know, the history of education 

in the province of Saskatchewan has always been one of 

cooperation, collaboration, and partnership. We went through a 

partnership process that came about as a result of a former 

minister of Education by the name of Doug McArthur who in 

the late 1970s underwent a review of social studies curriculum 

in the province, and out of that came Directions in core. In 

addition I think it’s fair to say that the public is not in any sense 

of the word overtly critical of the policy direction of the 

department at this time. 

 

I think it’s fair to say that as a result of the public consultation 

process that was undertaken by the government prior to the 

introduction of our budget in March of this year, that there was 

input from the public indicating that they wanted the 

department, they wanted government, to look at questions of 

governance for education, and municipalities as well. 

 

And as you know, I have spent some time in the province, 

around the province, speaking to school boards. As well as I’ve 

met with other interest groups to talk about a public policy 

option paper that the government will be releasing some time 

this month that looks at several options for reshaping the 

education system in the province. 

 

And that has come about as a result of some of the feedback we 

got in January and February; and also feedback that I have 

received from various partners in education that are interested 

in the government providing some leadership in the whole 

notion of reshaping education in the province, particularly 

school divisions. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, over the years there have been settings of goals and 

changes in objectives, and there have been things like the High 

School Review Committee. As these goals and objectives are 

looked at, how does the department measure whether or not the 

department and the education system in general has met the 

goals, has met the objectives, and whether or not there’s a need 

for change? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well each year, as you’re probably 

aware, the government publishes Saskatchewan education 

indicators report, which takes a look at how education is doing 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As well we have a program evaluation process within the 

department. We have a planning evaluation. There’s a whole 

unit of people that are set up to deal with the notion of looking 

at goals and objectives, looking at indicators, to determine 

whether in fact the work that has been done in the past is 

meeting those original goals and objectives. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. And I think that that is why in 

terms of public surveys, I think you see a satisfaction in the 

public with our education system today. One of the critical 

points though, and your own survey has shown this, is that of 

course education funding is not at the level that people would 

wish. And I think that is a situation that I’ve had discussions 

with you before and will continue to have those discussions. 

 

When you indicated that the policy and the direction of K to 12 

has not changed, I would just like to back up to the creation of 

the two departments  the post-secondary and the K to 12. In 

terms of employees and how that process occurred, could you 

just bring us up to date in terms of how were employees 

involved? Were there discussions that took place in terms of 

developing this new plan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well as you know, the government 

made the decision that there would be two departments  one 

for post-secondary education and one for education. This is not 

unlike many other jurisdictions in the country that have two 

ministries. 

 

Once that decision was made, the deputy minister of K to 12, 

the deputy minister of post-secondary, along with their 

executive staff, sat down and talked about how things would 

operate. I’m pleased to report that the two departments jointly 

share facilities; a planning branch. They jointly share human 

resources. They jointly share funding and legislative services 

and communications. So there is a joint . . . there is a capacity 

for the sharing of human resources for both departments. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  At the time that the department, the new 

department, was created, did you feel that the staffing level 

within the department, that things had been handled smoothly 

and that stress, anxiety, had not been created within the 

department itself in terms of that unsureness as to where people 

we’re going to be and whether there would be transfers; 

whether there would be cuts? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I’m sure that whenever a  

  



886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

department undergoes change, when any of us experience 

change and uncertainty, there is stress associated with that. So 

I’m sure that there were people in the department that were 

tentative about, where am I going? What’s going to happen to 

me? But we tried to work as quickly as we could to give people 

the information as to what was in the works for the two 

departments. 

 

And as I said earlier, there is a sharing by the two departments 

of the human resource capacity, communications, the funding 

capacity, capital, as well as one other which I’ve just forgotten 

but I’ll remember once I sit down. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Last fall, if I 

recall, you stated that an approach that you would be willing to 

look at for delivery of education in Saskatchewan was 

something I think you referred to as K to 14. And I understand 

that even other people in the education circles have referred to it 

as “education, birth to death.” 

 

In my opinion, I think that is a philosophical change from the K 

to 12 system that we have now. And I saw that as encouraging 

for some of the other things we’ll talk about in terms of the 

community colleges, regional college system, and the like that 

occurred at a time, you know, in late 1995, early 1996. Yet now 

we have created two departments with, I think, more roadblocks 

thrown up in the face of K to 12, the boards of education in this 

province who are responsible for K to 12. 

 

If we’re moving in the direction of K to 14, or something 

broader than that  regional educational authorities is 

something I think you’re proposing in your paper  are you not 

seeing this as more difficult to move in that direction with the 

fact that we now have two departments? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well no, as a matter of fact I’m not. 

And the reason I’m not is that I used to be the Minister for 

Education, Training and Employment. I knew both sides of the 

department. 

 

There was a K to 12 side and there was a post-secondary side. 

The person that’s now the deputy minister for Post-Secondary 

and Skills Training used to be the deputy minister for the whole 

department when I was the minister. 

 

As well, I know the people that work inside the department. I 

know people at the university; I know people at the regional 

colleges. I don’t think that because you have two departments, 

that that creates barriers to change. 

 

Barriers to change, in my view, comes from individuals. 

Structures don’t necessarily create barriers to change. I’ve come 

to believe that it’s our own concern, our own unwillingness to 

look at change, that can be the real structural barrier. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I would concur with you as far as your 

description of how we move in the direction of change. And I 

understand that your contacts in the education sphere are great, 

and I commend you for that. Maybe my contacts aren’t quite as 

great, but we believe we know people in both circles. 

 

My concern though is that if we have a division regional board 

of education responsible for K to 14, birth to 14, whatever 

systems we ask that new board to do, they’re now going to have 

to deal with two departments of Education. Yes, I think they’ll 

learn how to do that and they’ll do it efficiently and they’ll 

establish their contacts, but I think we’re still going to incur 

increased costs. 

 

So while your department, your officials, yourself and other 

people involved in education in the broad sense are going to 

work through this, I’m not sure that that’s going to make it 

easier for the real people out there in the province who are 

going to administer this system, to carry this out. And I still see 

that as a problem. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  You’re assuming that we’re going to 

go to regional education authorities. You’re assuming that 

we’re looking at a K to 14 system. I want to say with certainty 

here that there will be four options presented to the public. The 

public will have an ability to create another option. 

 

I’m not at all certain that at the end of the day, when people 

have had an opportunity to undergo a discussion of the options, 

that that’s what the public is going to recommend. We’re going 

to have to wait and see. 

 

I guess the other point I would like to make in response to your 

comment is that even with post-secondary and K to 12 under 

one deputy minister, my observation was that if you were the 

College of Education you dealt with the K to 12 side, and you 

dealt with the post-secondary side. I think it’s fair to say that 

when it was Education, Training and Employment, there were 

two divisions to the department. There was an ADM (assistant 

deputy minister) for K to 12, ADM for post-secondary 

education. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Minister of 

Education, I would like to just pose a question and a thought to 

you. 

 

It is my understanding that you just had mentioned that regional 

authorities don’t propose any barriers, or wouldn’t propose any 

barriers. I was notified some time ago that in the Humboldt 

division schools would in fact work with the regional Carlton 

Trail Community College in order to have an integrated system 

in delivering and sharing services. And it is now my 

understanding, from some information I just received a few 

days ago, that that whole concept will be put on hold. Is that 

correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  What we’re talking about is the joint 

use of facility at Humboldt. And there was only so much money 

in the budget for capital in this fiscal year, 1996-97, and we do 

not . . . we have funds to complete some projects that were 

begun last year, and we have funds for emergencies like roof; 

quality of air kinds of issues; portables, if you have a growing 

population. 

 

But we do not have new capital in this budget for new projects.  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

 

So when you say it’s been put on hold, there’s no money 

available in this fiscal year. But obviously I would still 

encourage the people in Humboldt to continue to work in 

collaboration with each other because there’s always a 

possibility of enhanced funding next year. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. So I can go to the 

people in Humboldt and tell them that in fact they cannot count 

on any funding for this at this point. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  You can tell the people in Humboldt  

the Humboldt School Division, the Carlton Trail  that for the 

fiscal year 1996-97, there is no capital funding available to do 

the project that they wanted to do in the town of Humboldt, and 

that’s the joint-use project between the high school and the 

community college. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, you mention around . . . 

when we were discussing the creation of the two departments 

you mentioned the fact that there were two deputy ministers and 

that each was responsible. If you were to choose or to identify 

one main reason why you think there was a need to create two 

departments, what would that be? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Oh, it’s very clear to me why we 

needed to create two departments or to have two ministers. As 

you may know, there are some fairly large  I would say huge 

 changes that are coming from Ottawa in terms of how we 

fund apprenticeship, adult basic education, and training in the 

province of Saskatchewan. There is a massive amount of work 

that has to be done in the next three years in order to address the 

funding reductions that are coming from Ottawa. 

 

And those funding reductions . . . what I want to make clear 

here is that we’re not talking about CHST (Canada Health and 

Social Transfer) money; we’re talking about money that used to 

come from unemployment insurance. It’s now called 

employment insurance. 

 

And unemployment insurance used to pay for seat purchases in 

regional colleges and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology). As well, they paid for the 

apprenticeship program. And because of the dramatic cuts or 

reductions from UI (unemployment insurance) or getting out of 

training by UI, the post-secondary and skills training 

department is going to have to undergo a whole new training 

strategy for the province because there’s simply no federal 

money. 

 

So the two portfolios are dealing with some very complex 

issues, and I think it’s fair to say that one minister could not 

deal with the K to 12 side and the post-secondary side and do an 

appropriate job. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. While I would take exception to 

some of your comments around no federal monies, I think some 

of my comments are best directed to the post-secondary side 

when we start to talk about the purchasing of seats because we 

think that there are some advantages to creating new 

partnerships and the kinds of things that you have talked about 

in the past. 

When you talk about creating the new department  and I 

guess my other question then would lead to your own 

department  are there things that you’re looking at as having 

other agencies, other departments do that you presently are 

doing? Has there been any discussion with other departments to 

say they can do something that presently the Department of 

Education is doing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I think it’s fair to say that we are not 

talking to any other departments about devolving functions of 

the Department of Education to them. What we have been doing 

is talking to Health, Social Services, Justice about integrated 

school link services, how we can better integrate services to 

children. 

 

So that discussion has been ongoing. We have our integrated 

school link services program or full service schools, and that 

takes a lot of work in terms of dealing with Social Services 

which is the primary deliverer of child services as well as health 

boards which delivers health services to children, as well as the 

Department of Justice which also, through third parties, delivers 

justice services to young people. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Where I was 

heading with this . . . in the past from my own personal 

experience, I know of instances where health services were 

necessary within a school setting, okay. Delivery of education is 

not just education. And the discussion and the reports that 

we’ve had around integration of school-based services . . . 

we’ve been talking for many, many years in this province that 

the roof that covers the building that we call the school now is 

probably going to have many, many different things occurring 

underneath that roof, whether they’re justice, whether they’re 

social services, whether they’re health services. 

 

What I’m trying to find out is whether or not you would have in 

place an agreement with the health care system so that schools 

and especially teachers and other support staff that have been 

asked to administer medication have been asked to deal with 

things like IVs (intravenous) in students that require this to live. 

These are people that are within our school system. And years 

ago and, as I understand, still to today health officials would not 

come into the school setting to administer this. 

 

Is there in place an agreement that would allow . . . now health 

officials if it can be worked out through home care . . . that 

nurses that are in the employee of home care would be able to 

alleviate the pressure? 

 

And if I could just add one more thing to that. Urban settings 

are tremendously different than the rural settings. And those 

problems are there in rural Saskatchewan. I’m just wondering 

how the department is looking at arranging partnerships with 

the other providers of care? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  You raise an interesting observation 

that the school has become the setting for a number of services 

to children. And I think one of the frustrations that I certainly 

had when I was involved working with street kids some 10 

years ago, one of the frustrations was that you had all of these 

agencies that were involved in providing services to those  

  



888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

 

young people, but there was never an integrated coordinated 

approach. 

 

One of the things that we’ve tried to develop in the last four 

years is more integration between health, social services, and 

education; I’ll use those three services in particular. I know of 

many examples where school divisions and health boards have 

sat down, and the health board is delivering a variety of services 

to young people in various school divisions. Now this has not 

taken place across the province. It is not, I would say, it’s not 

province wide. But certainly school divisions and health boards 

are working in collaboration with each other to deliver services 

to young people. 

 

I’m thinking of several examples of wellness centres within a 

school. In the town of Biggar, for example, the health board has 

provided a wellness centre in that particular school. There are 

examples of mental health workers working in schools with 

young people. And I understand that there are some examples 

 and I’ll try and get them for you  of where home care and 

the school are working in collaboration with high-needs 

students. 

 

But certainly it’s not across the province because we’re dealing 

with school divisions and their autonomous bodies. And we’re 

dealing with health boards and their autonomous bodies, and 

we’re relying on these boards getting together to collaborate 

with each other. And I think that there is much more of a 

willingness now to partner than there has been in the past. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Yes, I agree with you in that sense, that there 

is willingness. If the directive is to boards of education to deal 

with these high-cost students in a manner of saying, it’s your 

responsibility to deal with the health district board and try to set 

up that, that’s something that should be made clear to everyone 

because there has been tremendous discussion. You, I’m sure, 

have had the lobby from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation regarding administering of medications within the 

school setting. 

 

We know that boards are in a dilemma because they have to 

provide additional courses for non-professional, non-teaching 

staff to say, you are the people that will be in charge of actually 

providing health care to someone who is in our school setting. 

 

So to hear you say that there is that type of encouragement, that 

there is that type of a system that may work, and I know I’m 

hearing from our side where we are representing rural 

Saskatchewan, that that’s not happening yet to any great degree. 

 

Yes, it is happening in some cases, but we know of instances 

where nurses have been asked to come into the school to 

administer needles, and they won’t because there hasn’t been, I 

guess, that collaboration between the health board and the 

school board. And if that’s where the problem is . . . I guess my 

question is, is that where the problem is? Is it the fact that there 

has been a breakdown in communication between a health 

board and a division board? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I guess what I would say to you, all of  

the examples that I’m thinking of in terms of collaboration 

between health boards and school boards is in rural 

Saskatchewan. It is in rural Saskatchewan; it’s not in the larger 

centres. 

 

So I think because people in rural Saskatchewan tend to know 

each other, tend to know each other as neighbours and so on, 

that there is more collaboration. So I guess I would disagree 

with your observation that rural Saskatchewan, that there isn’t 

that collaboration. I think there is. And there are new services 

being developed as a result of some new partnerships between 

school boards and district health boards. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  There has always been a collaboration 

between . . . whether it be the hospital or the current health 

centre in terms of providing information to students. That has 

been there in the past, and I think it’s still there. So I agree with 

you in that sense. 

 

But what I’m talking about . . . And I hear you say that in a 

particular school there’s the establishment of a wellness centre. 

But a wellness centre isn’t dealing with administering an IV or 

administering a needle or those kinds of things that we still need 

to see happen. And you know, that’s my concern. 

 

And I’ll just leave it at that point. And I understand you’re 

going to give me some examples of where this is occurring, or 

your officials will, and I appreciate that. 

 

I think one of my final comments here would be is, who do you 

see as the chief stakeholders in the area of the education system 

right now? Who are the chief stakeholders? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  There’s a long list, and I meet with 

them regularly. In fact I just ended a meeting before I came 

here, meeting with a school division and teachers. 

 

Who do I think the chief stakeholders are? Historically the chief 

stakeholders have been school trustees, teachers, directors of 

education, parents, the colleges of education, the Department of 

Education. Those have been historically the partners. When we 

talk about partners in education, that’s who we refer to. 

 

I think that there are others that are interested in being partners 

in the educational process, and we’ve made some 

accommodation. And I’ll give you an example. When we did 

the high school review, we had people from the business 

community represented in that process as well as the labour 

community; and we had people from the Francophone 

community, if I’m recalling this correctly. 

 

So I would say that you know who the historical partners are, 

but there are other people that are asking to come in. 

 

As well, I think it’s fair to say first nations people and Metis 

people are now asking to be partners because first nations 

people, as you know, have band-controlled schools, but they are 

subject to the Saskatchewan curriculum, the teacher 

certification process, and so on. And I think it’s fair to say that 

first nations and Metis people are asking for some systemic 

barriers, our historical partnership to be opened up a bit, so they  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

 

can partner with us as well. 

 

The Chair:  It now being 5 o’clock, this committee will 

stand recessed until 7 p.m. later this same day. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 867 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 867 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 867 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 868 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 868 

  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 868 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 868 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 869 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 869 

  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 871 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 871 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 871 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 871 

  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 871 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 871 

  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 871 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 872 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 872 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 872 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 872 

  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 872 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 872 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 872 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 872 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 873 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 873 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 873 

  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 873 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 873 

  Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 873 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Melfort Mustangs Hockey Champions 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 873 

 Maidstone Trade Fair 

  Stanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 874 

 National Soil Conservation Week 

  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 874 

 Saskatoon Youth Orchestra 

  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 874 

 Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Conference 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 874 

 Spiritwood Area Doctor Retiring 

  Johnson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 875 

 South-east Volunteer Recognition Awards 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 875 

 Allan Cup Championship 

  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 875 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 SaskTel Strike 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 875 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 876 

 Health Districts Funding 



 

 

  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 876 

  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 876 

 Possible SaskTel Privatization 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

 Workers’ Compensation Consultant Costs 

  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 877 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 878 

 Social Services Office Transfer 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 878 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 878 

 Possible Flood Conditions 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 879 

  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 879 

 SaskPower Computer Expenses 

  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 880 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 880 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 69  An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 880 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

MOTIONS 

House Recess 

  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 880 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 881 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 881 

 Recorded Division......................................................................................................................................................................... 883 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 884 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

General Revenue Fund 

Education  Vote 5 
  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 884 

  Krawetz.............................................................................................................................................................................. 885, 887 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 886 

 

 

 


