


















































June 10, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2301 
 June 10, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  By leave, to move a motion with 
respect to . . . I’ll read the motion so that the members will . . . 
 

By leave, that notwithstanding an order of the Assembly 
dated June 7, 1996, extended sitting hours motion, that this 
House do observe routine proceedings at 1:30 p.m. every 
sitting day except for Fridays when routine proceedings 
will occur at 10 a.m. 

 
Leave granted. 

MOTIONS 
 

Routine Proceedings 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Lloydminster: 
 

That notwithstanding an order of the Assembly dated June 
7, 1996, extended sitting hours motion, that this House do 
observe routine proceedings at 1:30 p.m. every sitting day 
except for Fridays when routine proceedings shall occur at 
10 a.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 21  An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 

and to enact a related amendment / 
Loi modifiant La Loi d’interprétation de 1995 et édictant 

une modification corrélative 
 

The Chair:  I will ask the minister to introduce his official, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today, 
Madeleine Robertson, Crown solicitor from the Department of 
Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning, 
Minister, and, Madeleine. Looking at this Act I understand the 
purpose of this Act is to ensure that aboriginal and treaty rights 
are protected by all provincial legislation. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct. I think the purpose of this 
legislation is to make sure it’s absolutely clear that any 
legislation that we would pass will not in any way affect their 
rights as set out in the Act. And we set out a specific clause in  

The Fisheries Act two years ago, and when we realized that 
there would be a number of Acts coming in that might have the 
same affect, we decided it would be much easier if we just 
made the change here so that we wouldn’t have to insert the 
clause into every new piece of legislation that we brought. So 
it’s put into The Interpretation Act so that the particular clause 
will apply to all legislation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Before this Bill was 
tabled, did you find that there are many pieces of Saskatchewan 
legislation that infringe upon the aboriginal and treaty rights? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The answer to that would be no. We are 
bound by the constitution so this is really just a recognition of 
the constitutional rights of the aboriginal people. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The laws haven’t been updated since 1982. I 
understand that that’s when the last aboriginal and treaty right 
was updated. Can you tell me why; why it’s taken this long? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Canadian Constitution Act was 
passed in 1982. And as you know, there have been no 
amendments to the constitution since ’82. The Charlottetown 
initiative did not succeed. That was the last attempt to change 
the Constitution of Canada. And so practically, ’82 was the last 
change in the Constitution of Canada. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So why would the Saskatchewan laws . . . Was 
there anything to update, not until this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The Constitution Act of Canada is federal 
law, and this is a reference to the federal Act. It’s not reference 
to any Saskatchewan legislation. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Would it be correct to say that all legislation in 
Saskatchewan has been interpreted as not invalidating or 
detracting from the existing aboriginal and treaty rights even 
before this amendment was tabled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I also notice that The Fisheries 
Act, subsection 2(5), was repealed by this Act. What exactly 
was taken out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The only other piece of legislation where 
we put the recognition of the constitutional rights right into the 
Act was The Fisheries Act. But if we have this into The 
Interpretation Act, it would just be redundant to keep it in The 
Fisheries Act. So all we’re doing is removing the clause that 
was put in two years ago so that the only place that you have 
this recognition clause is in The Interpretation Act. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Has the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) and other groups been notified of this change, 
and are they happy with it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. And it was basically their suggestion 
that we do this. 
 
  



2302  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  I don’t think we have any further questions. 
This is the only thing they do. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 113  An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc. 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his official, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me 
today is Scott Banda, the general counsel for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. I welcome him to the Assembly and 
introduce him to the other members. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to 
your official, Minister. We have a few questions that we would 
like to address in this whole area of the Wascana Energy Bill. 
Minister, would you please sort of explain the main proposals 
of the Bill and what it’s intended to accomplish, both for 
Wascana Energy and for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  This Act clears up some administrative 
details. It clarifies that the name of the Act now is The Wascana 
Energy Act as it applies to Wascana Energy. It strengthens head 
office provisions for the company, for Saskatchewan. It clarifies 
the nature and the role of the board of directors. The board of 
directors will be required, as they are now, to have 50 per cent 
Saskatchewan residents, and it also alters the formula that under 
any circumstances there will be at least one Saskatchewan 
board member. 
 
And it additionally then removes ownership restrictions from 
the company so that it is in a position to operate in the 
market-place in a way that allows them to access capital for 
expansion and allows them to engage in the activities that the 
company believes it needs to engage in in order to continue to 
be a growing Saskatchewan company. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I assume that there was a fair bit 
of consultation between the government and Wascana Energy. 
Could you detail that process? How long did it take? Was it 
negotiation, or is it essentially complying with the wishes of the 
company? 
 
(1015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Discussions with Wascana Energy have 
been going on for some time. My involvement has been only 
since last November when I took over as minister in charge of 
Crown Investments Corporation. We’ve had very good and 
positive discussions with the president of Wascana Energy and 
their officials with our officials. They have asked for these 
changes in order that they may operate as a successful and 
growing Saskatchewan oil company. And we have common  

agreement on the nature of all the aspects of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Minister, were there any outstanding 
issues that you weren’t . . . or didn’t feel that you were able to 
bring forward in this legislation, or does this legislation cover 
fully all the recommendations that came from the company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  The recommendations that were discussed 
and worked through have the full support of the company. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, how much of Wascana Energy 
does the Government of Saskatchewan own now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  7.4 per cent. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Is there any plans that your ministry has to 
increase or decrease that amount from its current holdings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  No, the 5.8 million shares  is it?  we 
hold are like other assets we hold in the name of the 
shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan, and they are 
managed on an ongoing basis, as are the other interests that we 
hold on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  The new Act no longer prohibits foreign 
investors from holding more than 35 per cent. Can you explain 
what that . . . is there a new ceiling, or what the reasons are for 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  One of the provisions of this Act, as you 
mention, is the removal of the foreign ownership restriction. 
One of the dilemmas with Saskatchewan companies operating 
in the market-place is that the companies can estimate what 
their ownership structures are. But there comes a point when 
they are at risk of violating the legislation and they won’t know 
it because when shares are being traded in the market-place 
there is not an exact knowledge of who holds them. 
 
And in order that they did not want to find themselves in 
contravention of the Act, they asked that we remove that. 
 
This also provides them with the freedom, if there was a foreign 
holding that might help them expand their company, they could 
do that without violating the restrictions as well. So it provides 
them the freedom to operate as an aggressive oil company in the 
industry. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  How much is owned by foreign investors 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  As I said, the dilemma is that no one is 
certain of that because you can’t tell. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, in section 5, clause (3), again we 
see your government’s sort of happiness at operating all these 
different functions by way of regulations. I’m wondering what 
is intended to be the regulations that you need this clause in 
there for. Is there a direction in that regard or has this become 
one of your standard clauses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  This is standard wording to provide us  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

with the capacity to do the things we’ve agreed to in the Bill. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, has Wascana Energy felt that it’s 
sort of been hurt in the past by the image that it was a 
government company? And is this going to move away from 
that in a more public way, that distances its holdings from the 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  I think the presence or absence of the 
government as a shareholder in companies is generally not a 
factor and is, I’m sure, as often a positive factor as a negative 
one from my experience with the various holdings we have. 
 
The issue that was of concern to Wascana Energy in this case 
was not the government holding, because government continues 
to hold what it always did. The issue is their capacity to operate 
in the market-place in such a way that they can build their 
company without restriction by acquiring other assets and 
getting capital more freely. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, has there been any estimation 
from Wascana’s part in terms of how many jobs and what kind 
of expansion this is going to allow their company to realize? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  That’s all sort of in the course of doing 
business. They are confident it will strengthen their capacity to 
grow. And that’s in our common interest and we will watch 
them manage their way into that new future on the basis of this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, how many directors on the board 
do we have currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  We have two and the new formula will 
also result in us having two. Under the present formula, if the 
province were ever to sell its holdings, we would be down to 
zero. Under the new formula, there is no circumstance under 
which the province doesn’t have one. 
 
What I can say about the relationship with Wascana Energy is 
that it is a cooperative relationship, and we continue to respect 
their management with respect to respecting the needs of the 
province in this regard. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. That’s all the 
questions that I have on this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 94  An Act to amend  
The Education and Health Tax Act 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister responsible to introduce 
the officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I know the 
members of the Assembly will want to join me in welcoming to  

the Assembly, on my immediate right, Bill Jones, the deputy 
minister of Finance. On my left, Len Rog, the assistant deputy 
minister, revenue division. Sitting behind him is Doug Lambert, 
director of revenue programs branch. And sitting behind Mr. 
Jones is Arun Srinivas, analyst, taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And also 
welcome to the minister here this morning and the minister’s 
officials. Would you be able to just start out perhaps with just a 
brief summary of the intent of introducing . . . of this Bill being 
passed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’d be pleased to do that. This 
amendment to The Education and Health Tax Act is to provide 
a new system for collecting education and health tax from 
trucking firms that operate in Saskatchewan and one or more 
other jurisdictions, and that’s all it does. This is a technical 
amendment which is revenue neutral and which applies to 
interprovincial trucking firms. 
 
Under the new system, interjurisdictional carriers — or 
interprovincial carriers as they’re often called — interprovincial 
carriers will purchase or lease their vehicles tax free and then 
pay a prorated tax based on the percentage of the distance they 
travel in Saskatchewan, the value of the vehicle, and a declining 
tax rate each time they register their vehicles. 
 
The vehicle registration office in each province or state will 
calculate and collect the tax from their carriers on behalf of 
Saskatchewan. This will make it easier for carriers to pay the 
education and health tax and it will improve compliance, 
particularly from non-resident carriers, to ensure that all carriers 
pay their fair share of the taxes. 
 
Under the new system, the E&H (education and health) tax will 
decline each year from 4.2 per cent in the year that the vehicle 
is first acquired and registered, to less than 2 per cent in later 
years. These tax rates are adjusted to take into account the fact 
that trailers and most repair parts will be exempt under the new 
system. 
 
The changes will come into effect on January 1, 1997. They are 
expected to be revenue neutral for the province, as I said. I 
would add that these changes are welcomed by the trucking 
industry, which found the other ones awkward and convoluted. 
 
So this is a case of where a system which has in some ways 
been pioneered by Saskatchewan is being adopted by all of the 
provinces and the truckers welcome the change. It is revenue 
neutral for them and considerably simplifies the paying of the 
tax. It also means, as a matter of interest, the tax is paid over the 
lifetime of the vehicle and not all at once up front. And to that 
extent it evens their cost as well. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are there just 
strictly trucking firms that will be impacted here, or would there 
perhaps be bus lines as well? 
 
  



2304  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Just trucking firms. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Could you give . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m sorry, I’m told that buses are also 
included. I’m sorry. I’m told by the officials that buses are also 
included. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you give us 
perhaps some sort of a total number of companies which may 
be affected? Based on what present-day knowledge you have, 
how many trucking firms, how many bus lines, does this 
particular legislation have an impact upon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There are 2,800 carriers operating in 
Saskatchewan including 750 carriers who base-plate their 
vehicles in the province. That means that their primary licence 
is in Saskatchewan; 2,050 carriers whose primary licence is 
another jurisdiction but also re-license in Saskatchewan. So a 
total of 2,800 carriers. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you perhaps 
provide us with what might be your opinion as to why so many 
of these trucking firms feel a necessity to actually register their 
operations out of our province in the first place. Why isn’t the 
environment here, within our province, more conducive to 
having more of these firms actually maintaining their registered 
office here in the province and operating thereafter in other 
jurisdictions? Why do we see them doing the opposite? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s quite a complicated question 
which is well beyond the purview of this legislation. You might 
want to ask the Minister of Economic Development that in his 
estimates. We wouldn’t . . . I wouldn’t have that information, 
nor would the officials who are with me be in any position to 
speculate as to why some are in Saskatchewan; as to why some 
aren’t. Or for that matter, whether or not we have our share. 
This is simply the number of carriers that operate in this part of 
the world. 
 
So your question is well beyond the jurisdiction of the province 
and well beyond the responsibility of this department. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You had made 
some comments earlier about being revenue neutral, so I was 
going to ask you, as far as the additional costs of administering 
this new legislation  costs of enforcement and collecting fees 
or if there were any additional staff being hired, but perhaps 
related to what you told us earlier  if you could just perhaps 
elaborate. 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, I’m told that there are no 
increased administrative costs with the new procedure. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Minister, with respect to, if I go to clause 
5.6, it seems to give the Finance minister quite a bit of authority 
in terms of intervening in increasing amount of payable tax. 
Could you just outline for us this morning, what sort of 
guidelines would the minister use when deciding if it’s  

necessary to increase the taxes payable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It is basically as set out in the 
legislation. I think the legislation is largely self-explanatory. 
Section 5.6 provides the tax is calculated on a prorated formula 
based on the estimated percentage of total distance that the 
vehicle will travel in Saskatchewan during that licence period. 
When an audit is conducted, if it is found that the person 
actually travelled a significantly different percentage of their 
total distance in Saskatchewan than was estimated, then the 
department may adjust the tax. A similar provision applies 
under the current method of collecting the tax. So that’s your 
answer. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you. Mr. Minister. We have had some 
minor concerns expressed to us by some trucking firms that are 
located and operate strictly within the province itself, where 
they feel there may be some impact negatively to them where 
they will be required to pay the entire E&H tax amount versus 
their interprovincial carrier competitors who now will only be 
paying a prorated amount. And could you just perhaps give us a 
little bit of assurance that this isn’t the case, or if it is, what is 
your opinion? Is there a detrimental effect to companies 
operating just within our province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It would be minimal. It may have a 
modest effect on cash flow, but it would be very modest. I think 
I can say on behalf of the minister, I can give assurance on 
behalf of the Minister of Finance, that if indeed this is a major 
problem for the intra-provincial firms, that the minister I think 
would be — the minister and the department — would be happy 
to meet with those and to hear those concerns. 
 
That wasn’t expressed by the trucking industry when these 
changes were discussed with them. These changes have been 
discussed with the trucking industry. None of those concerns 
were expressed with any energy, certainly. And I think I can 
only say to the Assembly, and through the Assembly to the 
intra-provincial truckers, if this is a major problem, we’d be 
happy to take it up with them. 
 
As I say, if it’s a problem at all, it would make a very minor 
difference in their cash flow, and I can’t imagine it being a 
major concern. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
had indicated that there was 2,800 carriers involved. How many 
of these are members of the Saskatchewan Trucking 
Association.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We don’t have that information. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I notice in the write-up that you had indicated 
that the Saskatchewan Trucking Association was very 
supportive of this, so I’m just wondering how many of these 
2,800 truckers involved were actually supportive, if you don’t 
know how many were part of the association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Our experience in the past has been 
that the Saskatchewan Trucking Association is representative of 
the industry and thus speak for the industry. This has never  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

been a problem with Saskatchewan Trucking Association 
before. They have in fact been quite representative of the 
industry. 
 
So I think we can say, based on past experience, there’s never 
been a problem in the past. They’re in tune with their members 
and speak for them. I’ve no reason to believe that this year is 
any sort of an aberration. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, just to clarify it for me, and 
there’s a lot of trucking firms that are in Alberta, registered in 
Alberta, that have to comply with this, so you must have had to 
get some agreement from them as well. So is there . . . Or didn’t 
you have to get an agreement from them? Are they just going to 
pay this tax and smile? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well the Alberta government would 
have liaised with the Alberta Trucking Association. It’s our 
understanding that truckers generally in the cooperating 
jurisdictions are all in agreement. Our direct contact would have 
been with the Saskatchewan Trucking Association and we have 
been assured by them that all of the trucking associations are 
supportive of this. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So if the Alberta firms are in support of this as 
well, then I would guess there would have to be an increased 
cost in administration, at least in Alberta, because they never 
had these charges before. So in order to actually do this, there 
has to be some kind of set-up in Alberta now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It’s actually quite inexpensive. It’s 
calculated through the vehicle registration system. It is no more 
expensive to collect it through the vehicle registration system 
than it is through the initial purchase. That’s just basically the 
same system. 
 
Instead of having the dealers, the truck dealers collect it, the 
truck sales dealers collect it, you’ve got the people issuing the 
licence collecting it. But it’s the same system. There’s really no 
difference in administration and therefore no difference in cost. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Who’s actually going to police this system so 
that you can be sure that the mileage that’s being said is being 
used in Alberta compared to that in Saskatchewan is actually 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That is the responsibility of the 
department to police the payment of this tax, as they police the 
payment of all taxes paid in the province. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Is it going to be done through the truckers’ log 
books? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In the normal course, spot audits will 
be done, as they’re done with everything, and those spot audits 
will be adequate to ensure that truckers are complying with the 
law. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So then basically it’s up to the honesty, the 
honour, of the trucking firms to say how many miles are going 
to be . . . I know that you can check gasoline records, but  

besides that, you’re going to be relying on the honesty of the 
truckers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — That’s true of all tax systems in 
Canada and it’s true of all the tax systems in democratic 
countries. They’re all self-assessing. They all depend upon the 
integrity of the citizenry, with some reinforcement of that 
through spot audits. This is no different than income tax or sales 
tax anywhere else. This is the universal system. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So then the Alberta firms that have never paid 
E&H tax before are going to be, on their honour, expected to 
pay the amount of tax applicable in a direct relationship to the 
miles done in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, it won’t be any different for the 
Alberta firms. It’ll work just as it does now. When they register 
it you collect a pro rata share of it. Alberta will not collect a 
pro rata share for Alberta because they don’t pay sales tax. 
Nothing will change for the truckers in Alberta. 
 
Obviously Alberta would not be a part of any scheme which 
suddenly imposed upon truckers in Alberta a sales tax. Nothing 
will change for the truckers in Alberta except that this system is 
a lot easier for them to pay and administer and therefore they 
welcome it, as others do. But it won’t result in Alberta truckers 
paying any more tax. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, this 
particular piece of legislation I believe was referred to in the 
budget speech as being a measure of increasing employment. 
And seeing as it has been suggested that it might create jobs in 
the province, I wonder if you might be able to indicate to us 
how many full-time jobs you might be estimating that this 
particular legislation may create in the province, and how 
would you go about measuring that sort of thing, to determine if 
it has actually had a positive impact on job creation in the 
province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We don’t have any economic models 
done which would tell us how many jobs are going to be 
created. Those are expensive to have done. But it was 
mentioned in the budget, and there’s a number of reasons why it 
would aid unemployment. The primary reason is it allows our 
dealers to compete on an equal footing with dealers in other 
provinces. Because they don’t collect the sales tax, thus they are 
in the same position as Alberta is. So that’s the primary reason 
why it creates more jobs  because it allows our dealers to 
compete more effectively. 
 
It also probably will result in a more efficient and lower cost 
trucking industry. And that is obviously in everybody’s interest, 
whether you are in the trucking industry or whether you simply 
depend on it to move products to market. 
 
So for all those reasons, we think it’s going to increase 
employment. No economic model was done which would give 
us any precise figures. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also with respect 
to . . . on this sort of topic but more particular to bus lines, and  
  



2306  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

using as an example, like, a line such as Greyhound or any 
other larger bus line, but in this case somebody such as 
Greyhound which would do a lot of their repair work out of this 
province, for example, do you envision by introducing this 
legislation that there may be some day where we might be able 
to see a little bit more spin-off activity in terms of maintenance 
and repair, for example, to a bus fleet as a result of this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes we do. In fact we envision that 
happening relatively soon. This should enable Saskatchewan 
trucking sales and service firms to compete more effectively 
with, particularly, Alberta firms. So we think that will happen; 
we think it will happen fairly promptly. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have one 
further question for you here. And I’d have to apologize if it 
was alluded to earlier or answered. But it’s my understanding 
that one of the problems with respect to this legislation deals in 
terms of there will be some transitional matters. 
 
If I want to use an example, if a company was to purchase 
equipment say in December of this year and it paid the normal 
E&H tax, starting the very next time that it registered this 
vehicle, it would also have to pay the new prorated tax. And as 
a consequence, we would have some instances where people 
would be paying a tax twice. And albeit it would be a one-time 
occurrence, but it might occur. 
 
And given it’s a transitional problem, has your department 
undertaken anything to lessen the injury that may be involved in 
this regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  As a matter of interest, this 
department has. This department is on top of all problems, this 
one included. Always well ahead of the eight ball. They have 
worked out a transitional system which will leave . . . otherwise 
there would be no purchases between now and the first of 
January. If you didn’t have a transitional system, you’d have no 
purchases between then and now. So there is a transitional 
system which has been worked on with the trucking industry. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Just one further question is with respect to 
the regulations and as it would pertain to what sort of items 
would be under this tax and what isn’t. Would you have copy of 
those regulations with you here this morning, or if not, could 
you tell us when they might become available. Could you give 
us some best estimate as to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, the regulations have not been 
finalized. That would be in consultation with the trucking 
industry. It’s one of the problems with what appears on the 
surface to be a legitimate request by opposition members to see 
draft regulations. The difficulty is they’re not finalized until 
after we discuss them with the trucking industry. Time frame 
for completing them is probably the fall. We’ll begin to discuss 
them with the trucking industry relatively shortly. A time frame 
for completing them and proclaiming the legislation is probably 
sometime in the fall. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but in keeping 
with your Premier’s own words, quite often the devil is in the  

detail, so that is why we do ask for such. But we have no further 
questions here this morning for you and would thank again your 
officials for being here this morning. 
 
(1045) 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 95  An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and your 
officials, I am just wondering if you can explain the changes to 
this Act as it pertains to the venture capital Act as we knew it 
before. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I think I can. The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, which is the one 
under discussion, implements initiatives which are parallel to 
changes made to the federal legislation. That’s what we’re 
doing here. 
 
We have . . . the federal government has legislation which is 
probably called the same thing and does the same thing at the 
federal level; we have legislation which parallels that. They’re 
mirror images of each other. The federal government 
implemented changes and these changes mirror the changes 
made federally. 
 
By and large, they are two in number. One, the federal 
government announced in its March 6, 1996 budget, the federal 
tax incentive to investors investing in both federally and 
provincially registered labour-sponsored venture capital 
corporations would be reduced from 20 per cent of investments 
up to 5,000 to 15 per cent of investments up to 3,500. That’s 
one change. 
 
Secondly, the minimum holding periods for such investments 
would be increased from five to eight years. And they instituted 
a three-year waiting period for investors who have redeemed 
shares and wish to reinvest. 
 
So those are the two changes. We simply parallel federal 
changes. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So there will be a decrease in benefits to 
employees that are investing in the venture capital company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes. More properly, I think, called 
investors. But they, yes, they’re probably employees. Yes, the 
answer to your question is yes. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, what is the difference between 
type A corporation and type B corporation as it pertains to this 
Act? 
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Type A is a pool fund that requires 
the sponsorship of a labour union to create a broadly based 
investment corporation. Type B is intended to be created by a 
group of workers, all of whom are employed by the same 
employer. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Out of the existing labour-sponsored venture 
capital companies, how many of them are union and how many 
of them are from companies whose employees are not 
unionized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There are no type A’s. There are 20 
type B’s. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m sorry, but type A is the union sponsored 
ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Other than in the event of a death of a 
shareholder, is there any circumstances that would allow a 
shareholder to redeem his or her shares prior to the time 
prescribed in the regulations without repayment of the tax credit 
to the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, there is one circumstance, I’m 
told. For the type B, if the employee leaves the employment of 
the place, they can thereupon redeem their investment, 
somewhat I suppose like a co-op member who moves out of the 
district. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So what effect will that have on the company 
then, other than what it will do to their own financial status. Is 
there anything else that will happen to the company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, someone else buys it and it 
creates an obvious incentive in the corporation to keep the 
employees happy and keep them there. But yes, someone else 
buys it, or the company, if they have excess capital, will absorb 
it. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Is it a part of this Act or be part of each 
specific company’s dealings with their venture capital to say if 
they can decide who the share would go to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s a management decision. 
 
Ms. Draude:  This amendment deals with the partial waiver 
of the recapture of tax credits for shareholders who have held 
their shares for the prescribed period in the regulations. How 
does the minister determine the amount of the recapture of tax 
credit that may be waived? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m told that this has always been 
allowed; it’s just not been in the legislation. As I’m sure the 
member appreciates, by and large this legislation is permissive. 
 
However, this is a subset of income tax and this is all done 
federally. So we don’t get involved here. I suppose we don’t get 
involved here in the administration if this is done federally. This 
is just permissive legislation which allows the federal  

government . . . which allows people to claim on their income 
tax and so on these credits, and the federal government 
administer the income tax. So while we will attempt to answer 
questions with respect to administration of these things, it’s 
really done at the federal level. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I thought it was interesting when 
you said that there wasn’t any venture capital corporations now 
that have union involvement. I think that also begs the question, 
when you suggested that perhaps it would be an incentive to 
keep the employees happy and keep them in the company, when 
it comes to trading in their shares, how do you see this when it 
deals with unions? It leads me to believe that perhaps 
employees who a member . . . or are working for a company 
that does not have a union, feel more like they’re part of the 
company than the other ones. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There are quite a few in Quebec. It’s 
been quite popular in Quebec and quite popular with the unions. 
There are now some in Ontario, but the private sector unions 
are quite small in Saskatchewan. And they really would . . . I 
would have difficulty thinking of a private sector union in 
Saskatchewan which would be large enough to do this. Private 
sector unions in Saskatchewan are fairly small. 
 
The bulk of trade union members in Saskatchewan work, in one 
form or another, in the public sector. The private sector unions 
are fairly small actually, so I think it has more to do with the 
nature of the economy that it has to do with any relationship or 
any effect unions may have on a shop. 
 
Ms. Draude:  We understood last week from question period 
that a company in North Battleford, for example, Peak’s 
Manufacturing, just had a union started in that company with 
only 25 per cent of employees a member of the union. Would 
they be able to . . . would a company then have the option of 
selling shares to this group of people, or would they be 
regulated into it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Either both type A or type B would 
be available to them. 
 
Ms. Draude:  If they wanted to and the employer wasn’t in 
favour of it, would there be any way that through the unions 
they would have to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, it takes two to dance. There’s 
nothing which requires an owner of a company to accept an 
investment from anyone. These things only operate by 
agreement. 
 
Ms. Draude:  You can look at me like a doubting Thomas if 
you want. How will changing the timetable to 100 per cent 
within 24 months for which type A corporations must invest the 
capital they have raised affect the operations of the corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, it leaves them with a longer 
time frame within which to make the investments, and perhaps 
facilitates long-range forward planning. To that extent it’s 
probably . . . these changes will probably result in stronger 
businesses or places of work. 
  



2308  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, if the labour venture pool of 
money has been in place for a number of years and the company 
actually starts a subsidiary or has a parent company, can they 
decide to invest in either one of those companies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The answer is yes for type A, and no 
for type B. 
 
Ms. Draude:  What is the role of the minister in approving 
tax credits for federally sponsored labour-sponsored venture 
capital corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This enables the minister to ensure 
that any labour-sponsored venture capital corporations meet 
Saskatchewan law. That’s the discretion given to the minister 
 meet Saskatchewan law and policy. That’s what the 
legislation does. That’s what all the legislation does actually. 
 
Ms. Draude:  You probably told me earlier and I apologize, 
but can you tell me when this Act, the original Act, came into 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In 1986. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So in 10 years we only have 23 venture capital 
corporations formed. Are they still all in place; are they still 
active? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The officials tell me that 17 or 18 are 
still in place. That’s probably a pretty good record actually. 
These are high risk. Venture capital corporations are by 
definition high risk. So that’s probably a fairly good record 
actually. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I actually think that the idea of allowing 
employees or encouraging employees to become part of a 
company is a good idea. Is there any way . . . does the 
government do any advertising? Do they do any way of 
publicizing that this is an option to employees and to 
employers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, the Department of Economic 
Development do, I’m told, promote this type of activity. This is 
not done by the Department of Finance. They’re administrators 
only. It’s the Department of Economic Development which are 
responsible for promoting it. I’m told they do do that. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The only tax credit that’s available then is 
actually a federal one then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, no. The credit is available both 
as against federal and provincial tax payable. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Has there been any thoughts towards 
increasing the amount of provincial tax credit available to 
encourage employees to become part of the company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, the federal government is going 
the opposite direction actually. The provincial credits remain 
the same. We’re dealing here with the federal credits. The 
member I’m sure — nods her head  she appreciates that. The  

federal government’s going the other direction, so if you have a 
concern about this you may want to take that up at the next 
Liberal convention. 
 
(1100) 
 
Ms. Draude:  So there isn’t anything that the provincial 
government is doing to actually encourage it with a higher rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We find the federal Liberals very 
difficult to deal with. The member opposite may have more 
success than we have. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I have no 
further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It may be some commentary on the 
quality of representation that the officials have fled here without 
waiting to be thanked. I do, however, want to thank the officials 
for attending and assisting us this morning. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 80  An Act to amend  
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
introduce Stuart Kramer, deputy minister; Dennis Sherratt, 
director of wildlife; and Doug Kosloski, legislative analyst. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess the . . . first 
off I want to welcome you and your officials in reference to the 
discussions on this Bill. And I just want to get clarification right 
off the top. The intent of the Bill is to basically have habitat 
available for wildlife protection and just to ensure that there are 
lands set aside for the wildlife. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, that’s correct. The Bill is designed to 
secure the best wildlife habitat on Crown land. But at the same 
time we accommodate agriculture interests. Grazing and haying 
continues. The Bill simply does not allow the sale of these 
Crown lands which are important to wildlife, or nobody can 
break them up or drain them as well. So it protects the habitat 
while working with agriculture as well. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Okay, 1992 amendments to this Act provided 
for an addition of land to be protected under the Act. And 
consultation was done after the 1992 amendment was in place, 
and now we’re faced with another amendment to remove 
25,600 acres of land from being protected under this Act. 
 
Were there any consultation with farmers done before the 
implementation of the 1992 amendment, and if not, why not? 
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, there was some consultation done 
prior to the addition of those lands in 1992. 
 
And as you correctly state, we’re taking out about 25,000 acres 
from the Act. And these are perhaps quarter sections where the 
farming operation’s water supply is on or corrals. And so we 
have an advisory group which decided we’d take these out and 
allow them to be sold to the current lessees. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Could you basically and briefly give me a 
description of exactly how much land has been set aside and the 
exact location of these lands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  There’s about 3.4 million acres in the Act. 
This is about 30 per cent of the Crown lands used for 
agriculture. So we haven’t certainly put all of the land in the 
Act. 
 
So it’s about 30 per cent and 3.4 million acres. It’s scattered 
throughout the province, the settled region of the province. 
There’s some fairly large tracts of Crown land in the Act in the 
south-west where there’s some large ranching operations. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Is any of the, the land we speak about, is any 
of that land in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  It’s all located below the forest fringe. It’s 
all being used for agriculture purposes. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess the second part of the question  I’m 
really just trying to understand is a bit more from our 
perspective is  how was the land identified and then set aside 
for this habitat? Did you go through consultations only or did 
you have some involvements from environmental groups or 
some special interests groups in terms of what land that you’ve 
identified to set aside for habitat? Or was there animals being 
considered in terms of where their natural habitat was? Like 
how did you determine this particular area of land to be set 
aside? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  There was a scientific, biological inventory 
done of basically all of the land south of the forest fringe. And 
any of the Crown land which met certain requirements and had 
good habitat for a variety of species of wildlife was put into the 
Act. 
 
So it was a scientific basis that was determined. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and welcome to 
the minister and your officials. I just have a couple of questions. 
I’m wondering if there has ever been a request by an individual 
or a group or a council who may ask for this land to be 
removed, if that would ever be a case of why it was transferred 
from the Crown land into this group? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, there certainly have been requests and 
that is why we are removing 25,600 acres with this amendment. 
 
And what we have is a public advisory group  stock growers, 
wildlife federation are on this group. And for an example, if an 
individual applies to have the land removed, if it looked as  

though this particular parcel was an important part of his 
agriculture operation, this would be given serious consideration. 
 
On the other hand, if it was ideal habitat and the farmer or 
rancher could continue to use the land for grazing, it’s original 
purpose, we may not remove it. So we would certainly consider 
these requests, and have done so. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I understand you to say that an individual 
could request it on a single basis and you would determine 
whether it should be done. Is there any public consultation, 
advertising, or something done to allow neighbouring people or 
the towns to understand that this could happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Basically the requests are all from the 
current lessees. However if a community . . . if it’s a quarter 
section or something near a community and the community was 
interested in acquiring it or developing it, we would certainly 
review that request as well. But basically it’s the current lessees 
who have applied. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Maybe I’m not on the right wavelength, but 
I’m just wanting to make sure that if somebody applies to have 
this land transferred, if anybody around them would have any 
objections, if they would know this was happening so that they 
would know to object. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, I’m sorry I misinterpreted your last 
question there. Basically the purpose of the public advisory 
group  which is the stock growers and wildlife federation and 
a couple of other groups  we feel that they have broad enough 
representation that if somebody had a problem with a quarter 
section coming out or wanted a quarter section added in, that 
this would get through to the public review process. 
 
But as far as advertising in the paper, we don’t. It’s basically 
the lessee applies, this group looks at it and we look at it from a 
scientific basis, and the decision is made at that time. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The advisory council actually makes the 
decision, and I understood you to say that there would be 
wildlife representatives and stock growers; who else is on the 
advisory council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Currently, the group consists of the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation, the Department of Agriculture, and SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management). So 
there’s just the four on it at the current time. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you and 
welcome to your officials today. Just for clarification, I’m 
wondering whether or not the federal government has got some 
say in this amendment. As far as what I can see here, this is 
about Crown land, okay. And there’s obviously federal Crown 
land and provincial Crown land. In regards to this amendment 
and in fact this Act, does the federal government have authority 
to have some say in it, or is this all done through provincial 
initiative? 
 
  



2310  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  This is just provincial Crown land, so the 
federal government has no involvement in the process. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Could we then assume from that that 
the federal government, as far as land entitlement for the first 
nations people, could not in fact impose a land entitlement on 
the land that you have set aside here? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The treaty land entitlements is a 
cooperative process with governments as well as individual 
people. And before we would give up any of this land, all 
third-party interests would need to be settled. For an example, 
the lessee may decide that he’s not going to renew the lease, not 
going to keep farming. So we want to be very sure that all 
third-party interests are met. 
 
And as far as the federal government being able to come along 
and say this provincial land has to be put up for a TLE (treaty 
land entitlements) settlement, we don’t see that happening. 
 
Ms. Julé:  All right, thank you. This land is set aside 
primarily for wildlife habitat protection, okay. So if it ever 
came to the point where there was an agreement by provincial 
and federal authorities on this, that some of this would be used 
for land entitlement, would the wildlife habitat protection  the 
reason that this Bill was set out in the first place  would in 
fact that be protected? Would that have to be part of the 
conditions of land being turned over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, in fact we are. This amendment does 
remove 21,000 acres of land from the Act for treaty land 
entitlement. Now all third-party interests have been settled on 
these lands, so nobody is being displaced. The current people 
that use this land are not being displaced. 
 
We do not automatically allow every piece of habitat land to be 
settled or turned over for TLE. Again, on a scientific basis, if a 
particular piece of land is very unique, we would not give that 
up for TLE settlement. 
 
We also are looking at areas where we do take land out of the 
Act for TLE settlement, to replace that land with habitat of 
comparable value, though this may not always be possible. But 
we are looking at that as well. 
 
We are also fairly confident that the first nations people will 
utilize this land in probably a similar manner in which it was 
used  for an example, cattle grazing. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, officials. I wonder if you could tell us how much land 
is involved in this Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  There’s 3.4 million acres in the Act, which 
is about a third of the agriculture lease land in the province. 
And we are taking out 25,000 acres for farmers, ranchers, to 
purchase as per request and approval, and 21,000 acres for 
treaty land entitlement settlements. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. On any 
of this land, does the government pay grants in lieu to the RMs 
(rural municipality) or urban municipalities, as the case may 
be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The lessees who use this land pay the taxes 
on the land to the municipalities. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Is all of this land available to be leased? 
Is all of the land currently being leased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Virtually all of the land is leased. There are 
a few vacant corners here and there, but most of it is leased and 
the taxes are paid on that land. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Is cattle 
grazing the sole use for the land when a person leases it or when 
someone else leases it? Is it simply cattle grazing, or is it 
utilized for other things such as some of it for cultivation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  It’s largely grazing. There are perhaps 
some quarters with small areas cultivated or have been broke up 
and seeded to grass, so haying is certainly a part of the use 
made of this land as well. And also oil and gas operations are 
also occurring on some of these lands. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. What 
kind of fees are you looking at in charging these lessees when 
they lease the wildlife lands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The lease fees are based on the Department 
of Agriculture’s standard formulas for establishing grazing and 
haying fees. So it’s a standard formula for throughout the 
province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  What happens in the case of an oil 
lease? Who receives the revenue for the surface lease on that? 
Obviously if somebody is leasing the land, they are leasing 160 
acres to a quarter. If an oil interest comes in, they’re going to 
lose some of the productivity of that land. 
 
Do they receive any compensation for that? Are their fees 
dropped? Do they receive any compensation in a nuisance sense 
for having to protect their animals or to cultivate around these 
locations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you for the question. I don’t have 
the specifics on that because it’s more Department of 
Agriculture’s policy, but we’d be very pleased to provide that 
information for you. I do believe that the lessee certainly gets a 
small sum at least to help offset some of the inconveniences and 
what not. But we can get you the exact details. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you’re 
following the Department of Agriculture’s policy, that means 
that the lessee would get $100, which is totally inadequate in 
some of these circumstances where the quarter may be next to 
some property where their buildings are at, and they have the 
nuisance factor and yet none of the benefits that accrue from it. 
 
Further, since you are selling 25,000 acres back to some of the  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

producers, in the case where an oil lease is on the property, they 
would have to pay additional sums of money to gain that lease 
back, whereas they got no benefit when it was originally put on 
there if they were the lessee at that time. 
 
I think if you’re following the Department of Agriculture’s 
policies, that it should be reviewed as it’s totally inadequate to 
the current circumstances. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well I’ll certainly pass that on to my 
colleague, and we will get you the details that we can on the 
lease arrangements. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The wildlife 
that’s on these wildlife lands, the government is responsible for 
them. But what happens in the case where you have good 
habitat. You have a large herd of, say, white-tailed deer or elk 
on this land, and they don’t stay on that quarter or half  or 
whatever it is  of wildlife land. They move off of that onto 
the neighbouring farmer’s land causing crop damage, etc. What 
preventative measures, what compensations, do you have in 
place to protect those kind of . . . those farmers from those 
circumstances and to protect them from the depredations that 
the wildlife being raised on this land will cause to their crops? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly under extreme or unusual 
conditions such as last winter, wildlife damage was fairly 
extensive, and it didn’t matter whether there was habitat in that 
area or not. The white-tailed deer population had increased 
because of a number of mild winters, even though we had a 
very high harvest of animals last year. 
 
Our goal is to work cooperatively with landowners, and 
certainly we are continuing to come up with new programs. One 
of the more effective ones is providing permanent fencing 
material for farmers who incur damage on a regular basis. 
We’re even looking at planting some lure crops in some of our 
habitat lands to help keep the deer, wildlife, on the Crown land 
instead of out on a farmer’s field. 
 
So we are . . . our goal is to work cooperatively. Most people in 
the province enjoy wildlife and are prepared to put up with a 
little bit of damage. But when you can get very severe 
conditions, such as we experienced last year, when there is a 
problem . . . So we will be continuing to work on programs in 
conjunction with landowners. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Unfortunately permanent fencing doesn’t help unharvested 
crops that are lying out in fields. It’s quite difficult to put up a 
permanent fence to exclude white-tailed deer or elk on a quarter 
section or a half. It’s simply not economical to do so. It would 
be much better to pay a compensation under circumstances like 
last winter than it is to provide permanent fencing, even though 
the member from Rosetown seems to disagree with that. 
 
The wildlife lands, Mr. Minister, promote the increase in 
wildlife populations. If these lands are going to be in place . . . 
and they are in place throughout the agricultural area of 
Saskatchewan, promoting the increase in wildlife, and nobody 
disagrees with that. Most people agree with it. In fact that’s  

why a large amount of this land is turned over or sold to the 
wildlife funds. 
 
But there’s a price to pay, and it’s the farmers in the 
neighbourhood of the wildlife lands that pay that price. It’s not 
the wildlife member in the city of Regina or Saskatoon or the 
supporter of wildlife a hundred miles away that’s paying that 
price. It’s the farmer who’s living next door to it who pays that 
price. And that’s unfair to that particular farmer, Mr. Minister, 
and some form of compensation needs to be provided to that 
farmer for the crop depredations that he suffers. And your 
government, up until this time, has not been prepared to do that. 
Some form of compensation for the farmer has to be arrived at. 
 
Now that can be a monetary compensation for the losses he has 
suffered; it can be some form of ability to gain some revenues 
from the sale of hunting licences in his area. Some form of 
compensation has to be provided for those farmers who are 
living next door to this problem on a continual basis. It’s not a 
one-year situation. 
 
The wildlife, the deer, the elk, don’t stay on that little quarter 
section of land their entire lives; they range away from that. 
And it’s the farmers who live in the neighbourhood who are 
suffering the depredation, who suffer the expenses, who suffer 
their crop losses, whereas the whole society benefits from it  
the guy in Regina, the guy in Saskatoon, the guy a hundred 
miles away  benefits from that but pays none of the cost. It’s 
the farmer next door that pays that cost; that he is deserving of 
some form of compensation, Mr. Minister. 
 
So what are you proposing to provide that farmer next door to 
the wildlife land who, on an ongoing basis, suffers that 
depredation? What do you have in place for him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you for your comments. We are 
certainly . . . we realize that compensation would be the best 
way to deal with this problem, especially with crop damage, 
and we are working very diligently with SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and landowners, wildlife 
federation, etc., to come up with something, hopefully in place 
this fall. We haven’t got the details fleshed out yet but we are 
certainly looking at developing a program like that. 
 
Certainly the habitat lands, as you say, are important to wildlife, 
and the purpose is to protect wildlife. And when we think of 
wildlife many people narrow it down to Canada geese and 
white-tailed deer, which happen to be two species which are 
very adaptable to people, and they are increasing in numbers in 
despite their habitat lands. 
 
These lands are important to many of our native plants and 
animals which are in serious trouble, and so we want to address 
that as well. 
 
But we recognize the problems of some species such as 
white-tailed deer and we are working on a compensation 
program. And we will continue our damage prevention 
programs and other programs such as lure crops, adjusting 
hunting seasons to allow a greater harvest in areas where there’s 
larger number of deer. 
  



2312  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

(1130) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Move on 
to something else. What price do you pay for wildlife lands 
when you purchase it? How do you determine what the value of 
that land is and what you’re going to pay for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Before . . . this is not exactly on the wildlife 
habitat lands, but the wildlife development fund lands, if a piece 
of land comes up for sale or we would like to purchase a piece 
of land, we go back about two years, take all of the land sales in 
a particular RM, average it out, and we offer the average price 
or slightly below in purchases. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What if there 
have been no land sales within the immediate area within that 
two-year period. Do you have some other formula that you use 
to develop the price of the property? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  If need be, we would certainly expand the 
review to neighbouring RMs or that similar type of habitat, soil 
classification. And again, it’s always a willing buyer/willing 
seller operation as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, now that we’ve established what 
you’re prepared to pay, an average price in the area, what do 
you sell it for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The 25,600 acres which we are selling to 
landowners, ranchers, farmers, although it’s administered by the 
Department of Agriculture, the actual sale, again I’m sure it is 
based on the average price of land in a particular area, and again 
willing seller/willing buyer. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well when you were buying the land, 
you said you took the average price or lower. If you’re selling 
the land, the 25,000 acres, do you take the average price or 
lower for that land, the 25,000 acres that you’re selling? You 
must have some averages within the area of the land that you’re 
selling. Have you taken that price and lower, or have you taken 
that price and higher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We’re dealing with two categories of land. 
The wildlife development fund land, we go out and actively 
purchase it and we do not sell any of that land, so we don’t have 
a formula for getting rid of it. 
 
This land, 25,000 acres, the lessee has applied for it. And 
perhaps when a price is arrived at the lessee may decide well, 
I’m not going to buy it; I’m just going to keep leasing. And 
again the actual sale is through the Department of Agriculture, 
who I’m sure again reviews the land sale prices in the particular 
area for the class of land and the type of land. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well on the 25,000 acres that you’re 
selling, are you selling that at the average price of the land in 
the area where the land is being sold? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  This amendment simply removes that 
25,000 acres from the Act because somebody  the current 
lessee  expressed an interest in acquiring it. And I guess the  

Department of Agriculture and the lessee would have to arrive 
at a price. And again the sale may not go through; the lessee 
may just simply decide to keep leasing it. 
 
I’m sure that for both parties to agree, the average fair price of 
land in a particular area would be arrived at. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I think this is an important 
question, Mr. Minister, as to what price this land is being sold 
for. 
 
You’ve said that when you purchase land you buy it at an 
average price or lower. Now I think it’s important to know 
whether or not any of this land is being sold at less than the 
average price, and if it is being sold at less than the average 
price, who determined that this was going to be a valid sale? 
 
If any of it is being sold at a higher than average price, is the 
price for this land greater than what you purchased it for 
initially? If so, who benefits by that? Does the money stay 
within the funds used to acquire wildlife lands? Is it turned over 
to the Consolidated Fund? What happens to the money? 
 
But if this land is being sold and you’ve got 25,000 acres you’re 
transferring out of the Act to sell, is any of that land being sold 
at less than the average price? Is it being sold at a price lower 
than it was originally purchased for? If so, who made the 
decisions to sell those individual parcels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Again, we have the two categories of land. 
This Crown land in The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, most 
of it has been Crown land since the province was settled  old 
school sections, large areas in the south-west which has never 
been privately owned; the Crown has owned them for many 
years. 
 
So I guess I don’t have an exact formula but I would be happy 
to obtain  or ask the Minister of Agriculture to provide  a 
formula as to how they arrive at their prices to dispose of this 
land if the lessee is interested in purchasing it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister; if you would 
do that for us, please. Could you also then determine whether 
any of this land has been sold at less than the average price in 
the area and indicate that in your notices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We will endeavour to provide that 
information to you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Does any of the money for the 25,000 
acres being sold revert back to SERM for use for the purchase 
of other wildlife lands or does it go to the Consolidated Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  It all goes to the Consolidated Fund. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately 
then that means that we have a net decrease in the amount of 
land available for wildlife. And while I was complaining earlier 
about the farmer next door, I believe that this is a good 
program. It has some value. It just needs some compensation 
and some protection for the neighbours. I think that perhaps  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

some of this land or other land should be then designated under 
the wildlife protection area to maintain the balance of what we 
have today. 
 
In fact is . . . the World Wildlife Fund shows that while we are 
slowly increasing our protection of lands, types that are needed 
to be protected in this province, we still have a great deal of 
length to go before we reach their guidelines of 12 to 13 per 
cent. And if we’re transferring lands out of the protection area, I 
think that we’re moving backwards rather than forwards on this 
area. So I think it’s incumbent on you, Mr. Minister, to 
encourage your government to move ahead on this, rather than 
step backwards. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, I certainly appreciate your comments 
and share your views on this. We are in fact adding another 
3,600 acres to the . . . for protection under the Act with this 
amendment as well. And we’ve talked about a no net loss of 
wildlife habitat. Unfortunately there’s only so much land. But 
our goal is to, as we determine if additional Crown land is 
important to wildlife, we have that option to add more land into 
the Act, and we will certainly be pursuing this in the years 
ahead. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask a 
question regarding the . . . I guess what some of my constituents 
have put forward to me as far as conservation areas and I would 
guess it would be, is that the same as wildlife habitat protection 
areas? When we say conservation for wildlife, it’s the same 
thing is it? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Most of them are, yes. 
 
Ms. Julé:  All right. Some of the observations of my 
constituents have been that in fact there have been hunters 
coming in and hunting on the land that has been set aside for 
wildlife, okay. Is that against the law, to hunt on that land? Or 
in fact is it up to the farmer that owns it and has said that it is 
for wildlife protection, is it up to them to give permission? How 
in fact does one understand, as a citizen, what the legalities are 
there as far as hunting on that land? Because if there is 
permission given by either the farmer or if there’s no law 
stopping hunters, then in fact the whole intent of protecting 
wildlife is for nothing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Again we have various categories of land. 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act land, because it’s being 
leased by a rancher/farmer, the hunter should get permission to 
hunt on that land. Secondly, if the land is posted, then of course 
there should be no hunting. 
 
The other category, which we’ve talked about today, is the 
wildlife development fund land. That is land purchased from 
hunters’ money. An impost on the license has resulted in the 
wildlife development fund being established. 
 
We do allow hunting on these lands, but it’s hunting on foot 
only. And I guess we believe that controlled hunting, 
well-managed hunting seasons in fact do not endanger wildlife, 
and white-tail deer is only one species that we might look at on 
these lands. And we do believe that we need to harvest these  

animals and utilize the animals to the best of our ability. 
 
So hunting is allowed on some of the lands. If the person 
donated a quarter section of land to the wildlife development 
fund and did not want hunting on it, it would be so marked and 
anybody hunting on that piece would be charged. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I mention 
these things because of the comments made by the hon. member 
from Cannington. And there was certainly the feeling out there 
. . . in fact I have a relative who has donated some land for this, 
for wildlife protection, and the statement has come many times 
to my dear relative that although this is a wonderful place for 
ducks, etc., to be sitting, and it’s a good intention that she had, 
what’s happening is that farmers in and around are having those 
same ducks come and eat up all their crops. 
 
And so there’s some real irritation out there with the fact that 
this is happening and that there’s no compensation for farmers, 
and on top of it, who is really benefiting? In fact, are the hunters 
that are coming in from the States or so on, and tourism 
benefiting? Well that’s very good that we are getting tourist 
dollars in here, but it is at the cost of the farmer next door or in 
the surrounding area. 
 
And so I concur very much with the member from Cannington 
that if the province by and large is going to in fact benefit from 
this through all kinds of dollars that are brought into this 
province, then in fact maybe we should be looking at the 
farmers who give up and sacrifice so dearly for that kind of 
thing to happen. And with some kind of compensation in place, 
I believe that there would be an equilibrium here that would 
respect everyone. So if you could just comment on that please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  We do have a water fowl crop depredation 
program in place, albeit not maybe perfect, but we do have that 
program in effect. We also operate bait stations and lure crops 
to reduce the damage in surrounding crops. And again, you’re 
very correct in saying that we need to work with landowners, 
municipalities, because the future of wildlife in southern 
Saskatchewan does rest in the hand of landowners. We need 
their cooperation and we look forward to working with them. 
We have some good programs in place, but there’s always lots 
more to do. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just a couple 
of questions in terms of the 3.4 million acres of land that you 
have set aside. You mention that 30 per cent of that land is 
Crown lands and the other 70 per cent, I assume, is lands that 
you’ve leased from the different farmers and different ranchers 
in the area  is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Just to clarify that. There’s about nine 
million acres of Crown agriculture land in the province; this is 
owned by the province and leased out to landowners or 
ranchers. Of that nine million, or just over nine million, 3.4 
million acres have been identified as very important to wildlife. 
 
So it’s that 3.4 million out of the nine that’s in the Act. The 
other six million of agriculture leased land is not in the Act at 
all. So this is all Crown land. 
  



2314  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Mr. Belanger:  Have you got any, in terms of figures, as to 
what it costs, may have cost you, and where have you got the 
money to either buy up this land or lease this land in terms of 
trying to protect it for the wildlife? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  This, as I’d mentioned earlier, is Crown 
land. Much of it has been held by the province since the land 
was settled so we haven’t had to buy any of this 3.4 million 
acres. This is another very important benefit of this legislation. 
 
The province already owns it, it’s been leased out to 
landowners/ranchers, and this Act allows the ranchers and 
landowners to continue using the land. The Act simply prevents 
them from buying it or breaking it up and draining it. So other 
than administration, paper, it hasn’t cost . . . very little. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Have you got any dollars at all from any 
special interest groups. I’m talking about groups like the world 
wildlife federation. Any support in that effort? Or special 
interest groups in terms of assisting in some of the costs or 
some of the planning of this particular Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  With respect to this particular Act, there’s 
been no money come in because we haven’t needed it. We 
already own the land. This Act just prevents us or a government 
from selling the land, or allowing the lessee to break it up or 
clear it or drain it. 
 
So we haven’t required any money. The wildlife development 
fund land, the other wildlife land program we have, is basically 
strictly funded by hunting licences. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  A portion of this particular Act is to remove 
25,600 acres of land from being protected under this Act and 
that effort is primarily for the first nations treaty land 
entitlement process  is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The 25,000 acres being removed at the 
request of landowners is one parcel that is being taken out. 
We’re also removing 21,000 acres of Crown land for treaty land 
entitlement. And this 21,000 acres, although in the Act . . . all 
the third-party interests, the people that were using the land up 
until now  the ranchers/farmers  have decided that they 
don’t want the land any more. 
 
So rather than go out and lease it to somebody else, we’ve 
allowed the land to go to treaty land entitlement, and there may 
be more of that coming yet. So we have the two parcels: the 
25,000 for the current ranchers and farmers; 21,000 for treaty 
land entitlement. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Has there been any . . . So in essence, this 
Act does not, in no way, shape or form, drive a wedge between 
any first nations group or any other third-party interest in terms 
of trying to have access to this land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  In response to your question, we believe 
that all third-party interests are settled. We aren’t displacing 
anybody off the land. And once the third-party interests have  

been settled, we will . . . If a first nations wishes to have the 
land that they applied for, third-party interests are settled, then 
the land is turned over to the first nations. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Has there been any other lands in 
northern Saskatchewan  I’m talking about the forest fringe 
land that has been set aside for the habitation protection Act  
or is there any thought of doing that as well for northern 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  This particular legislation simply deals with 
agriculture leased land, which would be south of the forest 
fringe. Certainly we are looking at other programs in 
cooperation with northern people to protect unique areas in the 
North. But this particular legislation is just agriculture leased 
land south of the forest fringe. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, and that pretty well completes 
my questions. And I just wanted to point out that I think it’s 
incumbent upon government and I encourage that process to 
continue whereas that you look at the interests of all people 
involved with a particular piece of land. And certainly in 
reference to the treaty land entitlement process, as 
Saskatchewan residents, we must look at resolving this 
long-standing issue and to make sure that there is no wedges 
being driven between the non-aboriginal communities that 
enjoy the use of that land, you know, between the aboriginal 
communities that want to access to that land. 
 
I think the balance that you’re trying to achieve here is 
admirable. I sincerely hope that much more of this type of 
consultation and discussion could take place prior to an Act 
being implemented so as time goes on we can have less and less 
problems with the people affected by Acts of this nature. But 
thank you once again. I believe one of my colleagues has 
another question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I’d just like to point out that, certainly, we 
are committed to settling treaty land entitlements and this is one 
way, one avenue that we can take some land out of the Act once 
third-party interests are settled. We don’t want to, as you say, 
drive a wedge between anybody. We want to make sure the land 
is vacant basically and that’s when we would turn the land over. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just have one 
more question, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering why your 
government doesn’t use the funds from the sale of these lands 
for the compensation for wildlife damage? There would be 
funding available for that then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The Crown lands of course belong to 
everybody, and they are an agriculture lease actually. So we 
believe in operating through the Consolidated Fund. 
 
And certainly we will do everything in our power to come up 
with more money for compensation. It would be, as far as I’m 
concerned, great to have this money, but I realize that there’s 
highways, hospitals, and a number of other areas that need 
attention as well. 
 
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, if I could 
refer you to section 8(1). It sets out penalties to corporations 
that contravene any terms and conditions of the protection of 
wildlife habitat lands. The maximum penalty for a corporation 
will now be $50,000 with a further penalty for a continuing 
offence. Mr. Minister, could you tell me how many 
corporations have been charged to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well we’re happy to report that nobody has 
been charged yet, and we believe that by and large industry, and 
I guess I use the oil and gas industry as an example, in the last 
number of years have been very environmentally responsible, in 
fact are working with us. But if somebody did desire to cause a 
problem, the old fine maximum of $2,000 was no deterrent. But 
we do believe that $50,000 is, and we hope we won’t have to 
use it. And again we look forward to working cooperatively 
with everybody. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you give me an 
idea of what kind of offences would warrant a $50,000 fine, and 
at whose discretion would the amount of the fine be put 
forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Just a hypothetical example would be an 
industry that deliberately dumped waste material, toxic 
chemicals, perhaps in a burrowing owl colony or something like 
that. Something that was very deliberate and malicious I would 
see as resulting in a fine. And the actual amount of the fine 
would be determined by the court. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I would like to refer to the part that 
says the maximum penalty for the corporation would be 50,000 
with a further penalty for a continuing offence. What kind of a 
further penalty do you have in mind here? How much . . . is that 
a certain amount of money, a portion of the 50,000? And can a 
corporation continue to be fined until the offence ends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well I would envision this being very rare, 
probably simply not happening. But if somebody was charged 
or told to clean up a deliberate mess that they’d caused and they 
didn’t do so, then the Act does provide for an additional fine of 
$5,000 a day. And again I guess that would be determined by 
the courts. But that would be a rare circumstance indeed, I’m 
sure. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Okay. Clause 6 of this Bill repeals the old 
schedule of protected lands and replaces it with a new schedule. 
What is the purpose of this change, apart from the removal of I 
guess it’s 47,100 acres of land and the inclusion of 3,600 acres 
in the schedule. Is it for simplicity’s sake only, or are there 
other reasons for the change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The lands in the Act have been added at 
three different stages, I believe  1986, ’88, and ’92. So there 
are sort of three different schedules. This simply puts all of 
those three into one volume. And it’s, as you say, for simplicity 
and convenience mostly. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I missed 
one of my issues, forgot it when I was asking you questions 
earlier. It deals with the grazing rights, with cultivation rights  

for some of this land. How are the transfers made when 
someone wants to give up the grazing rights and someone else 
wants to pick it up? What’s the process in place for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Not to pass the buck again, but it’s the 
Department of Agriculture determines who leases this land. 
And I know it’s based on a number of things such as the age of 
the applicant, how close they live to the Crown land, and 
perhaps how much their assets are worth. But that’s a 
Department of Agriculture decision. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the 
policy on subleasing, subletting the property? Do you have a 
policy on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Again commenting on behalf of the 
Minister of Agriculture, I don’t believe there is a policy on 
subleasing. But again if you wish to add that information, we 
can provide it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And it’s 
my understanding that there is a policy in place on that, and that 
subleasing is not allowed. 
 
An Hon. Member:  If you knew the answer, why did you 
ask the question? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  To see if the minister knew what the 
answer was. Well obviously he wasn’t sure about it. 
 
What mechanisms do you have in place, Mr. Minister, to 
determine whether or not subleasing is taking place? Because 
I’m hearing complaints that there is indeed some subleasing 
taking place, whereas one neighbour would like to be able to 
acquire the grazing rights. The neighbour that has it at the 
current time is unwilling to let it go because of some personality 
conflicts and is turning around, subleasing it to someone else. 
What mechanisms do you have in place to determine whether or 
not the person who actually has the grazing lease on it has any 
cattle and is grazing any cattle or are they subleasing it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well, thank you. What I meant . . . what my 
interpretation was, we have no policy on subleasing, meaning 
we don’t sublease. But you’re certainly correct there. I guess the 
local community basically, the ag rep, neighbours, whatever, 
certainly if something is illegal we do our best to enforce it with 
everybody’s help. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  If a current leaseholder was subleasing 
out to someone else, would that be in contravention and 
therefore his lease would be revoked and anyone else would 
then be free to apply for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I’m sure every situation would be different. 
And again I simply cannot give the details on the part of the 
Department of Agriculture, but it would be dealt with 
accordingly. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
  



2316  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to thank 
the opposition members for a very thorough questioning on this 
Act and look forward to their cooperation. I’d also like to thank 
my officials for their help here today as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today, and 
for their cooperation and their answers, and look forward to 
working with them in the future. 
 

Bill No. 84  An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce her official. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 
have with me today, Jim Brickwell, senior policy analyst with 
municipal policy and legislative services in Municipal 
Government. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Minister, 
and your official. I just have a few questions on this amendment 
and they’re basically for information that I would like to 
tabulate. How many people are employed with the Wascana 
Centre Authority? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This year there’s 127. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Are there any plans to continue with a 
long-term development proposal in the near future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Every year the development plan is 
reviewed by the board and I don’t think there’s been a year 
where there hasn’t been new work done on the park. And as 
well, every five years the plan is reviewed at public meetings 
with the community. So there is quite a rigorous requirement 
for an ongoing review. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Why in Bill 85, which covers the Meewasin 
Valley, are there subsections referring to the city and university, 
but in the Wascana Centre Authority amendment, Bill 84, there 
is no reference to these partners? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think it’s just a difference in the way 
the Bills were written. You’ll notice that in (e) under the 
amendment, it says participating parties; and the participating 
parties are understood to be the government, the university, and 
the city. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. In the 1996-97 
estimates the Wascana Authority received $782,000. Could this 
possibly be broken down? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  That entire portion is the statutory  

funding that it gets from Municipal Government. Were you 
wanting to know the actual breakdown of the funding? 
 
The detail would be in the annual report and we don’t have a 
copy of that with us, but we could get you that information and 
send it to you. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
this is all the questions I have. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you very much. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 85  An Act to amend 
The Meewasin Valley Authority Act 

 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. The official will 
be a familiar face to you. It’s Jim Brickwell, who has assisted 
the committee in the immediately preceding Bill. 
 
The Chair:  Perhaps I should have invited the official to 
introduce the minister. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to Mr. 
Jim. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you could just brief us a bit on 
the mandate of the Meewasin Valley Authority. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  This is an Authority that is a partnership 
of the province, the city of Saskatoon, and the University of 
Saskatchewan with respect to the husbanding, the care, for the 
Saskatchewan River valley as it passes through the city of 
Saskatoon and the immediately surrounding area. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to ask, over 
how many acres does the Authority have control at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m sorry, Mr. Chair, and to the 
member. I’m going to have to provide that information with 
you. I don’t know. It’s a large area. It’s all within the city of 
Saskatoon, but I don’t know the exact acreage. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Could I ask you then how many 
employees the Meewasin Valley Authority have on the payroll? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I’m sorry to tell the member 
we’re going to have to inquire about that as well. We don’t have 
it in the material that we brought to the House today. It will be 
no trouble to get the information though. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The next question I was 
going to ask is, could you give us a breakdown for the last fiscal 
year of the amount paid out . . . so I presume you don’t  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

have that with you either, or do you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I can give information on that, with 
respect to that question, Mr. Chair. In the ‘95-96 year, the 
authority spent $1,263,884 on its operations; $1,764,496 on its 
construction projects; and set up depreciation allowances for 
70,000; for a grand total of $3,098,380. There are also some 
allocations to various funds, but so far as expenditures are 
concerned, those are the broad categories. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So the amount that you 
have stated goes for operations. It was one million plus. Does 
that include the payroll for the staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there are 
obviously some things taking place throughout the Meewasin 
Valley where fees and so on are charged to the public for 
coming in and for enjoying a part of the Meewasin Valley. Are 
any of the fees or the monies collected from those fees, do they 
go back . . . is there any formula, I should say, that that money 
would go  if there are any fees  the money would go or be 
designated for the university or for the province or whatever? 
I’m just wondering if there’s any designations of those monies 
in particular. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I think it 
is correct to say that there are no fees charged by the Meewasin 
Valley Authority for any of the services they provide. I could be 
wrong, but that’s the impression I have. 
 
If there were such fees, they would go back into the operational 
account of the MVA (Meewasin Valley Authority). But I don’t 
think there are. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are there 
any plans for expansion or to further develop the existing 
property? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The Meewasin Valley have a planning 
process that is continuous and is long term. They have been 
throughout their history, constantly developing things like the 
trail through the valley and various other facilities, like 
interpretive centres and the like. 
 
There will be such matters on the drawing board  
improvements to parks and improvements generally to the river 
bank. And they evolve over time and they’re modified from 
time to time. And it’s a major function of the MVA to make 
such plans and to keep them up to date and review them and 
consult the public about them. So the planning process is going 
on all the time. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I don’t 
think I was born when this all started . . . anyway, Mr. Minister, 
what I’d like to ask you is, where did the funds come from 
initially to get this whole project started? Could you let me 
know whether it was from the provincial government, or did the  

federal government give us a hand in this? Where did the 
funding come from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The three partners  the province, the 
city, and the university  have been involved from the 
beginning. I think it was before my time too, difficult as that 
may be to believe. But in any event, the partners were there at 
the beginning and contributed from the beginning and there was 
no federal money used to get the thing off the ground. The 
federal government have made important contributions from 
time to time during the years by way of projects of one sort or 
another and their participation is very important in that way. 
But the fundamental funding of the Authority and its activities 
have been by the partners that are before us in the Bill today. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Those are all the 
questions that I have and I thank you very much. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to move the Bill without 
amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, just before I do that, I’d 
like to thank Mr. Brickwell for coming to assist the committee 
today and the work on this Bill and on the Wascana Bill that has 
just been completed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21  An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 
and to enact a related amendment/ 

Loi modifiant La Loi d’interprétation de 1995 et édictant 
une modification corrélative 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 113  An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 94  An Act to amend  
The Education and Health Tax Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move that this Bill be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
  



2318  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Bill No. 95  An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 
Venture Capital Corporations Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 80 - An Act to amend  
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 84  An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 85  An Act to amend  
The Meewasin Valley Authority Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2319 
 June 10, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan regarding 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre, and the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the signatures on the petition are from Melville, from Fort 
Qu’Appelle, B-Say-Tah, and Regina. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens 
throughout the province regarding the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina and 
Lemberg, Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Radville, and Weyburn, and Oungre. So 
present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, all from the city of 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Gainsborough, 
Redvers, Manor, Pinehouse, all over southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Silton, Craven, Lumsden, Moose Jaw, the 
city of Regina, and also some from the community of Bethune. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from the city of Regina. And I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues today in presenting petitions on behalf of citizens all 
throughout southern Saskatchewan in their efforts to save the 
Plains Health Centre here in Regina. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are . . . a 
few from Regina, but the bulk of them are from the Yorkton 
area. I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to present petitions on SaskPower: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 
SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 
three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 
debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 
future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the entire province of 
Saskatchewan. I’m sure that there isn’t a community in here  
  



2320  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

that’s been missed. And I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order, petitions regarding the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and pursuant to 
rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure today to introduce to you and all my 
colleagues in the House, a group of students that are seated in 
the east gallery. These are grade 5 and 6 students from the 
Invermay School, a very special group as well since one of 
those students happens to be my daughter, Lindsay, as well, 
visiting Regina and visiting the legislature. 
 
I’d like to introduce their teacher, Mr. Joe Kowalyshyn; 
chaperon-parent, Mrs. Mary Kuras; and of course the bus 
driver, the most important guy I think, who’s been up since 
about 5 this morning to get this group of students to Regina — 
Mr. Lawrence Stefanowich from Canora. 
 
Welcome to Regina. Welcome to the legislature. And I hope 
that you have a great day and I’ll visit you later on for drinks 
and a photo session. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and to members of the Legislative Assembly, a 
group of students seated in the west gallery of the legislature. 
There are 17 English as a second language students, adult 
students, from the Wetmore campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology). They’re here on 
a tour of the building today. 
 
I’m introducing them on behalf of my colleague, the Hon. 
Harry Van Mulligen, from Regina Victoria. And I’ll be pleased 
to meet with them a little bit later to discuss what they’ve seen 
and hopefully answer their questions. 
 
I’d like to ask you and everyone to join in welcoming them here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I want to introduce to the Assembly some very special 
visitors from the other side of the province of Saskatchewan, 
from the far North, the community that most of us are familiar 
with now. 
 
They’re from the small community of Fond-du-Lac and I’d like 
to ask them to stand as I introduce them. They’re here visiting 
the Assembly. First of all — we have in fact the Northland 
Community College class — we have their teacher, Gareth 
Cook; and the students, Darlene Mercredi, Felix Mercredi, 
Morris Mercredi, and Jacqueline Isadore. 
 

I’d like to welcome them to the Assembly and also ask my 
colleagues here to also make them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce four 
very special guests. These guests are particularly special to our 
page, Jocelyn Arthur. It’s her parents, Alan and Kathy Arthur, 
and her grandparents, Jack and Vera. I would ask everyone to 
welcome them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great pleasure 
today to introduce 28 grade 5 students seated in your gallery. 
These students are from Peart School and are accompanied by 
their teacher, rather, Bill Murphy, and chaperons, Rock 
Legendre and Mary Hague. It will be my pleasure to meet with 
this group of grade 5 students at 2:30 on behalf of the hon. 
member for Regina Victoria. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming this good-looking 
group of students to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Ag Biotech International Conference 
 

Mr. Koenker: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow the ag 
biotech international conference begins in Saskatoon. 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food is one of the sponsors of 
this conference, and it’s fitting that it’s being held in 
Saskatchewan and especially in our city of Saskatoon as 
Saskatoon is quickly being recognized as the centre of 
agricultural biotechnology. 
 
There are currently some 28 companies engaged in ag biotech 
in Saskatoon employing over 300 people. The ag biotech 
industry has grown by over 300 per cent since 1991 with sales 
of over 300 million expected by the year 2000, up from today’s 
base of just 42 million. 
 
Examples of the benefits of ag biotech are actually quite 
numerous in our province. Anyone who knows the history of 
canola research will know the benefit of that research to 
agricultural producers in our province. The benefits also of 
genetically engineered seed that is resistant to herbicide. This 
translates into a benefit, it’s estimated, to Saskatchewan canola 
producers of approximately $20 per acre. So there’ll be 600 
representatives gathered in the city with over 800 speakers at 
the ag biotech conference in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Funding Agreement with the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Late last week the  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

federal government announced the ground-breaking new 
agreement that will provide the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations with $50 million over the next three years. 
 
This new funding arrangement will give native people more 
control over their own job training programs and will hopefully 
cut through some red tape. Blaine Favel, Chief of the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, says a number of 
bureaucratic strings that limited our leaders will be eliminated. 
That’s because about 40,000 treaty Indians living in towns and 
cities will have one less level of bureaucracy to wade through. 
 
This deal gives FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations) the authority to set up employment services and 
training to Indians living off reserve. First nation leaders are 
best acquainted with what their communities needs are 
concerning job training, so it only makes sense that they have 
the authority to deliver those programs. 
 
I would like to congratulate FSIN and the federal government 
for reaching such an important agreement. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ag Biotech Resource Kit 
 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
addition to the statement made by the hon. member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland-University, we all know the information 
age is playing a role in teaching Saskatchewan high school 
students all about agriculture. 
 
The Hon. Minister of Agriculture and Food, and the deputy 
minister, who is also the past-president of Ag-West Biotech, 
were on hand today in Saskatoon as an agri-food biotech 
research resource kit for high school students was unveiled. 
This resource kit is called “A Quick Dip in the Gene Pool” and 
is for high school students across western Canada. It includes a 
facilitator’s guide, two videos on genetic research, computer 
discs in either IBM or Apple format, and an audio cassette, and 
for schools with the capability, the material is also available on 
CD-ROM (compact disc read-only memory). 
 
“A Quick Dip” is designed to create interest among our students 
and encourage their curiosity along the road to scientific 
exploration. The resource kit will be demonstrated at the 
Ag-West booth at the conference in Saskatoon. Saskatchewan is 
one of the major participants of this educational project which 
involves the four western provinces, agriculture industry, 
research scientists, and others. This is a good example of what 
can be accomplished through cooperation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agricultural biotechnology has made a significant 
contribution to our economic development and growth. And it’s 
important to our future farmers, entrepreneurs, and researchers, 
to be aware of the tremendous potential this area holds for the 
future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ninth Annual Law Enforcement Run 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to commend 
all the people who are participating in the ninth annual law 
enforcement run. In Regina this weekend, over 300 people 
braved the scorching conditions to run a 2 kilometre course at 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) Academy. 
 
This is just one of the many events taking place as 26 law 
enforcement agencies help raise money for Special Olympics. 
The law enforcement run is expected to be a tremendous 
success by raising about $95,000 across Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to thank the people across the province who 
demonstrate their tremendous generosity and compassion by 
donating and pitching in to help out this very worthy cause 
every year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Party Donation List 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If you ever get 
an invitation from a Liberal, take it with a grain of salt. Last 
week, the Liberal leader and the member from Wood River 
were inviting, even challenging, anyone who was interested in 
coming down to the Liberal Party office to take a look at their 
donation list. In fact Friday morning the member from Wood 
River said the difference between Conservatives and Liberals is, 
and I quote, “Conservatives can come into our office and look 
at our list any time.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Lyle Hewitt from our office decided to take 
the member from Wood River up on his invitation. I understand 
Lyle and Emmet Reidy were having quite a pleasant visit right 
up until Lyle asked to see the Liberal donation list as offered by 
the member from Wood River. He wasn’t shown the donation 
list, Mr. Speaker; in fact he was shown the door by a clearly 
agitated Mr. Reidy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is the Liberals follow the same 
reporting practices as everyone else, but only the Liberals have 
been sanctimoniously denouncing the other parties and saying 
you can walk into their office at any time and look at their 
donation list. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we called them on it and they were bluffing. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. Now the hon. 
member from Wood River knows that you cannot do from your 
seat what you’re not permitted to do when you have the floor. 
Order, order. I will ask the hon. member to withdraw the 
unparliamentary remark that he made and apologize to the 
House. 
 
The hon. member for Wood River, I ask you to withdraw the 
unparliamentary remark that you made and apologize to the 
House. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I withdraw any 
unparliamentary remarks I might have made. 
  



2322  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

The Speaker:  And I ask that, on record, you apologize to 
the House. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  And I also apologize. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Finally, Mr. 
Speaker, one very telling statement came out of this whole 
incident. Emmet Reidy said he wouldn’t show us the list 
because he was scared those people might now be interested in 
donating to us. Based on the Liberals’ performance as of late, 
that’s probably the most honest statement we’ve heard from the 
Liberals in a long time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Banners for Wascana Park 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Speaker, creating a park out of a pile of 
bones by a muddy creek is one of our proudest 
accomplishments and its importance to our city is dramatic and 
ongoing. Wascana Park is the environmental, recreational, 
cultural, and entertainment heart of Regina. 
 
On Friday, I commented on the dragon boat festival to take 
place in the park in August. This morning, as a conclusion to 
Tourism Awareness Week and to complement Tourism 
Regina’s Rediscover Regina campaign, the Branch Out group 
of Wascana Centre announced a new summer banner program 
for Regina  70 banners designed by Marlon Janzen from the 
Royal Saskatchewan Museum, Barry Ellingson from the 
Science Centre, and Erik Norbraten of Brown Communications 
Group, feature friendly messages in vibrant colours. 
 
They will be fastened to street lights around the park to give a 
celebratory atmosphere. The Branch Out group consists of the 
major tenants of Wascana Park  the Legislative Assembly, 
MacKenzie Art Gallery, Royal Saskatchewan Museum, Centre 
of the Arts, Saskatchewan Science Centre and Wascana Centre 
Authority. This group of six has come together to increase the 
number of visitors to each attraction and to make each visit 
more informative and enjoyable  a fine example of initiative 
and cooperation. Wascana Centre is truly a happening place this 
summer. Mr. Speaker, see you in the park. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Foam Lake Community Hall Opens 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to congratulate the residents of Foam Lake and 
district on the opening of their new community hall. I had the 
pleasure of attending the ribbon cutting ceremony last Friday 
night. It was the culmination of a project that has been 
developed for many, many years. 
 
While the committee treasurer has actually only paid about 
$600,000 for the construction of this new building, the Foam 
Lake hall is actually worth about three-quarters of a million 
dollars. This is a testament to the amount of dedication and 
volunteer hours it took to plan and to build the hall. 
 

The result is a tremendous facility that will enable Foam Lake 
to host all kinds of events that otherwise would have bypassed 
the community. I ask that all members of the Assembly join me 
in congratulating the people of Foam Lake and district on their 
superb cooperative effort. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Communities Hold Fund-raising Walks 
 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fifth annual Hip 
Hip Hooray walks were held nationwide recently. Saskatoon’s 
was on June 7, and they did a very fine job. Congratulations to 
their committee chairperson, Clare Johnston, and publicity 
person, Lisa McGowan, and everyone else involved. 
 
Yorkton had its first annual Hip Hip Hooray walk this weekend 
on Sunday and raised over $8,000. Well done in Yorkton. 
 
Regina’s second annual Hip Hip Hooray walk, Sunday, saw 
more than 78 walkers raise more than $13,000. And that’s up 
from last year. 
 
The money raised is all put to use for research, education, and 
further equipment. Hip Hip Hooray not only raises money, but 
it educates us and reminds us all just how important our 
personal mobility is. It also reminds us how incredibly fortunate 
we are to live in a time and a place blessed with technologies 
and the resources needed to help us more fully enjoy life. 
 
Congratulations to the Regina Hip Hip Hooray committee 
chairperson, Carolyn Kim; orthopedic surgeon, Dr. Justin 
Naude; and other committee members, Blair Broadfoot, Lillian 
Andrews, Flo Karnes, Sandy Euteneier, Jody Smith; and 
sponsors Marlene King and John Booker. 
 
Next year’s Hip Hip Hooray fund-raising walk is May 27 in 
Wascana Park and will be bigger and better than ever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Donations 
 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier indicated to the media on Friday that his government is 
preparing to bring an amendment to The Election Act which, in 
his words will, “once and for all and absolutely totally clarify 
the situation and toughen up the Bill.” 
 
The Premier also indicated that these amendments will be 
passed, with or without the consent of the other parties in the 
legislature, in the next few days. 
 
How does the Premier propose to legislate a solution to the 
problem without a full examination of the extent to which the 
existing legislation has been either evaded or violated? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
member’s question, we don’t expect to have any difficulty 
understanding the problem by the time we’ve finished our 
consultations. 
 
We have met already with the third party. We have a meeting 
scheduled for later this afternoon with the Liberal Party. We’ll 
have follow-up meetings to those, if necessary. And between 
the three parties, we ought to be able to work out a provision 
which is crystal clear, which is beyond any dispute about 
interpretation, which will inform us in this legislature and all of 
the people in our parties as to what is required, what is not 
required. And we don’t think that there’s any special difficulty 
if we apply our minds to it in good faith. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That means we will be 
able to deal with matters from this point onwards. What about 
the law and the legislation that’s been in place that appears to 
have been evaded or violated. The Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education has shared with me a number of proposed 
amendments to The Election Act, but I question why we would 
go behind closed doors to discuss amendments that we agree 
have been contravened. 
 
Before making any changes to legislation we must first examine 
what appears to be a wilful attempt to circumvent the law. It 
appears to me that this government would rather try and fix a 
law and not answer for what they’ve done. 
 
Will the Premier explain how he intends to ensure that these 
violations are carefully and properly investigated? Will he 
initiate an independent inquiry into this matter to determine 
once and for all . . . to clear the air? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I first want to say, Mr. Speaker, in case 
my friend has not yet heard it from me or understood what I’ve 
been saying, that we do not agree that the Act has been 
contravened. Speaking for our party, speaking for our party, 
we’re in full compliance with the law and according to all the 
advice that we get, there is simply no doubt about that. So I 
want to make that clear. 
 
We have, before this Assembly, having passed second reading, 
ready for committee consideration, this very Act. And it would 
be irresponsible for us not to address ourself to this problem of 
interpretation and to revise those sections, recast them in such a 
way that there is simply no doubt about what is the election 
contribution disclosure law in this province. And the member 
must realize that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fact remains that 
these were not amendments that were included in the initial 
discussions that we had for changing The Election Act. They 
only came to light when in fact it was brought to the public’s 
attention that there was some question about impropriety. 
Mr. Speaker, when the controversy involving undisclosed party 
trust funds first came to the media’s attention last week, the  

minister in charge of Post-Secondary Education indicated that 
there was nothing wrong with anonymous donations to political 
parties. Only days later the minister is now saying there needs 
to be amendments to tighten up The Election Act to cover the 
loopholes involving disclosure. 
 
Will the minister explain why he appears to have come full 
circle on this issue? Is he for or against public disclosure of 
political donations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the remarks that the 
member attributes to me were taken in the context of a 
discussion about the history of our disclosure laws. That’s been 
a long history characterized  the member for Wood River 
may be interested in this because I think he’d learn something 
from it  characterized by decades of discussion about to what 
extent there should be disclosure of political contributions in 
this country. 
 
Now obviously the member from Wood River doesn’t know the 
view of his own party with respect to the disclosure of the 
names of political contributors, as was learned when the third 
party staff member went around to the Liberal office to find out 
that very information. 
 
We think this is an opportunity to clarify this law. We propose 
that there be full disclosure and we have said so in our Bill . . . 
in our draft amendments that we want to discuss with the 
Liberal leader this afternoon. That is our thinking on the matter. 
If the members opposite have opposite views, they’ll have an 
opportunity to indicate that to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Funding 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 
members opposite know, the chief of staff at the Moosomin 
Union Hospital has resigned because of funding restrictions 
imposed by this government. Dr. Steve Gordon said he was 
frustrated because the hospital is understaffed, there isn’t 
enough money for training, and morale is low. He said they 
can’t even get enough funding to properly train nursing staff 
and upgrade their life-saving skills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Health concerned that his drastic 
cuts to health care funding will force more and more doctors to 
resign in complete frustration over these funding cuts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. I would have been concerned about 
that, Mr. Speaker, had we not back-filled the federal Liberal 
cuts in health care. But I heard the doctor on the radio this 
morning, Mr. Speaker, and my impression from that interview 
was that this was largely a local issue, in that there was some 
frustration between the doctor and the health board in terms of 
health board decisions about funding and the speed at which 
certain letters had been answered and so on. 
  



2324  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

And I think it would be inappropriate for me to get involved in 
what I think is a local issue between the physician and the 
Pipestone District Health Board. But I do want to commend 
both the board and the doctor for being concerned about 
education, and I hope that they will resolve any differences that 
they may have. And I’m pleased that the doctor indicated also 
that he’s going to be continuing with some other activities in the 
area that apparently are not dependent upon the agreement with 
the board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, Dr. 
Gordon is not the only doctor who is frustrated with this 
government. The Canora Courier recently published a letter 
from the Canora Hospital medical staff to the Assiniboia Valley 
health district. They are concerned that the number of acute care 
beds in the district is failing to meet the needs of the people. 
The letter says: 
 

We urge you to listen to the people, consider the health 
care needs of the AVHD (Assiniboine Valley Health 
District), rescind your motion dealing with acute care beds, 
and provide a more adequate number of beds. 

 
Mr. Minister, are you going to do something to address the 
concerns of the medical staff in Canora and throughout the 
province, or do you plan to keep ignoring them until they too 
decide to quit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The question, Mr. Speaker, should always 
be whether the number of hospital beds exceeds the average 
daily census of the area. In other words, are there enough 
hospital beds to deal with the number of people requiring to be 
hospitalized? And the approach of the Liberal Party, as 
indicated by the member from Melfort, who was up in this 
House last week complaining about the fact that the number of 
hospital beds in that district, at Melfort hospital has gone from 
80 to, he said, 40 — so he said, why are half the beds gone? 
 
The answer, Mr. Speaker, is that the average daily census  in 
other words, the number of people that go to hospital in Melfort 
 is 32; 40 beds is adequate to deal with 32 people. You don’t 
need 80 beds, Mr. Speaker, to deal with 32 patients. 
 
But that is the sort of line that the Liberal Party wants to put out 
there to confuse the public. And now the member says, people 
are dying in the streets, when the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that if 
somebody needs to go to the hospital, there is a bed, there are 
enough hospital beds. This is just scaremongering on the part of 
the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kerrobert Court-house Closure 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, a few weeks ago, you heard from the people of  

Kerrobert and area tell you that they are opposed to the closure 
of the Kerrobert court-house. Over the weekend, the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan told you the same thing. Law society 
members say it’s unfair to force people to drive two or three 
hours to attend court, and they say the closure of the Kerrobert 
court-house will place rural people at a disadvantage. What else 
is new, Mr. Minister  another attack on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of what the law society is telling you, will 
you reconsider the decision to close the Kerrobert court-house? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
Leader of the Third Party for that question. I am meeting 
tomorrow with members from the city council in Melfort, 
including the mayor, along with the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. I met with 
them previously when I was in Kerrobert about six weeks ago 
and this is a follow-up from that meeting. 
 
We’re listening carefully to the concerns that the community 
has. We’re making sure that all people in Saskatchewan have 
excellent access to justice, excellent access to the courts, and 
that is our commitment, and that’s what we’ll be doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you say 
that there’s no need for a court-house in Kerrobert because we 
have the technology like fax machines and phones and what 
not. Mr. Minister, there are many instances where a person still 
is required to appear in court. I don’t know if you’ve been 
watching too many episodes of Star Trek, but I’m not aware of 
any technology that allows you to beam yourself to the 
court-house, Mr. Minister. 
 
But you have said that there are more affordable options, like 
holding trials by telephone. How exactly is that going to work, 
Mr. Minister? Is this phone-in court policy already in place? 
 
I also understand, Mr. Minister, that you’re planning on 
meeting with the people of Kerrobert tomorrow, representatives 
of the town of Kerrobert tomorrow. What will you be telling the 
people of Kerrobert tomorrow? What they want to hear from 
you is that the court-house is going to remain open. Is that what 
you’re going to be telling them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 
for the second question about this. For the information of the 
member, here in Saskatchewan we have been using telephone 
conference chambers applications in court for approximately 10 
years, and that’s something that we’ve been using very well. 
 
Also I’d like to inform the member that in Calgary; London, 
Ontario; Ottawa  places like this  people are appearing in 
court over television on remand from the jails. This is a kind of 
technology that is being used in other parts of Canada. We are 
not using it in Saskatchewan at this time, but we’re reviewing  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

that. 
 
The real issue is, will the people have access to hearings and 
court and trial in their communities. The answer to that is yes 
and that there will be opportunities for people to go to trial in 
Kindersley, Unity, Wilkie  all of the places around that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Labour or his designate. Mr. 
Minister, under your union-preference tendering policy, 
companies are forced to pay a 21 cent an hour payroll tax that 
goes into a fund to promote union activities. Now, Mr. Minister, 
very directly, can you tell us how much money has been 
collected to date through that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I do not have in my head or 
on paper in front of me that amount, but I want to say to the 
members opposite that all of those discussions regarding the 
issues that are dividing the construction industry are being 
discussed at a common table with all the partners there. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a supplemental for the minister. Mr. Minister, since you won’t 
tell us how much money has gone into the fund, we’ve done a 
little bit of rough estimating that we’d like to run past you. 
 
Now based on your figures of $30 million worth of projects 
awarded under the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement) and based on an 18-hour average wage and an 
estimate that labour makes up about 40 per cent of project costs, 
about $140,000 has been collected through this unnecessary 
payroll tax. That’s $140,000 that has been added onto the 
project costs for no good reason, Mr. Minister, and it is the 
taxpayers who get stuck with the bill. Quite frankly we don’t 
think that that’s fair or right. And, Mr. Minister, what benefit 
have the taxpayers seen from $140,000 payroll tax in this area? 
Name one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the construction industry in 
Saskatchewan has benefited from the fact that good quality, 
Saskatchewan-trained people have been working on the 
construction industry on this block of $30 million worth of 
work. And those who have an interest in building the 
Saskatchewan industry have agreed to sit down at a table, and 
those who have destroyed Saskatchewan and its industry in the 
past are sitting there asking questions, seeing if they can stop 
progress yet one more time. I just want to again applaud the 
efforts of those who want to build Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a second 
supplemental for the same minister. Mr. Minister, when this 
union fund was first introduced, the deputy premier at the time 
said the money would benefit non-union contractors through 
research into efficient construction methods. And now Bill  

Hyde said non-union contractors would benefit because the 
fund would be used to educate them about bidding on Crown 
projects. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
say that they have seen no evidence that even one dime of this 
fund has been used to the benefit of non-union contractors. Mr. 
Minister, this is a union fund designed to promote union 
activities, nothing else, and the taxpayers are paying for it 
through inflated Crown construction costs. 
 
Mr. Minister, why did the former minister and the 
vice-president of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) say this fund would help non-union contractors 
when that clearly is not the case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, there is a substantial 
commitment by the industry and by working people in this 
province to work with the training strategies in this province in 
order to build the strength and success of our construction 
industry here. 
 
The members opposite know that that’s been substantially 
challenged by the cut-backs by the federal government with 
respect to its contributions towards purchased seats in the 
secondary training institutions. 
 
I want to say one more time that it’s my belief that the 
construction association and the building trades and the CLR 
(Construction Labour Relations Association) are discussing this 
issue and many others with respect to how they can continue to 
build the Saskatchewan construction industry in a healthy way 
that supports Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan 
workers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rehabilitation Services 
 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to bring to the attention of this House a letter 
addressed to the Leader of the Third Party. And I would like to 
send this letter today over to the Minister of Health so that he 
may follow along. 
 
In this letter, Evelyn Ereiser of Edmonton expresses her 
concern over the state of health care being provided for her 
sister Bernice, a 59-year-old disabled woman who recently 
suffered a stroke. Mr. Speaker, Bernice Ereiser is undergoing 
daily physiotherapy while she remains in St. Paul’s Hospital. 
Unfortunately this rehab treatment will end next week because 
of the lack of bed space. She’ll be moved to a transition ward at 
Parkridge in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family of Bernice Ereiser feels that she is the 
victim of a priority system in which, and I quote from that 
letter: 
 

A 59-year-old mentally handicapped individual doesn’t 
stand a chance of getting the facility placement which she 
so desperately requires. 

  



2326  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Will the Minister of Health explain why the mentally 
challenged do not have a place in this government’s vision for 
wellness. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the member is 
aware that it is the physician that decides whether or not a 
person is admitted into an active rehabilitation program in 
Saskatoon. And apparently that has always been the case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I certainly have seen the letter the member refers to. I’ve looked 
into the situation. My understanding is that the physician felt 
her physical condition warranted a certain placement. 
Obviously the sister disagrees, and the member disagrees. But 
this is a decision the physician has made. 
 
I certainly will raise the concern with the district health board, 
but this is the medical decision that has been arrived at. I don’t 
think it has much to do, Mr. Speaker, with any level of funding. 
I think it’s simply a medical decision that has been made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Human Rights Commission Funding 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission sent out a press 
release a few days ago outlining its concerns about its budget 
cuts. Chief Commissioner Donna Greschner stated: 
 

This cut has caused an immediate reduction in educational 
services and we are gravely concerned that the cut may 
also cause a further delay in investigating cases. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I find this to be very disturbing because some 
human-right complaints are being backlogged for as long as two 
years. Many of the people filing complaints are suffering 
workplace harassment because of their sex, race, or age. A long 
waiting period to have their case heard could eventually 
discourage people from seeking help from the Human Rights 
Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please tell the people of 
Saskatchewan who desperately need the assistance of the 
Human Rights Commission why their access is being limited? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 
member for that question. As we all know in this House, and 
we’ve heard usually once, maybe ten times a day, we have had 
to make some very difficult decisions in this government to deal 
with the fact that the amount that we were to receive from 
Ottawa was not what we expected. And this was something that 
ended up being a situation where all departments, all agencies 
of government, were asked to do their part in this. And the 
Human Rights Commission has done their part and has assisted 
us in this way. 
 

We in the Department of Justice are working very closely with 
the people at the Human Rights Commission to make sure that 
there are not any greater delays in any cases that go to that 
Human Rights Commission. We’ve also been looking carefully 
with their staff at how some of the matters are dealt with. And I 
think that we can say that we have a very good Human Rights 
Commission in Saskatchewan. It’s effective, efficient, and it is 
doing a good job for all of us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights Commission 
releases its review of services this fall, but we already know the 
staff is trying to process a tremendous backlog of complaints. 
Will the minister commit to upholding the principles of equality 
and justice by making a concerted effort to assist the 
commission in improving its delivery of services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond to 
that by saying that this is something that we are continually 
doing. It’s something that’s always part of government policy, 
that we work carefully with all of the agencies and commissions 
that we are involved with, and that this commitment is not 
something I have to make now, it’s something that’s part of our 
commitment as government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Living Conditions 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions today 
are for the minister responsible for Northern Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the far northern part of this province 
face extremely high costs of living every day. One litre of gas in 
Uranium City sells for about $1.18. A loaf of bread in Stony 
Rapids costs $2.60. Two litres of milk costs $4.50. And even 
one package of Kraft Dinner costs more than a $1.50 in Stony 
Rapids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to know what this government is doing to 
help these people living in the far North, and will this 
government commit to subsidizing freight costs to the North in 
order that costs for daily essentials come more in line with those 
paid in southern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca 
may not know that indeed there used to be a program in the ‘70s 
with the NDP (New Democratic Party) government of the day 
of $250,000 subsidy a year. That was cut back by the Tory 
government later on. We have replaced it now, Mr. Speaker, 
with about a $5 million program to go to the people on welfare 
and we’ve been helping them in that sense. The money goes 
directly to the families, Mr. Speaker, rather than subsidizing the 
transport companies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, the people in the far North are 
very worried what will happen to their communities come 1997. 
Next year the Canadian Coast Guard is going to stop  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

dredging the McMurray River so that the barge that carries 
daily supplies can get from Fort McMurray up to Lake 
Athabasca and into the far northern communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the far North need a road through 
there. This government has committed some money to the 
project, but the people of the North need to know what this 
government is doing to prepare for 1997 in order to ensure that 
there’ll be more money to construct a high-quality road in order 
to maintain the supply of goods to the people of the far North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to probably 
say my speech about the 10th time; if you remember, that 
indeed the priorities in regards to northern development and the 
monies that we had, was to put $6 million on the Cumberland 
bridge. And we put about one and a half million dollars in 
regards to the road in relation to Grandmother’s Bay. And then 
we did some improvements on the forestry area in and around 
Canoe Narrows for the people to get part of the forestry 
industry. And also on the Athabasca road, Mr. Speaker, as well 
as, you know, part done with Garson Lake this year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have had our commitment, etc., and that 
everything . . . as money becomes available in regards to 
northern roads, we will continue to build in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker; it is now the middle 
of 1996 and another problem from a far northern community of 
Stony Rapids, a town that is living without the basic essentials 
of water and sewer. Mr. Speaker, the people in Stony Rapids 
have been desperately, for years, calling for proper water and 
sewer services. They’ve been asking this government on a 
constant basis. We are now moving into the 21st century, and 
there are still people in this province without water and sewer, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is this government doing for the people of Stony Rapids? 
And will the minister stand up today and commit to putting in 
water and sewer system in Stony Rapids so that people in these 
northern, far northern, communities can move into the 21st 
century like the rest of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca 
is a little bit behind the times. I talked with the representatives 
from Stony Rapids about this, that we had indeed put in about 
$90 million over 20 communities over our first term in office, 
and indeed when money becomes available . . . If it was not for 
the $114 million cut-backs, Mr. Speaker, we would have the 
roads and also the sewer and water in northern Saskatchewan, 
but in fact the federal $114 million cut is affecting our 
budgeting in regards to the North. 
 
I wish that the member would write letters to the people, you 
know, and his MPs (Member of Parliament) from northern  

Saskatchewan — who are invisible in the North — to really 
deal with the issues of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 76  An Act to 
amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union 
Hospital Act and The Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948 and 
to make consequential amendments to other Acts be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, it’s high time we had a chance to 
talk about the NDP government’s disregard for health care. And 
with a Bill like The Health Districts Amendment Act on the 
table it seems like a perfect time to talk about what’s so terribly 
wrong with this government’s health legislation. 
 
I would hate to see this government continue on their current 
path when it comes to health care in this province. I would hate 
to see the situation get even worse than it already is. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it has to be that way. I think there are 
solutions if the NDP government would take the time to look at 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of every person in every community 
throughout Saskatchewan who has suffered because of this 
government’s action, I feel I must stand up in the House today 
to make a stand on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen firsthand how devastating this 
government has been to health care. We have spoken with 
people in our own communities and in communities across 
Saskatchewan who are frustrated and confused  not only that, 
they are also afraid. These are the people who have been 
personally touched by health care cuts. They are the ones who 
have seen their parents, their children, their families, and their 
friends, shamelessly ignored by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if this government remembers back to 
March 4 to a Shellbrook woman named Julie Walker. She spent 
three agonizing days at the Royal University Hospital in 
Saskatoon waiting to have her broken leg attended to. It was 
only after she contacted the media that she received care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Health minister’s reaction would be to blame 
the hospital or to blame the federal government or to blame 
Grant Devine’s Tories. But, Mr. Speaker, we know this is a 
cover-up and the Health minister knows it’s a cover-up. The 
truth is, it is the provincial government who must take 
responsibility. When a case falls through the cracks, this  
  



2328  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

government owes it to the people to look into it and to make 
sure that that never, ever happens again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is people like Julie Walker who have seen how 
painful the NDP government cuts have been. 
 
And what about 84-year-old Moose Jaw resident Jack 
Nicholson? The members opposite should remember him. He is 
the man who suffered a fall while left in the hands of a home 
care worker last fall. His daughter, Lorraine Michon, was 
worried about her father, Mr. Speaker. But when she contacted 
the Moose Jaw Union Hospital she was told there weren’t 
enough beds to admit her father. He eventually died, Mr. 
Speaker, because of a tragic accident and because the health 
care system didn’t provide adequate support. 
 
Why do you think there weren’t enough beds? Does the 
Minister of Health care and realize that it’s severe funding cuts 
to health districts that have forced bed closure throughout the 
province and have prevented badly needed beds being added to 
other units? Mr. Speaker, I would sincerely hope that he does 
start to think about it before the situation is played over and 
over and over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pearl Fitzpatrick’s family is worried about the 
health care cuts that were just too deep. Ms. Fitzpatrick, who is 
from Eatonia, was shipped off to Royal University Hospital in 
Saskatoon where she waited five days to have a broken ankle 
examined by a specialist. 
 
Two days later she was released. Why? Because once again 
there was a bed shortage. When home care staff finally 
examined her, they found she had developed gangrene. Her 
second visit to the hospital lasted about a month because 
doctors did not know whether she would lose her leg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a senseless tragedy and a tragedy that 
should not be happening in our province. The people who 
choose to live here despite oppressive government policies are 
compassionate and caring. They care about each other and they 
want to see a decent quality of health care for all the residents. 
When they hear these stories, how do you think they feel and 
how do you think it affects them? Well let me tell you, Mr. 
Speaker. They are scared. They are very afraid. They’re afraid 
to trust a government that lets these things happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the examples don’t end. The member from Wood 
River, my hon. colleague from Wood River, has brought up the 
situation of Vicki Lissel in the House several times this session. 
In case the members opposite need reminding, she is the woman 
who has been asking for government compensation for victims 
of hepatitis C. She is the woman who the Health minister 
refuses to meet with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government may think it can turn its back on 
these people. Maybe the members opposite think if they ignore 
the problem it will go away. That certainly seems consistent 
with their actions in the past. 
 
But I want to ask . . . I want them to ask themselves, is this 
right? Is it right for these people who are forced to suffer  

silently, alone, even though they did nothing wrong? Doesn’t 
society at least owe them some compassion and understanding? 
I would hope that the NDP members would agree. But their 
cold silence tells a sad story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on about individual cases that 
we might be able to bring up in the House, because 
unfortunately these stories are not rare. Tragedies like these are 
happening all over the province. Still this government continues 
to hem and haw and to run away from their responsibility. It 
can’t be our fault, they say. They frantically look around and 
start pointing the fingers blindly. But if they were honest and if 
they were compassionate, they would take a long, hard look in 
the mirror and realize they can do something about it. If only 
they want to, they can do something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can also illustrate this government’s lack of 
commitment to health care by looking at the state of facilities 
throughout the province. My colleague, the member from 
Athabasca, stood up in this House not so long ago to describe 
the horrendous conditions of the hospital in La Loche. 
 
Can the members opposite remember his description? Did they 
listen when he talked about the trailers pushed together with a 
leaking roof and wiring problems? Did they think about the 
people in northern communities who have to rely on this facility 
to provide health care? I hope they did, Mr. Speaker, because 
it’s a pitiful example of what this government is doing for 
health care. 
 
And by no means are the northern people the only people who 
are suffering. People in rural communities throughout 
Saskatchewan are falling victim to the government’s 
wide-edged axe. Look at Swift Current. They are losing the 
Swift Current Care Centre and are watching in disbelief as 
seniors are coldly kicked out of their home  a home they’ve 
known for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health used words like 
consolidation and streamlining to justify the decision to close 
down this facility that our sick and our elderly rely upon. This is 
simply unacceptable. People are not objects to be toyed with 
and moved around at the will of the NDP government. People 
deserve to be treated with dignity and respect. 
 
Why can’t the members opposite see that? When will they 
finally realize that the cuts they make in the back rooms of the 
legislature are the same cuts that are tearing down our entire 
health care system? Instead they decide to play games with 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
One of the most despicable tactics is pitting communities 
against each other and making them fight for badly needed 
health care dollars. This is a cowardly strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
How can this government take a situation involving the life and 
death of Saskatchewan people and make it into a competition? 
 
For example, the Fort Qu’Appelle Indian Hospital was looking 
for a greater share of funding, and rightly so. It needed this 
money to keep programs going. But at the same time the people 
from Balcarres and Lestock were upset because that meant their  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

share of the pie would be less. And no, it’s not a matter of 
greed, at least not on the parts of these hospitals. It’s a matter of 
ensuring the safety and care of actual people who are hurting, 
who are suffering. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all these cuts are creating extreme anxiety among 
the sick and the elderly. They are worried sick that no one will 
take care of them when they can no longer care for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, getting sick or old should not be a punishment. 
But this government doesn’t seem to understand that. Our 
seniors are facing an uncertain future after devoting years to 
developing this province, and after years and years of working 
to make Saskatchewan safe and a caring place to live, they are 
now afraid. They are afraid that their commitment to 
Saskatchewan has made no difference whatsoever. 
 
Look at the situation at the Eaglestone Lodge in Kamsack. 
Eighteen seniors were forced to live in a state of anxiety 
because they did not know what would happen to them if the 
lodge closed permanently. Is this the compassionate health care 
system the NDP promised the people of Saskatchewan? Is this 
the same government who, when in opposition, asked the 
Tories, why should the sick and the elderly carry the burden for 
your incompetency? 
 
Well I ask the members opposite the exact same thing today. 
Why should the sick and the elderly carry the burden for your 
incompetence? Mr. Speaker, what can health boards do, 
especially when this government introduces a Bill like this one 
which gives even more power to the minister? Health boards 
already have their hands tied despite the government’s promise 
that they would be true representatives of the people. The fact is 
that government holds the purse-strings and they will continue 
to hold the purse-strings after this Bill is pushed through. 
 
(1430) 
 
The most striking example of the government exercising its 
control is the Plains Health Centre here in Regina. A Health 
department official, Deb Jordan, sent a letter to the acting chief 
operation officer of the Regina District Health Board which 
clearly shows this. The letter said, “interim operating funding 
for the district is predicted on the basis of the board moving 
ahead with the closure of the Plains Health Centre”. Isn’t that 
great, Mr. Speaker? Now the government is threatening our 
elected representatives on these health boards. 
 
Is that a government that believes in being accountable to the 
people? I certainly don’t think so, and neither did the people in 
this province. Shortly after that decision, a group of concerned 
people placed an ad in the Leader-Post which said, “with a gun 
like that in its head, what choice was left”. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
what choice was left? 
 
From what I have seen of this NDP government, this is exactly 
the goal they are aiming for. They will do anything to ensure 
the power remains within the tight grasp of government. It 
doesn’t matter that over 70,000 people have signed petitions 
objecting to the closure. It doesn’t matter that the facility is 
used for residents from right across the province. It just doesn’t  

matter to the government what people really want or what they 
really need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time for the government to re-evaluate 
its priorities, and I would suggest that they do this before they 
pass legislation that will affect health care in our province to a 
greater detriment. I want them to think about the individual 
stories they have heard in this House, not only from myself but 
from my hon. colleagues. And to think about the stories that 
they are hearing in their own constituencies, because if they 
take the time to listen I believe they may finally hear what we 
have been hearing for several years now. People are scared and 
unsure and are losing faith in their government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before this Bill is brought up in the Committee of 
the Whole, I implore the members opposite to think about what 
legislation like Bill 76 will mean to the people who they were 
elected to represent. After all, this is their main job. Their job is 
not to stand behind poor policies and watch health care get 
ripped apart by unfair legislation. They do not have to support 
every bad decision the Health minister or the Premier proposes. 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that my words here today may have had 
some impact, and I hope that we will see some real, valuable 
changes in this Bill and in other health legislation this 
government brings forward during this session. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take a 
few moments today to discuss the impacts, in the amendments 
to The Health Districts Act, that it will have on the people of 
this province, especially those in northern Saskatchewan. 
Before I get into the details about the effects that this Bill will 
have on the people of the North, I’d like to speak in more 
general terms about the impacts and effects that this Bill will 
have on all people across the province for many years to come. 
 
As we have said before in this House, the Bill before us today 
deals only with the legal aspects of district health boards. None 
of the concerns of health boards or of the people of this 
province have even begun to be addressed by this Bill. This 
government has been running from health care issues from the 
day this session started, and I have a feeling that this is going to 
continue until the very last day we sit in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all have seen how health care in this province 
has been ripped apart since this government came to power in 
1991. Yes, they blamed the problems on the former Tory 
administration in 1991, and they continue to do so today. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, enough is enough. It is due time that this 
government take responsibility for its action. It is due time that 
this government begins to work for the people of the province 
instead of against them. 
 
This government has come up with a good scheme to get out of 
the responsibility for cuts to health care  simply blame the 
district health boards. The government makes the unpopular 
decision, then the Minister of Health, each and every day in this 
House, gets up and says that these boards are autonomous and 
they’re the ones making the decisions. Well I’d like to tell that 
member that he should remember that he and his government 
are the ones funding these health boards. The government is 
holding the purse-strings, and this is all their doing. 
  



2330  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

The story is somewhat different in northern Saskatchewan 
where there are currently no health boards. What the 
government tells us when you question health care in the North, 
that it is the federal government’s fault. 
 
Well I’m really beginning to wonder why we need a provincial 
government at all. The district health boards make all the rural 
and urban health care decisions, and the federal government 
makes all the northern choices. What do we need a Minister of 
Health for? I guess he is the one who appoints the board 
members and tells them what they can and can’t do. 
 
I want to discuss for a moment the newly formed Lloydminster 
Health District. Why is it that this government can create this 
district and the people of the North are still waiting? Where is 
this government’s priorities? 
 
The biggest problems with the creation of the Lloydminster 
Health District Board is that its entire structure will be 
determined in the regulations. What is there to hide and why all 
the secrecy? I think that we would all agree that there has to be 
a need for a health board created in Lloydminster. So I’m not 
sure what the government is trying to hide or get away with. 
 
For a government that claimed that the district health boards are 
autonomous and make their own decisions, this new Bill seems 
to be imposing a number of restrictions on these new boards. 
Not only does this Bill impose new, oppressive enforcement 
provisions against municipalities, it also creates new restrictions 
on the power that district health boards have to buy or sell 
property. 
 
It seems to me that this government wants all the control but 
none of the responsibility. Well let me tell the members 
opposite this: you just can’t have it both ways. Either give up 
the control or accept the responsibility. This government was 
elected to be accountable to the people of the province and I 
think it is time that it started to govern and legislate in an open 
and an accountable manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many northern communities are lacking basic 
health facilities. District health boards have not yet been set up 
in northern communities and the people of the North are tired of 
waiting for equal health care and health care facilities. 
 
I’m still finding it hard to believe that this government can 
continue to say it is committed to the people of the North, yet 
four health Bills are before us today and not one of them deal 
with issues in northern Saskatchewan. Municipalities are 
mentioned, urban areas are mentioned, but once again the 
people of the North have been completely ignored. 
 
This Bill causes a great deal of concern for the people of La 
Loche. People at St. Martin’s Hospital there are especially 
worried because the hospital simply does not have the money to 
repay any debts that were incurred by former union hospital 
boards. We all know that, the state of health care facilities in the 
North, and this is going to be a major problem. How can anyone 
expect the La Loche hospital to repay debts of a union hospital 
board? It is crazy to think that these mice-infested health care 
facilities have extra money sitting around to pay old  

debts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have recently spoken with a number of 
northern health care facilities who were kind enough to review 
this legislation and tell us their views. Section 19 of this Bill is 
amended so that a municipality will have to pay the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board interest on any outstanding debt 
at prime rate of interest of the chartered bank that holds a 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, northern municipalities are still in debt. 
These small northern municipalities have very little economic 
base and there is simply no way to raise money. La Loche is no 
different. 
 
I will go out on a limb here and state that when this piece of 
legislation was drafted, northern Saskatchewan was not in 
mind. This is a not a problem only in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
Rural municipalities are lacking funding in economic bases as 
well. I wonder if the minister will be able to explain where 
these small northern municipalities will be able to come up with 
extra money to pay interest owed on an old debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, like many others tabled in this House, 
will be better understood once we are able to look at the 
regulations. 
 
With regards to by-laws or medical, dental, and chiropractic 
staff, there’s very little of this in the North. Enacting by-laws to 
govern medical staff and their procedures will be extremely 
costly to northern health care facilities. And to be honest, there 
is such a lack of medical staff that by-laws are really not urgent 
at this time. Staff is. 
 
Northern health care facilities see this type of legislation as 
totally out of their league. These people need funding. They 
need better facilities. They need more health care professionals. 
What they don’t need are more laws telling them how to govern 
the few people who do work in this particular area. 
 
This Bill also indicates that there will be regulations to govern 
dental and chiropractic staff. I will quote from a letter that I got 
from Violet Lemaigre of St. Martin’s Hospital with regards to 
this section. She writes, and I quote: “Would we have access to 
these services in the North? And if so, how?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask if this government is going to 
commit itself to work to get better dental services in the North. 
Will chiropractic services be available to the people in the far 
northern communities? These are questions we have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northern communities are very worried about the 
future of their health care facilities. These facilities are falling 
down on the people of northern Saskatchewan, and it is 
extremely difficult to attract quality physicians and dental 
hygienists in northern communities, yet all this government is 
worrying about is by-laws and regulations to govern specialists 
that do not exist in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I think the time to develop northern health districts is long 
overdue. District health boards need to be established in  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

northern Saskatchewan. I understand that four district planning 
committees have submitted recommendations for the formation 
of district health boards in the North. When can we expect to 
see some action from this government? 
 
Interim district health boards are going to be appointed. When 
would elections take place for the permanent board members? 
 
It seems to me that every time I question this government about 
health facilities and health boards in the North, I am told that 
they are in the planning stages or in the reviewing stages. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, now is the time to move into the implementation 
and construction stages of this process. We in the North have 
been waiting long enough. We have had enough of fluffy 
legislation that continues to ignore the people of the North, 
especially those in the north-western part of this province. I 
wonder if the implementation of the Athabasca health facility 
will move along as quickly as the La Ronge facility did. These 
people have waited long enough. Please stop ignoring their 
needs. 
 
New section 26.1 of The Health Districts Act is also an area of 
concern for northern residents. This section establishes a 
relationship between district health boards, which are not yet in 
existence in the North, and affiliates. In order to provide 
funding, the government and the affiliates will enter into 
agreements. But, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t got no health district 
board yet in that area, so how could we be part of that process. 
 
Due to the fact that St. Martin’s Hospital is the only acute care 
facility in the proposed health district, if an agreement with the 
government cannot be reached, this hospital will be forced to 
close. I really don’t see how this will be of any help to the 
people of the North. 
 
I do understand though that it is difficult for this government to 
remember northern Saskatchewan. After all, as the explanatory 
notes in clause 13 state, that an amendment had to be made 
because “reference to The Northern Municipalities Act was 
inadvertently omitted when the Act was drafted and passed in 
1993.” 
 
This makes me really wonder what the current minister for 
Northern Affairs was doing during the drafting of this Bill. We 
all know that Northern Affairs deals with all aspects of life in 
the North  education, social services, housing, and yes, even 
health. This only goes on to confirm my belief that this 
government has no commitment to the North. Even their own 
northern member forgets about northern legislation. 
 
This government claims equal treatment of the North. They 
claim that services are equal; maintenance is equal; funding is 
equal. Yes, the people of the North are so far behind that it is no 
longer acceptable any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sincerely wish that this government would take 
the time to see what the people of this province really need and 
really want. This is in regards to health care and services and 
facilities. I think that if the people of the North were consulted, 
and if we were consulted from the start, we would see that their 
needs and their wants are fairly simple. They need facilities that  

are up to standards of 1990s. They want accessibility of the 
services similar to those available to the people of southern 
Saskatchewan before all the hospitals and care homes were 
closed. 
 
They need health care professionals who are trained to deal with 
problems in northern Saskatchewan. They need social workers 
who have knowledge of native traditions and ways of life. They 
need addiction treatment centres closer to home so that they 
don’t lose touch with their communities and their families. 
They need health care centres in order to get proper health and 
sanitation problems under control. They need health care 
education. They need to teach these people alongside of them 
how they can both better lives in spite of conditions in which 
many of them live in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
They need a common bond and a common voice to be able to 
express their concerns to this government. It is due time that the 
district health boards be established. It is due time that health 
board members be elected. And it is due time that this 
government started paying attention to the people of the North 
with regards to health care, social problems, and economic 
issues. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I am happy, Mr. 
Speaker, today to enter into the debate on Bill 76, An Act to 
amend The Health Districts Act. And while, Mr. Speaker, we 
agree with much of what the Liberal caucus members have been 
saying, there are a few points, I think, that we should add to this 
debate for consideration by the government before they pass 
this particular piece of law into our society as a tool for people 
to work and live by. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a quote that you will be hearing many 
times from our members in probably the days to come. The 
quote is from the Minister of Health, who recently said in this 
House, and I quote: “Either you believe in local decision 
making or you do not.” That quote may go down in history as 
one of the most violated quotations ever to be repeated in this 
House. 
 
(1445) 
 
The legislative agenda of this session shows quite clearly that 
the Minister of Health in fact does not believe in local decision 
making. For while he says one thing to make it sound as though 
he’s caring and interested in local control and local decision 
making, his actions and the type of Bill that we see before us 
today say exactly the opposite  a direct contradiction which 
we intend on pointing out. 
 
And perhaps after we do that, Mr. Speaker, the minister will be 
good enough to take a look backwards and say, well maybe 
we’ve gone too far, maybe we’ve made a mistake. And maybe 
in the process of democratic debate, he will see the error of his 
ways and will change some of the things in this Act and in the 
other health Acts to make our province truly a better place to 
live. 
 
Several of the Bills before us this afternoon are clearly aimed at 
giving back to the minister a broad range of powers over health  
  



2332  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

districts and the facilities that they manage. And that is the key, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
For weeks, whenever the destructive consequences of this 
government’s health policies have come to light, the Health 
minister has passed the buck to the districts. Don’t blame me, 
the minister will say. He’ll say, it’s all the health boards; they’re 
doing it. It’s their decisions that are running the health facilities 
out in the country and in the cities. It’s the health boards. I’ve 
got nothing to do with it. He shrugs his shoulders and simply 
walks away from all the problems as though he’s scot-free and 
clean as a whistle. 
 
Well it just isn’t really working that way, Mr. Speaker. Because 
at the same time that he has been putting on that charade, he has 
been putting legislation before this House that would turn the 
district boards even more into scapegoats and puppets of the 
government with no power to do anything except to catch the 
flak from the minister on one side and from the general public 
on the other. 
 
It’s a no win situation for people that are on these health boards 
even as things stand now. And after this particular piece of 
legislation is passed, they will even have their hands tied in a 
worse fashion. And in fact they will become either puppets of 
the state or clearly the footballs of the general public. I can’t 
really see why anybody would ever want to stay on a health 
board after these kind of conditions are imposed upon them, 
because truly, democracy and the democratic process that they 
thought they were entering is being violated and will not be 
allowed to work. 
 
Already the minister controls the purse-strings of the boards so 
tightly that they have little choice but to make cuts and close 
facilities that the minister doesn’t have the guts to do for 
himself. So what happens . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I understand the hon. member 
would want to be using parliamentary language, and just 
selected a word which falls outside the realm of parliamentary 
language. And I’ll ask him simply to withdraw the remark and 
continue his debate. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  I withdraw that unparliamentary word, Mr. 
Speaker. Clearly the minister does not have the intestinal 
fortitude with which to see through some of the decisions that 
he makes, and we want to make sure that he understands that 
the people of our province see him as the one who is 
responsible directly for making these decisions. And even 
though he may pass a piece of legislation that provides him with 
even greater powers to pass the buck and to blame other people, 
he will ultimately be held responsible. 
 
Now with this legislation the minister extends his powers even 
further  even further than he already has. Now I’ve just 
pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that by controlling the purse-strings 
you basically turn the boards into puppets. Well it goes even 
further now. You not only control the purse-strings and force 
people to make decisions by the way that you administer the 
money or the way that you tell people that they can get the use 
of the money, but now he goes further. 

For starters, the minister now would have the power to restrict 
the amount of real property that the health boards can acquire or 
dispose of. This clearly puts the decision to build or to close a 
hospital right back on the minister’s desk. Because now the 
health boards will of course be restricted by this new regulation 
in the legislation and how the real property of health boards can 
be handled. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s very important. It would be so easy for 
us to have slipped past this legislation and let it pass and not 
have taken note of what the implications can be here. But 
realistically, if you allow the health boards to be put into this 
kind of a position of having to account to the minister for the 
buildings that they’re going to build or the ones that they’re 
going to dispose of, if that accountability is no longer 
completely in the hands of the health boards, then the minister 
has taken control of this aspect of health care in all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
For some reason, this limitation was not thought to be necessary 
when The Health Districts Act was originally passed. Of course 
back then the minister could appoint his own people to the 
boards without having to worry about anybody that might be 
considered a little bit against the government, or even a lot 
against the government, getting involved, because they weren’t 
elected; they were strictly appointed. 
 
Now that the boards are at least partially elected, they might 
actually go off and make some sort of independent decision. 
And of course the government is saying, through this 
legislation, that we can’t have that and we won’t allow that. So 
what they’re really saying is that we don’t trust you now that 
you’re elected and so we’re going to change the rules to make 
sure that we’re in total and absolute control. 
 
What point is there to a democratically elected board if they no 
longer have any direct decision-making powers and any 
controls? 
 
So further to this Bill, it limits the boards in terms of policies 
that they can set. Now if you are limited now, of course, in 
terms of policies, you not only can’t handle the physical aspects 
of health care, which is the building structures, you now have to 
worry about policies. Well health care, it seems to me, depends 
largely on buildings and largely on policies  policies like we 
heard about in Alberta. 
 
In fact just a few days ago, a young man was turned down for 
certain kinds of treatment. Unfortunately he passed away, and 
that was the news that was on last night. And it’s unfortunate, 
but policy was what decided what that government would pay 
for or not pay for. So policy is very important, for those people 
who don’t understand that policy is important. 
 
That was a policy decision made by a government through their 
health system, a decision that some kinds of medical care are 
too expensive. And so that policy is we don’t pay for them, we 
don’t allow them to be brought to the general public. And of 
course, if you want it, you can find another source of financing, 
which of course in that case, people did, but it unfortunately 
was too late. 
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

But I use that as an example to show how policy affects what 
goes on in our medical system and why it is so important for 
health boards to have the right to make policy, because policy 
being made at the local districts means, of course, having 
control over situations that might be unique to a certain district 
in our province. 
 
For example, the member talks about northern Saskatchewan a 
few minutes ago in his address, and obviously there are some 
distinct kinds of problems up North that we would never have 
in the city of Regina. I guess distance itself could be the most 
important one that would readily come to mind for everyone. 
You’re thousands of miles from anywhere. 
 
No one really chooses to get away from the North, I’m sure, 
because it’s a beautiful place to live. But the reality of life is 
that if you’ve cut a blood vessel or an artery, you’re likely 
going to die. A very simple little wound that in the city could be 
patched up in a matter of minutes can be a death sentence to 
you up North. So policies of how you rescue people and get 
them to safety are extremely important. 
 
Those same kinds of policies may not necessarily be necessary 
or apply in Regina. You couldn’t, for example, talk about 
landing a helicopter, I’m sure, in downtown Regina to pick up 
somebody to take them for a medical emergency. Obviously the 
system that we have now with a good ambulance and good 
ambulance attendant can take care of that problem. 
 
But in northern Saskatchewan it might very realistically be 
proper for the health board to have arrangements with the 
military to bring in a helicopter in a severe situation to help get 
patients moved in and out. Those kind of policy decisions, of 
who calls them and when they should be called, all should be 
dependent on the people that know and understand those 
processes. Those kind of policies now could be in jeopardy and 
could possibly be taken out of the hands of those local health 
boards and be restricted by a decision of this piece of legislation 
providing the minister with a veto power basically on what 
everybody decides to do. 
 
And in the minister’s own second reading speech, he says this 
Bill addresses the matter of model district medical staff by-laws 
which, among other things, recognizes the shift from 
facility-based models of health delivery to a broader, 
community-based approach. This amendment proposes to 
formally ensure that district health boards and affiliates will 
have such by-laws in place. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, the minister will decide what policies the 
boards shall have, and if they disagree, he will simply pass 
regulations to impose policies or use his veto to block the 
conflicting by-laws. 
 
So there you have it. The minister is still in absolute control. 
And so when he says, it’s not my fault, I had nothing to do with 
it, the health boards made the decision  the truth of the matter 
is that he has always had the responsibility and he should 
always have the responsibility. 
 
And we’re saying that he shouldn’t duck the responsibility of  

admitting that he has it, that he is the minister, but he should 
also then have the bravery to allow the health boards to make 
decisions and to live by those decisions when they are made. 
 
How can this amendment possibly be reconciled with the 
statement, either you believe in local decision making or you do 
not. And obviously it can’t be reconciled because the two are 
tremendously different  the two stated positions. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is a very dangerous provision in this 
Bill to disband district health boards and impose his own 
administrator. Once again, we see just how afraid this 
government is of elected health boards, because he provides 
himself with the power to completely just fire elected people. 
 
I mean how do you in a democracy say, you’re elected by the 
people, you got 52 per cent of the vote or 51 per cent plus; but 
we don’t like what you’re doing, we don’t like the decisions 
you’re making, so you’re fired. Good bye, adios; you’re no 
longer in business; I’m taking over and we now have a 
dictatorship. Well, Fidel, what’s new in Cuba? I mean it sounds 
to me like we’ve gone back a couple of steps here. 
 
Well anyway, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this Bill provides, and 
that’s what the people should understand that it does provide. It 
provides a dictatorial approach to health care, and it does not 
provide what the government itself has said it wanted to give to 
people, which is the freedom of choice and the right to make 
decisions. 
 
So we don’t say that necessarily some dictatorial things are 
wrong in life, but it is desperately wrong to try to snow the 
people and tell them that you’re giving them the right to choice 
when in fact through the back door you’re setting up the 
dictatorship with dictatorial powers. 
 
Certainly and clearly there are some good reasons for this 
provision, and we do recognize them, and we’ve talked about 
that. If a district somehow becomes insolvent or if there were 
some emergencies, then the government would have to step in. 
And of course those are a couple of things that we thought 
about when we decided that you can’t just come out with a 
blanket statement saying that the minister is absolutely never 
going to have the power to do anything. Because if you do that 
of course, then there can be a crisis where the minister 
obviously must step in. And you can’t expect the Premier to call 
a sitting of the legislature just to give the minister the power to 
take over a wreck out in the country some place. 
 
So obviously if a health board has blown the family inheritance 
and all of the health board’s money and cashed in all of the 
local jewellery and sold the furniture and maybe even sold the 
hotel to some guy in Alberta or whatever, and the first thing you 
know the hospital is converted into a hotel rather and it’s been 
sold off  and all these kinds of silly things might possibly 
come true somewhere. We never know, with all this gambling 
that’s going on, what people might try next. 
 
But obviously there are situations where the minister does have 
to have the opportunity to be able to step in to straighten things 
out. So I guess it’s the old story  well you’d like to have  
  



2334  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

everything black and white but we do see the need to have a 
little grey area here. And we never did say from the start that we 
don’t want the minister to have the power to run an efficient 
and effective health care system. 
 
But don’t tell us one thing on one hand and do the other thing 
through the back door. So I would suggest however, Mr. 
Speaker, that such circumstances, that they could just as easily 
be dealt with on an ad hoc basis either through emergency 
legislation before this House or through orders of the council. 
 
So this is another thought that we had, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
could possibly, if we were in sitting time, deal with 
emergencies through the sitting of the legislature. At that time 
we can give the minister an emergency power, but of course the 
Executive Council would also have that ability. And that of 
course takes, I think, a reasonable approach to dealing with 
situations of crises during non-sitting times. The cabinet of 
course is always available and I’m sure that they would have no 
aversion to giving the minister the power necessary to clean up 
a bad situation if one should happen to arise. 
 
Now if the minister insists on this amendment I would suggest 
that it at least spell out a mechanism for recognizing and 
dealing with an emergency situation. In other words, tell us how 
you’re going to deal with emergencies. Be out front with us. 
State it in the legislation. Don’t leave it up to the imagination 
simply, with the minister having veto powers to do whatever he 
pleases. And I think that’s, in fairness, what people are looking 
for in our democracy, is some kind of guideline that they can 
understand ahead of time and not leave everything up to the last 
minute when a crisis hits. 
 
(1500) 
 
It is an obvious invitation for an abuse of power by the minister. 
It enables him to appoint a public administrator for any other 
reason that is in the public interest by his interpretation. And 
that, we believe, goes far too far. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, our caucus believes that many of the 
provisions of this Bill do insult the intelligence and the 
independence of district health boards. And barring dramatic 
amendments, which I hope will come, I would urge all 
members at this time to seriously consider that they should 
stand up for the health districts that are in their community. 
Each MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) has a health 
district that they are particularly interested in and each one is 
going to be affected by this Bill and the effects of this Bill. 
 
Every MLA in this building, everyone that’s elected, has some 
health board that they have a direct concern with. 
 
So I would urge them all to stand up and vote against this Bill 
and to defeat it, unless the minister has the courage to bring in 
the necessary amendments to make this the kind of law that 
Saskatchewan has come to depend on and believes it should 
have and has a perception of having earned. And I believe that 
that perception, in this case, is reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased  

to join the debate on Bill 76, The Health Districts Amendment 
Act. 
 
We have all seen and experienced the effect of this 
government’s health reform. They called this reform the 
wellness plan. Before I get into the problems that the health 
districts are facing, I would first like to say a few words about 
the role of the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor laid out the role of the 
Department of Health very clearly in his 1996 spring report. He 
said, and I quote: 
 

The department is to provide leadership and vision to the 
health system, to protect and improve the health and 
well-being of the people of Saskatchewan. The department 
provides policy direction, direct services, and funding. 

 
The key part of this statement is the aspect of funding. The role 
of the Department of Health is to provide the funding. The 
department receives over $1.5 billion from the government 
coffers and the department also raises revenue in 1995 of over 
41 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the critical decisions that have been made 
by the health districts hinge upon the amount of funding they 
receive from the Government of Saskatchewan. This is where 
the many problems that health districts are facing come into 
play. The health boards are given the decision-making 
authority, but those decisions are based on the level of 
provincial funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what allows the Minister of Health to bury 
his head in the sand and blame the health districts when 
hospitals close, when beds are lost, and health care 
professionals are laid off. The hands of the health districts are 
tied. They have to operate within a budget that is dictated to 
them by the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister knows he is responsible for the health 
districts and he knows that they make decisions based on the 
funding priorities of his government, yet he sits back and passes 
the blame onto the health districts. He uses the health district as 
the political buffer to break NDP election promises such as the 
promise to provide separate funding for the geriatric unit at 
Providence Place in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to address some of the concerns 
raised by the Provincial Auditor in his ’96 spring report. One 
area of concern deals with the definition of health needs 
assessment. I believe this is critical, especially when this 
government provides funding based on need. As stated in the 
Provincial Auditor’s report, a single definition of health needs 
assessment does not exist. It does describe needs assessment as 
an essential first step which provides the base for sound 
planning and decision making. 
 
The problem is that needs-based funding is a new concept for 
health care professionals in Saskatchewan and it can be a very 
complex process. As a result, health districts are finding that 
they may need assistance  assistance in terms of finding the  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

necessary data, preparing and analysing the data and 
consequently reporting it, in order to make the proper decisions. 
The Provincial Auditor describes some of the problems that 
health districts had. 
 
For instance, the availability or location of needed data was not 
commonly known. The data was not specific to the district’s 
population due to changing boundaries, lack of access to 
comparable data from other districts and the province or the 
country, and needed health information was not available from 
any source because the health system usually tracks illness and 
treatment-oriented statistics like drug use and hospitalizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the data used by health districts to assess the 
health needs of their residents is inadequate, the districts may 
fail to identify and act on the most important health needs. They 
may waste through excess or duplicate services, and they may 
be unable to show services are effectively improving health as 
required by this Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an attempt to help solve this problem, the 
Provincial Auditor recommended that health districts should 
plan for the entire health needs assessment process over the 
long term, such as 3 to 10 years. The difficulty with this is that 
this NDP government is prone to saying one thing and doing 
another. It will be difficult for health districts to plan too far 
into the future when this government may decide it is time to 
play politics with them. 
 
The Provincial Auditor also recommended that health districts 
should organize and combine their needs assessment 
information to provide an overview. This should be done in a 
way that helps districts compare key information at district, 
provincial, and national levels and allows the information from 
all districts to form a provincial picture. 
 
He went on to say that health districts should improve their 
analysis of collected needs assessment information, including 
their process to identify important health needs, and set 
priorities for action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important to note what the response of the 
Department of Health was. The department said, and I quote: 
 

We agree that the needs assessment process is important to 
the success of health districts (and provides the Provincial 
Auditor’s opinion) . . . and supports the Provincial 
Auditor’s opinion that districts’ need assessment processes 
require improvement. The department is committed to 
supporting districts as they undertake these needs 
assessments which assist them in identifying the health 
needs of their residents. 
 
(They want on to say that) The department and districts 
will continue to work together towards improving districts’ 
needs assessments processes and addressing the concerns 
raised in the Provincial Auditor’s report. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the minister committed himself to working with 
the districts but it appears that once again this is nothing more 
than lip-service. If the minister was working with the districts,  

he would not be so quick to blame them for the many problems 
in our health care system in Saskatchewan. Every time a 
hospital closes, a senior is faced with the threat of bed closures, 
or a health care professional is forced to leave our province, he 
simply says it was a decision of the health district. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister how he can blame the 
health districts when he controls the purse-strings. He and his 
NDP colleagues  the supposed left-wingers, the supposed 
protectors of health care  are the ones who initiated the health 
reform process. Mr. Speaker, I would also like to ask the 
Minister of Health if this is what he had in mind when this 
reform was first introduced. Did he envisage the closure of over 
50 hospitals? Did he envisage the cutting of numerous health 
care positions in this province? Mr. Minister, what did you and 
your NDP government hope to gain by this reform? 
 
I sincerely hope that it wasn’t what you had in mind. I think it is 
time to come clean with the people of Saskatchewan and tell 
them what they can expect over the next three years. Tell them 
just how big a mess the new Liberal government in 
Saskatchewan will have to clean up when we take office after 
the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the Minister of Health to stop hiding, 
to stop passing the blame, and stop ignoring the very serious 
problems in our health care system. The minister refuses to go 
out to the health care rallies being held all over the province to 
protest what he and his government have done to the health care 
system. Instead he sits back and pretends that everything is right 
on track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a reason that these concerned residents are 
packing into town halls to protest against the systematic 
dismantling of the health care system. They want and deserve to 
be heard. The Minister of Health owes it to these concerned 
taxpayers to go out and tell them face to face what he is doing. 
And he owes it to them to go out and try to explain why he is 
doing what he is doing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, he won’t do it. The reason why he won’t is 
very simple. It’s because he knows what he is doing is wrong, 
and he can’t explain it. He would rather leave it up to the health 
district to deal with these issues because, after all, he claims it is 
their decision to make. Mr. Minister, you know that you aren’t 
leaving the health districts any options. You have broken 
promise after promise to the people of Saskatchewan, but you 
refuse to take responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it all adds up to one word: arrogance. This NDP 
government shows blatant disregard for the people of 
Saskatchewan each and every day. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if the minister would ever muster up enough 
courage to go out to some of these town hall meetings, I can 
assure him that he would be in for a rude awakening. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are fed up with the 
choices made by this NDP government. They have a lot to 
answer for. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too  
  



2336  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

would like to address some of the shortcomings in this Bill to 
amend The Health Districts Act. I add these comments to what 
my colleagues have already said. I want to make it clear that I 
echo their concerns as well as the concerns of the member from 
the third party. However, I don’t see the point in rehashing the 
same issues that my colleagues have already addressed. 
 
Instead I would like to add to what has been already said, and in 
hopes that the members opposite will finally come to 
understand what the people of this province are worried about 
in this Bill. People in my constituency are asking me: can’t you 
stop this government; can’t you make them realize what they’re 
doing to our health care system? 
 
I hope they will listen to the concerns we bring forward and 
realize that we are speaking on behalf of our constituents and on 
behalf of their constituents. Unlike the members on that side of 
the House, we cannot and we will not let the government 
silently destroy health care in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s almost impossible to talk about the specifics 
of this Bill without talking about the non-specifics of the 
regulations. In other words, what is in the Bill is not necessarily 
as scary as what’s been left out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is at it again. Time after time, we 
see loosely drafted legislation brought forward by this 
government. Now we know they have a lot of lawyers to rely 
on. Their cabinet is full of legal advisers, and we know that they 
can find even more money to pay for legal advice. I’m sure that 
their fund could help find more if they were short. So I know 
that this poorly designed legislation isn’t coming from 
ignorance of the law. 
 
I can only assume that the members opposite have chosen to 
draft this hazy legislation to work to their own advantage. 
Instead of drafting tight legislation, this government has chosen 
to leave lots of room for interpretation. And this is where the 
regulations come in again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are so tired of this government’s refusal to be 
open and accountable to the people of the province. In every 
piece of legislation and in every back room deal they make, 
they are hiding actions from the public. And why is this, Mr. 
Speaker? What do they have to hide? 
 
Well I guess I know there’s some secret funds they don’t want 
us to know about. But what else are they afraid of? Are they 
afraid that if people know what they’re up to, they’ll hit a wall 
of protest and plummet in the view of the voters? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the case of Bill 76, like so many other Bills 
brought forward this session, the members opposite stubbornly 
refuse to table regulations in this House. They would much 
rather pass a Bill that lets them bring in the real power later  
out of the sight of opposition politicians and out of the sight of 
the Saskatchewan people, out of the sight of the people who 
elected them. 
 
And why not? If people knew the full scope of this legislation, 
maybe they’d oppose it. Is that what the government is afraid  

of? And if that is what they’re scared of, then why don’t they 
bring . . . if that is what they’re not scared of, then why don’t 
they bring the regulations out in the open and let them succeed 
or fail under public scrutiny? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not even beginning to suggest that we should 
include every last detail in a piece of legislation. Many of the 
Acts are already convoluted enough, so I do recognize the 
regulations are a viable and necessary part of our system. 
 
What I do object to, though, is this government’s overuse of 
regulations. I object to them using regulations as a way to gain 
control without having to answer to the people. And I really 
object to them giving themselves the power to make changes in 
the back rooms of the NDP cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only does this Bill introduce new topics for 
regulations, it greatly expands the minister’s power to make 
these regulations. Just think about the implications of this. We 
have a Health minister who has no concern for the health or 
welfare of the Saskatchewan people making the rules. 
 
And who do you think will suffer, Mr. Speaker? It’ll be the 
same people who’ve been made to suffer all along: the people 
who have seen their hospitals in their communities shut down; 
the people who have watched as seniors are kicked out of care 
homes and forced away from the people they love; the people 
who have watched their friends and their families suffer 
needlessly because the nearest facility is hours away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the regulations outlined in this Bill could 
make a vast difference in the way our health care system runs. 
For example, one topic for regulations includes the power to set 
standards for district health boards and to set standards for 
affiliates. 
 
(1515) 
 
What kind of standards does this government have in mind? 
Hopefully they’re not the same standards followed by the past 
and present Health ministers. Hopefully this doesn’t mean that 
the district health boards and the affiliates will stop listening to 
people and blindly implement decisions that are bad for 
everyone. Because this is the standard set by the NDP 
government so far and nothing in this House has made me think 
it is heading in any other direction. 
 
Another regulation arising in this legislation includes the 
drafting rules for appeals by doctors, dentists, and chiropractors. 
The district health boards will examine their by-law concerning 
appointments, assessment, discipline, classification, and 
organization. In other words, the Health minister will have even 
more control over the health care professionals and the health 
care organizations in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t understand why this government feels a 
need to control every aspect of our life. Don’t they have enough 
faith that the people of this province can make informed, 
intelligent decisions about the way they run their own lives? 
Don’t they realize that by putting power back into the hands of 
the people this province will actually grow? 
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

It’s like an over-controlling parent, Mr. Speaker. If you don’t let 
your child make his own decisions, he will never learn to be a 
self-supporting, contributing member of society. He will rely on 
his parents for everything, and when they make the wrong 
decisions or can no longer make decisions, he will be lost. 
 
Let me tell the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that the people 
of Saskatchewan, the people of this province, are not in need of 
close government control. They do not need the government to 
tell them what to do, how to do it, and when to do it. What 
would be nice is if this government gave them some idea of 
what was being done. Then they would become actual 
participants in the governing of their province. That would 
probably be a real unique idea. Imagine that, Mr. Speaker  
people who actually have a say in the decisions that affect them. 
 
Unfortunately this government can’t seem to see that far. They 
can’t see past the tight grip of control they insist on keeping 
over every aspect of our life in this province. The only part of 
society they don’t want to be responsible for is the mistakes 
they have made. They prefer to pass off onto the federal 
government or onto past administration these problems. 
 
What’s even worse is that they prefer to let third parties take the 
blame for their poor decisions. Instead of admitting that their 
funding cuts are forcing schools to close, they’re letting the 
school boards take the heat. Instead of accepting responsibility 
for cuts to municipalities, they’re forcing communities to cut 
back on essential safety and maintenance services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to move away from over-governance. We 
have to move away from a government that insists on playing 
for power in every action they take. Mr. Speaker, we simply 
have to move away from this underhanded way of bringing in 
legislation. Government by regulation is not what the people of 
this province want, and they are not willing to accept it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some very serious questions that I would 
like to further raise when we debate this Bill further. I would 
hope that the members opposite will have some solid, 
reasonable explanations for why they choose to give themselves 
all-encompassing power. I’m sure that’s an explanation we 
would all like to hear. So I therefore move adjournment of 
debate on Bill 76. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 77 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 77  An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
noticed a growing trend since we began this session in the 
legislature. I guess I might be accused of being naïve, as a 
newcomer to politics and all. But, Mr. Speaker, as a member of 
the general public looking in on this place from the outside, I 
always thought that government legislation, that is government  

Bills, would answer more questions than they create. However, 
as we move along towards the end of this session, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve now come to the conclusion that that just is not necessarily 
so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve come to the conclusion that the government’s 
motivation is not spelled out in the words of the Bills that have 
come before the House. And as we’ve said time and time again, 
the motivation seems to be more power for the government and 
less accountability to the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look at the legislation this NDP government has 
introduced. Whether it be the closing down of court-houses, 
amalgamating local governments, or giving too much power to 
the government’s political appointees at Saskatchewan’s family 
of Crown corporations, I find that there’s always more to these 
Bills than first meets the eye. I think Bill No. 77 could very well 
be another example of this deceptive approach to government 
embraced by the party opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while Bill No. 77 may seem logical to some, at 
least on the surface, again it is one of those Bills that raises 
more questions than it answers. Namely, it raises questions 
about this government’s intentions when it comes to changing 
the way we pay our doctors. The method of payment for 
physicians in Saskatchewan has been a long-standing argument. 
It dates right back to when medicare was first introduced in this 
province in 1962. 
 
Many people argue that the current payment-for-service method 
should be scrapped. And they argue vigorously in this regard. 
But just as many argue against putting doctors on a flat salary. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this definitely is a debate worth having in 
Saskatchewan because people obviously have some very 
serious concerns about what is happening. They deserve to have 
access to the government’s ears. They deserve to have a forum 
that takes them seriously and that gives them a chance to create 
positive, long-lasting solutions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the government can’t play its typical power 
games. It should be an open and honest debate with the 
government asking the people of Saskatchewan  and this 
must include the doctors of Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker 
 as to what they see as the pros and cons of these two 
systems. And then most importantly, they must listen. 
 
Now I know listening is a foreign concept to many of the 
members opposite. Sure, they pretend to be listening, and they 
can pretend to be concerned. But people in this province don’t 
need a government of good actors. They need a government of 
smart, compassionate, hard-working people who truly represent 
their best interests. That’s the way any such debate in this 
regard should take place. It should not be done through any 
back-door tactics by a government, away from the attention of 
the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know full well Bill No. 77 does not deal with 
these topics directly. But clearly this very subject was on the 
minds of government officials when they crafted this piece of 
legislation. Whether it was the main impetus of Bill 77, I don’t 
know. But obviously the government is thinking about this  
  



2338  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

debate. It’s thinking about changing the way we will be paying 
our doctors. The government’s own explanatory notes that 
accompanied this Bill, such as they were, clearly state that these 
changes recognize the ongoing shift to other, alternate methods 
of payment, such as capitation and salary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe this Bill is a clear signal from the 
government that it expects to see a lot more physicians moving 
away from the current fee-for-service method of payment to 
something different. My question is whether or not the 
government expects these doctors to voluntarily move to 
another system or whether this government plans to take more 
drastic action. Do they plan to force doctors in Saskatchewan 
onto a salary? 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps we’re reading too much into this Bill at 
this time. But given this government’s track record when it 
comes to reforming our health care system, Saskatchewan 
residents cannot be blamed for being suspicious of any action 
taken by the NDP government or by the Minister of Health. The 
whole health reform process was conducted under the guise of 
public participation. But in the end, it was just another part of 
the smoke and mirrors game this government plays so often and 
so well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to go too far astray of the subject 
matter at hand, but I don’t think you can discuss any health care 
Bill in this House without touching on what this government, 
what the NDP, the party of Tommy Douglas, has done to our 
health care system, especially in rural areas. 
 
Yes, this government held public meetings to discuss health 
reform, but only after it first took its broad axe and hacked 
away at 52 rural hospitals throughout this province. No, Mr. 
Speaker, that occurred later. 
 
My constituency, Mr. Speaker, there are three such hospitals 
that are now referred to as wellness centres. Those facilities at 
Theodore and Invermay and Norquay were hospitals that 
provided acute care to the residents of the area. And at the time 
that this government proposed, through the broad axe, that they 
would close 52 hospitals, there was a great outcry from the 
public. People were not prepared to look at an alternative. 
 
Yet in the end, when it was obvious that that plan was going to 
proceed, that indeed the hospital as we knew it in Invermay was 
no longer going to be open, people accepted that because they 
looked at the other plan, the plan that this government had for 
regional hospitals — the plan that the other hospital within the 
district would in fact be able to handle the acute care needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the nearest hospital to the community that I’m 
from, which is Invermay, is about 30 miles and that is the 
Canora Union Hospital. That hospital at a time 3 years ago had 
over 30 acute care beds. This last year it was reduced to 20, and 
now the Assiniboine Valley Health District Board is proposing 
that that 20 acute care beds will be reduced to 14. 
 
When we look at the population of our community, Mr. 
Speaker, the population of that district health board, we’re 
talking in excess of 17,000 people. And when we take a look at  

the number of beds that will be left in the three remaining 
hospitals in that centre, we have a total now of only 42 beds. 
That translates to about 2.3 beds per thousand. This is well 
below a Canadian average. This is below one of the statistics 
that’s available from another province in this country. 
 
We have the level of acute care funding that is the lowest 
standard in all of Canada, and the people in the Assiniboine 
Valley Health District are up in arms, Mr. Speaker. They feel 
that the government has reached a point where it no longer 
cares. That will occur with our doctors, Mr. Speaker, as well, 
because doctors have indicated that they are fed up with being 
unable to provide the care. They know they don’t have the beds. 
They have to fight amongst themselves. 
 
We see physicians who are now debating with a fellow 
physician as to whether or not they have the availability of a 
bed, a bed that is needed for a sick person  someone who has 
just been injured or someone who has suffered a heart attack. 
And now we have tremendous stress on those front-line 
workers, whether they’re doctors, whether they’re nurses, 
whether they’re the assistants that provide the care in the 
hospital. We know that we have had . . . We expect, within our 
health facilities, we expect good care. We’ve received it. But 
now there is a situation whereby we may not have the beds. We 
may not have the ability to place people in these hospitals. 
 
I spoke a few minutes ago about the fact that people looked at 
the closure of the small hospital in Invermay and they opposed 
it but in the end they said, okay, we’re going to have to look to 
something bigger  change. The government said, you know, 
everyone’s afraid of change. 
 
But now we looked at Canora, now we’re seeing what’s 
happening to Canora, and we have examples of many people 
. . . my own personal example, Mr. Speaker. When I was 
hospitalized for two days in January due to an injury, I had to 
wait for three hours while I sat in a wheelchair and the 
physician ordered someone else out of a bed. That happened to 
me personally in the month of January of this year. 
 
(1530) 
 
Two days later, I wasn’t prepared to leave that hospital bed, Mr. 
Speaker, but the doctor came to me and said, we need your bed 
more than what you need it right now and you’re out. And by 
the way, I was told to leave that bed before 8 o’clock in the 
morning and have my breakfast in a wheelchair while it was 
prepared for another patient. This is unacceptable type of care, 
Mr. Speaker, and we have to address this. 
 
This government which prides itself so much on its openness 
and accountability chose not to ask the public what they thought 
of closing the hospitals. Because, Mr. Speaker, they knew what 
the answer would be. They knew the people would tell them not 
to do this. They would beg them not to do this. 
 
As we’ve seen over and over again, this government doesn’t 
like to listen to what they don’t want to hear. And they certainly 
don’t want to hear from the people in our province, who now 
live in fear because they no longer have adequate emergency,  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

acute, or long-term care in their region of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This government adopted the religion of wellness without 
asking the people what they thought. And for those members 
opposite, the theory of wellness is just don’t get sick and 
everything will be fine; don’t have an accident and you won’t 
need a hospital. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, despite what this government’s theories are, 
people do get sick, people do have accidents, and people do get 
old. And that will always continue to be the case. It will always 
be the case that people need adequate medical care. They will 
always need adequate emergency care, and they will always 
need adequate long-term care. And as often as we can, we 
should be providing that care as close to their homes as 
possible. Medicare must not and should not be centred around 
the major cities in our province while people hundreds of miles 
away from the cities are left to fend for themselves, helpless in 
the knowledge medical attention is not readily available in their 
area any longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policies of this government are not what the 
people want. Day after day, we receive calls and letters at our 
constituency offices and here at the legislature. They are from 
people who no longer believe this government cares about 
them. They no longer believe the myth that the New 
Democratic Party is the party that fights for quality medical 
care throughout our province. Nearly every day now, the people 
wake up to the news that yet another medical facility is closing 
its doors due to this government’s lack of commitment to 
providing quality medical care to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the cries of outrage from those people, 
despite the issues we raise in this legislature on a daily basis, 
the situation seems destined to get worse before it gets any 
better. Our health care system is in crisis. It is failing, Mr. 
Speaker, and this government appears either unwilling or 
unable to stop its deteriorating condition. They seem more 
willing to pull the plug on the system, particularly in our rural 
communities. 
 
The government opposite has taken the opinion that by living 
outside the city, you’re taking your chances. They seem to be 
saying, if you’re foolish enough to actually live outside the city, 
you don’t deserve the same level of service. That’s what the 
NDP government is saying, Mr. Speaker, but that’s not what the 
people of Saskatchewan are saying. And that, most definitely, is 
not what members on this side of the House are saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, attracting doctors to Saskatchewan has never been 
an easy chore, and getting our own doctors to stay here is 
getting harder every day. That’s why, before the government 
jumps headlong into putting all doctors on salary or capping the 
number of services they can charge for in a full year, we must 
have a full-fledged discussion with the people of this province. 
 
And I don’t mean the type of discussion which usually takes 
place when this government is involved — the type of 
discussion this government usually engages in — is where they 
talk and everyone else listens. 
 

And when the people finally do get a chance to say something, 
the government does not listen because it’s already made up its 
mind. That’s not the kind of public input we need in this 
discussion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On a matter of putting doctors on salary or capping their billing 
at a set annual level, we must study the issue long and hard 
before jumping into anything. We must ask what effects such 
policies will have on keeping doctors in, and attracting doctors 
to, Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, to follow a policy that 
may cause more of our doctors to head off to other jurisdictions, 
would not be a wise one in my view. We must ensure we adopt 
a policy that is conducive for attracting quality medical 
personnel to our province  and I mean all parts of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In reading over this Bill some very basic questions come to 
mind, questions that this government must answer once and for 
all. Does the government intend to introduce capitation for 
physicians on a wide-scale basis? Does the government intend 
to use the power it has given itself under The Health Districts 
Act to force health district boards to enter into contracts with all 
doctors in the district, where capitation is the result? Does the 
government also intend to take this step with affiliate members 
of the health districts? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government should  and must  answer 
these very simple questions as it continues on its self-indulgent 
health care reform process. The government, I feel, must also 
address the growing problem of the lack of doctors in rural 
Saskatchewan. Clearly, closing dozens of hospitals throughout 
Saskatchewan doesn’t help attract these individuals to those 
areas of our province desperately in need of their services. 
 
So what do we see as a result in communities throughout the 
province? We see entire communities being destroyed. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, the community works together as a whole. The 
actions of a small faction can affect the entire community. Now 
cooperation and working together may be a totally foreign 
concept to the NDP members, but in rural Saskatchewan 
especially it is reality and it is what has made our province great 
for so many years. It is why people are proud to say they are 
from Saskatchewan, and it is why people here are renowned for 
their friendliness and their willingness to help others. 
 
But if the NDP government continues on its current path 
straight to the heart of urbanization, we will lose some of that. 
If a doctor is forced to leave a community because this 
government makes bad, short-sighted choices, the community 
suffers. Not only are they forced to look elsewhere for a doctor, 
businesses lose a potential customer. If the doctor is married, 
the spouse may also have a job and will leave. And if the doctor 
has children, the children leave the school. Because this 
government dishes out educational funding based on a per 
student capita, the school board suffers. That means they will 
have to cut costs including resources, services, and possibly 
jobs. So then the teacher is forced to leave the community, and 
this vicious cycle continues. When a family leaves a small 
urban centre, whether it’s a doctor with a spouse and children 
. . . the spin-off is tremendous, Mr. Speaker. 
  



2340  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

It’s a difficult concept for people living in a large urban centre 
like Regina or Saskatoon to understand, how one family 
moving away can have such a tremendous effect. But when the 
spin-off occurs in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 
continued reaction just never seems to have an end and is 
always detrimental. I’m not being melodramatic, Mr. Speaker, 
but this is a scenario that plays out daily. I stood in this House 
not long ago and I listed off the cuts forced on school boards 
throughout our province. And I just touched on a few of those 
boards that have reported what they were forced to do as far as 
balancing their budgets. 
 
The same situation is playing itself over and over and over 
again throughout Saskatchewan, but what is this government 
willing to do to stop the decline? Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a question we ask ourselves on a daily basis. Because 
every time we watch a seniors’ home close or we see the doors 
to a hospital being shut for the last time or we see the doctors 
leaving the province in droves, we have no good explanation. 
The only explanation we get from this government is a weak, 
finger-pointing non-answer from the Minister of Health or from 
the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before the government pushes this Bill through, 
they need to take a look at the long-term implications, because 
even though capitation is by far the most powerful cost-saving 
instrument for governments, it is strongly opposed by doctors 
and by the Canadian Medical Association. And rostering, which 
must also be discussed in relation to this Bill, is not necessarily 
the best solution for Saskatchewan either. In order for rostering 
to work, hospitals, family doctors, and specialists, would have 
to come under the direction of a single authority which would 
subsequently challenge the autonomy of health boards. But we 
already know that health boards aren’t autonomous. Because 
this government has to control the purse-strings, health boards 
don’t really make the financial decisions. 
 
The other main problem with rostering is that competition 
would sky-rocket in large centres and rural areas may have 
trouble finding a doctor to stay in their area. We are already 
waving goodbye as our doctors head south to the United States, 
and rostering could make this even worse. 
 
So who wins and who loses? Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe the 
government thinks it will win, but the fact is that rural residents 
will lose and any government who can consider that a victory 
should be ashamed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 77 is merely one of the government’s 
latest attempts to change health care in this province. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, what seems okay on the surface is 
sometimes rotten deep down. So, Mr. Speaker, please don’t 
blame us for being suspicious of the government’s motives. We 
can only draw from our experience, and our experience with 
this government’s health care reform has been anything but 
positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have questions about this Bill and we would 
like to hear the government’s answers, because health care is at 
the very core of Saskatchewan society. And before we support 
legislation of any kind, we need to hear how it will affect  

people now and how it will affect the people of this province 
for many years to come. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move that the debate be adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 82  An Act 
respecting Health Facilities be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the very 
future of health care in Saskatchewan is at risk because of this 
government’s policies. And the legislation that the NDP 
government is bringing before the House this session could 
have a profound, long-term impact on our health care system. 
Still the members opposite sit back and take these Bills lightly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it appears they don’t care what the legislation 
means to their constituents. All they care about is that they ram 
the legislation through as quickly as possible, and head off for 
summer holidays. Well, Mr. Speaker, the official opposition 
does care about the effects this legislation will have. The 
members in our caucus do want to answer to our constituents 
because, unlike the members opposite, we strongly believe that 
we are here in this House to represent them, to represent our 
constituents. We are here because they have problems and 
solutions and hopes and dreams that can help this province 
become a better place to live if only the government would 
listen. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker. we have sent this Bill out to interested parties 
throughout the province and some of the comments we are 
getting back don’t bode well for this government. For example, 
let me quote from one response we got: 
 

This is a particularly dangerous piece of legislation 
because at the outset it appears innocuous. However 
because it is so loosely drafted and gives the minister both 
a surprising level of discretion in granting licences and so 
little discretion in removing licences once granted, it is one 
that must be subjected to significant scrutiny and debate. 

 
Imagine that, Mr. Speaker — it should be subjected to 
significant scrutiny and debate. And what does this government 
propose? This government wants us to poke at the surface, 
superficially, and then hand it over to them to pass. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we aren’t about to do that. So the members 
opposite should sit back and prepare to answer some very 
serious questions — questions asked by people throughout 
Saskatchewan that can only be answered by the members on 
that side of the House. Mr. Speaker, the government tries to say 
that Bill 82 will prevent a two-tier health care system. Well I 
hate to tell them this but it’s much too late. For the past five 
years, since this government came to power, they have been 
working very hard to create a two-tier system. 
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

Every policy they make, and every piece of legislation they 
introduce, is proof of this. Of course, Mr. Speaker, I’m talking 
about the two tiers in Saskatchewan as being rural and urban. 
And believe me, there’s no question which tier this government 
holds at the top. I guess we shouldn’t be surprised that rural 
areas get the short end of the stick, and when it comes 
particularly to health care. All we have to do is look at the 
cabinet  urban lawyers, urban educators, urban businessmen, 
and a couple of farmers thrown in for appearance sake. Why 
should anyone expect their agenda to be anything but 
urban-based? 
 
Mr. Speaker, our health care system is failing. I don’t know 
how many more examples we need to bring before this House 
every day before the government finally admits it. How can the 
Deputy Premier go home every night knowing that the words of 
Louise Simard are coming back to haunt this government? In 
1989, just seven years ago when the NDP were in opposition, 
she stepped up on her high horse and rode out to win the battle 
of health care. She said: 
 

The opposition is going to fight these cut-backs for health 
care and these changes to medicare. It’s going to fight the 
erosion of the principles of medicare. I feel rather certain 
we’ll be having a change of government next time around 
and then the public isn’t going to have to worry about these 
problems any longer. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess reality knocked her off her high 
horse. Little did she realize that those words would be used as 
weapons, and that the NDP government had no intention of 
fighting for health care. Mr. Speaker, a more cynical person 
would suspect that she already knew that her words were just 
empty rhetoric. 
 
But I would never suggest that. I don’t imagine they got the art 
of empty rhetoric down pat until they took over as government. 
But whether it was cold-hearted rhetoric or simple naïvety, the 
fact is her words could not be any more false. She said the 
public would not have to worry about health care, not with the 
NDP fighting for it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the public is worried. No, that’s not nearly 
strong enough  the public is terrified, because they have 
watched hospital after hospital being shut down. They have 
seen beds lost to government cuts. They have seen health care 
professionals forced out of work by government cuts, leaving 
the province. And they have seen that health care may not be 
there for them when their children are sick or when their parents 
need help. 
 
What kind of government let’s people live in fear? I think that’s 
a question that only the members opposite can truly answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with this Bill the government is trying to remove 
services which are currently ensured to a second tier system. It 
targets Catholic hospitals, private practitioners, private 
facilities, and elected health boards. 
 
And when I say targets, Mr. Speaker, I mean exactly that. The 
NDP government is using this Act as a weapon. One man I  

spoke to referred to it as a Trojan Horse. And we all know what 
happened in that story, Mr. Speaker. If you bring in a secret 
weapon disguised as a gift to the people, it can do a lot more 
damage than open warfare. And that’s exactly what this 
government’s health legislation is doing. The members opposite 
bring forward a Bill and talk about how wonderful it is for the 
people of this province. But when you look deeper into the Bill, 
things don’t look so rosy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a classic example of an oppressive 
Crown. It pits citizens against the state. It gives the minister 
unconditional power. Well surprise, surprise. This sounds a lot 
like our biggest complaint about every piece of legislation that 
this government has brought forward in this session. More 
power to the government, less power to the people  perhaps 
the NDP should use that as their new motto. There’s something 
to be said about truth in advertising you know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the guidelines in this Bill are ludicrous. 
For example, the Bill allows the minister to search and seize 
private-practice property. Since when can one member of a 
commercial relationship search and seize the property of 
another member of the same commercial relationship? As well 
the minister can delegate all his power to any health department 
employee  to the secretary, to the janitor, to anyone. Isn’t 
there a competency issue at stake here? Although I guess we 
could ask the same question if the power was to remain solely 
with the minister. I’m not sure law school teaches the intricacies 
of health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act states that a private facility cannot charge 
fees if the service costs are being paid out of the public purse. 
Fair enough. But this can be changed at any time by the 
minister through regulations, and he doesn’t have to let anyone 
know. Why the shroud of secrecy, Mr. Minister? Why does this 
government have to introduce legislation that lets ministers hide 
their actions from the people of this province? How is this open 
and accountable government? Is that what they’re telling us? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not even properly define private 
operators. Private or public facilities are not protected because 
the minister can change the definition through regulations. So 
what we are left with, Mr. Speaker, is a government which is 
accountable to no one, with no clear mandate and no real 
concern for the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me again quote from an opinion we received 
about Bill 82: 
 

This legislation has either been drafted extremely poorly, 
or it is specifically circuitous and evasive. By reading 
together sections 2, 12, and 29, it would appear that the 
primary purpose for this Bill would be to allow the 
government to create a series of procedures that are 
deemed, for the purposes of this Act, not to be insured 
services. If a health facility can only perform an insured 
service, but it can bill the patient directly, then obviously it 
is creating an alternative to the present health system. On 
the policy side, this statute would allow for the 
development of certain controversial, standalone clinics. 

 
  



2342  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Let’s go back to this, Mr. Speaker. He said either this Bill is 
poorly done or deliberately secretive. Either way it doesn’t 
make for good law. The people of Saskatchewan have no choice 
but to accept the legislation this government pushes through. 
Yes, they can protest, but if the members opposite don’t listen, 
then what good can it do? Therefore we should be absolutely 
sure that there is good, logical reason for bringing in a law 
before it is rammed down the throats of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the government decided to introduce this 
Bill, they did it in the name of preventing private health care. 
But the Premier himself admitted that the legislation was little 
more than a political statement. In the May 2 edition of the 
Leader-Post, the Premier says, and I quote: “It is a political 
statement because it is a statement of principle and philosophy.” 
 
Principle and philosophy? What I want to know, Mr. Speaker, is 
why the word practicality never crosses the Premier’s lips. Is 
his government introducing a Bill that could have serious 
ramifications on health care in this province just to make a 
point? That is exactly the kind of self-serving statement we 
have come to expect from the NDP government. Little do they 
care what is good for the people. All the Premier cares about is 
how he comes across. Well I’d like to tell the Premier that 
legislation should not be about pumping up your ego  it 
should be about creating laws for the people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Premier thinks this Bill is a realistic 
compromise to long waiting-lists, I think he is dreaming. Our 
government wants private clinics to open up in this province 
with the blessing of whomever the Minister of Health 
designates, but doesn’t want to let them make money. 
 
Well I don’t mean to doubt the principles of true socialism, but 
I think that our society is a little more motivated than that. 
Philosophically speaking, it would be great if the Gimbel’s of 
health care would move to Saskatchewan out of the goodness of 
their hearts, to cut down on the waiting-lists. But what is their 
motivation when in other provinces they can make some sort of 
profit? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s position is confusing. On one 
hand they say they are promoting capitalism and business 
expansion. The Minister of Economic Development stands up 
in this House as a self-proclaimed champion of business. Yet on 
the other hand, the Minister of Health is introducing this Bill to 
hold back capitalism and competition. There’s a discrepancy 
here and the people of Saskatchewan know this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying we support extra billing. What I 
am saying is that there is a problem here and the government is 
making it worse by ignoring it. They are making the people of 
this province suffer because they continue to chop away at 
health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time they stopped introducing philosophical 
pieces of legislation and started looking for real answers to the 
problems plaguing our health care system. It is what the people 
of this province truly deserve. 

Mr. Speaker, I guess I also have to question why the 
government even bothered introducing a Bill that threatens 
action but promises none. Even the Premier admits that it is an 
unnecessary piece of legislation. And with its philosophical 
leanings, it has shown itself to be nothing but a chance for the 
Premier to spout left-wing rhetoric. 
 
But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, if it is allowed to pass, it will have 
long-term implications for health care in this great province of 
Saskatchewan. And that is something we must take very 
seriously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I conclude, I just have to emphasize once 
again how crucial decent, accessible health care is to our 
province. The people of this province just can’t take much 
more. The cuts have already come too fast and much, much too 
deep. People in every community throughout Saskatchewan are 
struggling to make sense of the mess, but the government just 
keeps adding to it. And every time it seems like a community 
might be digging itself out, the government throws a new pile 
on it. 
 
Where are the members who just six or seven years ago 
promised to defend medicare? Where are the people who 
promised to stop the Plains hospital from closing? Where are 
the people who told their constituents that health care would not 
suffer? 
 
I believe some of these members are present here today, Mr. 
Speaker, but they are different people now. They sit back while 
the urban controllers make choices that are bad for their 
communities. And they sit silently as they watch community 
after community fall under the government’s slash-and-burn 
approach to health care. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I implore all members in this House to think about 
health care and what it means to every man, woman, and child 
living in this great province of Saskatchewan. I want them to 
think about how important it is to building a sense of security in 
all communities. I want everyone to consider how legislation 
will affect the people of this province, the very people who 
elected us  all of us. And then, when it comes time to pass the 
legislation, I hope they do the right thing and speak on behalf of 
the people that they represent and make the right choices and 
the right decision. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
join in on the debate regarding Bill No. 82, The Health 
Facilities Licensing Act. 
 
After the systematic dismantling of our health care system over 
the past few years, I think any Bill that deals with the health 
care system needs to be closely scrutinized. When I look at the 
record of this socialist government, I can’t help but hold them 
solely responsible for the many severe problems in our health 
care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government introduced a health care 
reform which they called the wellness model. If that is not an  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

oxymoron, I don’t know what is. What has this wellness model 
meant for the people of Saskatchewan? It has meant that over 
50 hospitals would be closed, nursing homes would be closed, 
acute care beds would be lost, and health care professionals 
would have to seek employment outside of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they call this a wellness model. Many residents of 
rural Saskatchewan have seen their hospitals boarded up, 
forcing them to drive great distances to receive the health care 
they so badly need. I would ask the Minister of Health to show 
me how the people of Saskatchewan have actually benefited 
from this health reform. They haven’t saved any money. We all 
know that the same amount of money is being spent on health 
care as was before our wellness model came into place. I know 
he would be very hard pressed for an answer. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just rural communities that are hit by 
this health reform. It is also having a detrimental impact on 
urban communities. The Plains health care centre right here in 
Regina is scheduled for closure. I along with my colleagues 
have presented hundred of petitions on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan people who are worried about losing this facility. 
The government opposite does nothing but close their eyes and 
plug their ears. Every day they make snide remarks about the 
petitions as we present them. They absolutely ignore the 
petitions and the people who have signed them. So much for 
government of and for the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Health provides his feeble 
answers to issues raised every day in question period, he 
constantly blames the health boards for decisions that are made. 
This is completely appalling to me. This NDP government 
holds the purse-strings. They are the ones who dictate to the 
health boards how much money they will receive each fiscal 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know the old saying  remember the 
golden rule: those who have the gold makes the rules  applies 
to this government. They are the ones who dictate to the health 
boards how much money they’ll get. The health boards’ hands 
are tied, and consequently they have to make decisions based on 
a budget set by this socialist government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all they have been successful in doing is creating a 
buffer for government to hide behind. The health board makes 
the decision to cut back programs and services or close facilities 
based on their budget provided by the government. And the 
Health minister sits back and says it was the decision of the 
health board. Can’t the minister understand that the health 
boards don’t have any real options or alternatives because they 
don’t have the money. The government controls it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government blames everyone from the 
federal government to the previous Tory administration to 
former premier Ross Thatcher. The time is long overdue for this 
NDP government to stop blaming. Take some responsibility and 
provide Saskatchewan people with the health care they need 
and the health care they deserve. 
 
Health care is something that the people of Saskatchewan value  

dearly. And right now they are very scared of what this NDP 
government has in store for them. I challenge the Minister of 
Health to go out to the town hall meetings that are happening all 
over this province, listen to and see what people are saying and 
feeling. The Minister of Health owes it to the people to go to 
their community and explain to them in person why he is 
shutting down their hospitals, why he’s throwing the seniors out 
of their homes, and why so many of them are just . . . they are 
abandoned. 
 
And then they tell the people that it’s not their fault; it is the 
health boards’ fault. Well, Mr. Speaker, I assure the minister 
that those concerned residents won’t buy into his charming way 
of ducking and hiding from the truth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to address the impact that a hospital closure 
has on a rural community. When a rural community loses a 
facility like the hospital, a nursing home, or a school, it has a 
profound impact on the economy and the prosperity of that 
local community. The loss of facilities means jobs losses and 
consequently rural depopulation. When people in rural 
communities lose their jobs, they tend to leave that community, 
not necessarily because they want to but rather because they’re 
forced to. 
 
If a nurse in a rural community loses his or her job, they are 
forced to leave the community, and they take their children with 
them of course. This translates into a decline in school 
enrolment and also means a cut in funding to the school, which 
translates into job losses for teachers and school staff. It may 
also mean an increase to mill rates as so many communities are 
currently experiencing now. 
 
When people leave a rural community, the tax base shrinks, and 
all of a sudden there is no money for the local governments to 
operate. This means that the rural roads and highways can’t 
even be properly maintained. 
 
A decrease in population translates into severe economic 
downturns for that community. Every business in the 
community is affected by this negative string of events. When 
businesses suffer, they too are forced to cut back in their own 
operations. Once again this means job losses and further 
depopulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a vicious circle that begins with the 
arrogance and thoughtlessness of the NDP government and 
ends with the complete destruction of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what really saddens me is that the sole motive 
behind the choices are made by the politics of this NDP 
government. They show no remorse for the people whose lives 
they are throwing into utter chaos. The socialist cabinet full of 
lawyers don’t seem to care about rural Saskatchewan at all. As 
long as Highway No. 11 between Regina and Saskatoon is 
drivable, they seem to be quite content. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this arrogance is inexcusable. But what bothers 
me even more is the fact that their rural NDP back-benchers 
aren’t standing up for their constituents either. Some of them 
have sat here for several years and have said nothing publicly.  
  



2344  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Even the new NDP back-benchers have fallen victim to the 
NDP muzzle. I can’t understand why they don’t say something. 
Why don’t you stand up and represent your constituents? 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Health Facilities Licensing Act follows suit 
with the NDP approach to governing. This is to take all the 
decision-making authority and place it right smack in the 
minister’s lap. They set up a shell or a charade and lead people 
to believe that they are the ones who actually get to have some 
input into the decision making. But this is simply not the case. 
This NDP government is a master at smoke and mirrors. 
 
In this Bill, the ultimate decision-making power is in the hands 
of the minister. Surely the health board or the accreditation 
board operator can make a recommendation. But once again this 
is a politically driven lip-service. It’s like saying to someone, 
you can make all the recommendations you see fit, but in the 
end we’re going to do whatever we want anyway. Mr. Speaker, 
I must say this is an arrogant way to govern, even for a socialist 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health has the strict authority to 
grant or to refuse a licence, renew a licence, and he can suspend 
or cancel a licence. It seems that the minister can do whatever 
he wants. 
 
But I can also guarantee that whenever there’s a glitch in the 
system, the minister will once again point his finger at the 
health board. After all, this government has created the perfect 
scapegoat. They have mastered the art of blaming and pointing 
the finger at someone else. Instead of taking some initiative, 
some leadership, and some responsibility, they just choose to 
pass the buck. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of 
this irresponsibility. The people are intelligent, and they can see 
through this Teflon armour this NDP government has chosen to 
wear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I implore the members opposite  any 
cabinet ministers with integrity and any of the back-benchers  
to get your heads out of the sand and take a good hard look at 
what this government is doing. Hospitals and nursing homes are 
being shut down. Long-term and acute care beds are 
disappearing. Seniors are losing their homes. Health care 
professionals are being driven from their communities. And the 
list goes on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the job of each and every member of this 
Assembly to represent their constituents. The members opposite 
are failing in their role. I say to them again, take responsibility 
for the choices and the decisions of your government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to take 
some time today to discuss the impacts that this Bill will have 
on the people of this province, the people who rely on fully 
staffed health care facilities today and those that will be relying 
on these facilities in the future. 
 

I feel that I must bring these issues to the attention of the 
members opposite as it is quite obvious that they are not 
thinking of the future of this province. They charge us over and 
over again with our doom and gloom attitude, and they ask us to 
move with them into the 21st century. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that I want to be with these 
people in the 21st century. We will have no affordable care 
homes to live in, no rural or accessible hospitals to go to, and 
our children will be forced to care for us in our old age 
regardless of their financial situations. 
 
From the time that this government was first elected in 1991, 
promises have been made, and promises have been broken. I 
feel that it is absolutely appalling that this government feels that 
it can break its promises on the backs of the sick and elderly of 
this province. Mr. Speaker, many NDP members have made 
significant promises about the care that the seniors of our 
province will receive. In 1991 the former Health minister said 
to the PCs (Progressive Conservative), and I quote: “Why 
should the sick and the elderly carry the burden for your 
incompetence?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was five years ago, and this party is still 
singing the same tune. Well enough is enough. It is time that 
this government take responsibility for what is happening to 
health care in this province. The question that I now want to ask 
is this: why should the sick and elderly carry the burden of the 
NDP arrogance and their incompetence? 
 
This government campaigned on promises to protect the seniors 
in this province. They campaigned on promises to make sure 
that hospitals and care homes will be there for the people who 
need them. The 1995 NDP election platform states clearly on 
page 36 that “hospitals will always be there when they’re 
needed.” Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s barely a year later, and already 
there are no hospitals in many areas where they are needed, and 
there will be no hospitals where they are needed in the future. 
 
I would like to use the closure of the Plains Health Centre as an 
example. This centre is a place for trauma patients. It will gone 
next year. This is also the only hospital in the city that has a 
helicopter landing pad. But that too will be gone next year. It is 
the most accessible hospital for people in the southern part of 
the province. 
 
But by next year, these people are going to have to travel 
through Regina to either the General or the Pasqua Hospital 
which are already bursting at the seams. To add to this, the 
parking situation at the Pasqua Hospital is appalling, and there 
is simply is no room for expansion unless, of course, this 
government is considering building a parkade as part of its 
cost-saving measures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP 1995 election campaign platform tells a 
tale of what this government wants the people of this province 
to believe it’s going to do. When we look around this province, 
one year later, we see that the election platform is nothing but a 
bunch of empty promises. 
 
In that election platform, it stated clearly on page 38 that  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

“Saskatchewan is for a public, universal, accessible, 
comprehensive, and portable health care system.” I beg to differ 
with that statement, Mr. Speaker. Our system of health care 
may be public, but due to the cuts and closures since the 
election, the system of health care in this province is far from 
accessible and comprehensive. 
 
I have already shown this point with regards to the Plains 
Health Centre, and I think that if you spoke with anyone in rural 
or in northern Saskatchewan, they would argue with you about 
accessibility of health care service in their areas. 
 
(1615) 
 
The 1995 NDP platform document also states that this 
government wants to “ensure that nurses, doctors, therapists, 
and other health care providers are full partners in the process 
from the ground up.” Once again, here is an example of a 
promise that has not been lived up to. If nurses had been 
involved in the process of hacking apart our health care system, 
would they have been picketing outside of the Weyburn 
hospital to oppose the cuts? I urge this government to go out 
and speak with nurses and doctors across this province and see 
what they would think about what is happening to the health 
care system in Saskatchewan. I doubt very much that you will 
find a lot of contented staff members out there. 
 
The key issue is safety. Many of these nurses fear that the cuts 
have gone so deep that they just are not able to provide the level 
of care that is necessary. The basic necessities are not there. The 
safety of patients is in jeopardy. Many seniors have experienced 
accidents, have had falls, and have suffered traumatically 
because of nursing cuts. 
 
Nurses feel badly, but they cannot possibly do more with so 
little help. The quality of care provided is suffering as there just 
is not the staff available to provide the care in a sufficient 
manner. This is not the fault of the nurses, doctors, or any other 
care-givers. It is the fault of this government who, through 
funding cuts, shows that it does not believe that the people of 
our province deserve adequate access to health care facilities 
and sufficient services in those facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will give you an example of how these cuts to 
hospitals and care centres are affecting rural Saskatchewan. The 
town of Cudworth, which is located in my constituency, has 
been given a very strong indication that the loss of their hospital 
may be imminent. 
 
Recently a consultant came out from Regina, just showed up 
one day and gave a firm recommendation that the towns of 
Wakaw and Cudworth could start looking at what they will do 
in light of the possible closure of their hospitals. The review 
process that was gone through recommended a joint planning 
committee between the towns of Wakaw and Cudworth to look 
at alternatives. This review process and a proposal for a joint 
planning committee is smoke and mirrors. 
 
This is another example of the provincial government 
attempting to look like it is consulting with individuals who 
have a stake in the decisions at hand with regard to hospital  

closures. The decision had already been made. Some time 
before this consultant turned up, St. Michael’s in Cudworth, 
along with other facilities in the Central Plains Health District, 
drew up comprehensive working strategic plan. These were 
totally rejected. I’m wondering why, if local people are allowed 
to make their own decisions. 
 
This was also done to the Regina District Health Board 
regarding the closure of the Plains hospital. They were told to 
either agree to close the Plains or lose all funding. The decision 
to close the Plains was like choosing between cutting off your 
arm or your leg. It was a no-win situation. 
 
The proposal for a joint committee composed of reps from 
Wakaw and Cudworth, each of which are in two different health 
districts, is also a no-win situation. This is driving a wedge of 
bitterness between the centres and creating a feeling of utter 
contempt for government who is forcing them into this 
situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an ever increasing need in rural 
Saskatchewan for long-term care and hospital care for our 
province’s ageing population. Closing the Plains and other 
nursing homes has taken away a centre that provides 
outstanding care to our seniors and to all members of our 
society. Closing 52 rural hospitals took away care centres for 
our seniors as well. Now the threat of the closing of the 
Cudworth hospital takes away one more place that seniors in 
my constituency could go for care. 
 
The consequences of those drastic cuts to health care facilities 
are popping up all across the province. A woman from my 
constituency, a woman from Cudworth, was taken to Saskatoon 
last summer for tests. Not only did she have to go to two 
hospitals in Saskatoon before the tests could be done, but she 
also had to wait for hours for the basic comfort of a bed. 
 
Mrs. Hauber, an 89-year-old woman, suffered through one of 
the most traumatic events of her life in early August of last 
year. Not only did Mrs. Hauber have to wait a long period of 
time to get a bed. The bed that she had to get into was on 
wheels that were not locked. When Mrs. Hauber tried to get out 
of the bed, it rolled away from her, and she ended up falling and 
needing sutures to close up the wound in her forehead. Staff 
cuts in all hospitals under the direction of this government have 
lent her these kind of traumatic experiences and many more 
similar frightening experiences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for an 89-year-old woman to feel that insecure and 
that scared in a facility that is supposed to care for people while 
they are ill is totally unacceptable. Mrs. Hauber went to 
Saskatoon for chest X-rays and ended up with bruised ribs and 
stitches in her forehead. How can the Minister of Health 
honestly say that this is an example of quality health care? This 
is nothing but an example of people who slip through the cracks 
of our health care system due to overcrowded hospitals and the 
lack of staff available to care for these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Hauber’s family took her back to Cudworth 
hospital to recuperate from her traumatic experience in 
Saskatoon. What started out as a short trip to Saskatoon for  
  



2346  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

precautionary treatment turned into a three-month nightmare for 
herself and her family. What would the Hauber family have 
done if the Cudworth hospital had been forced to close down? 
What are people in similar circumstances across rural areas that 
have already lost their local hospitals to do in similar situations? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the example that I have highlighted today is 
unfortunately not an isolated incident. This sort of thing 
happens every day. People are constantly turned away from 
emergency in Regina and Saskatoon hospitals as there just isn’t 
the room to care for these people. They are oftentimes told to go 
to their local hospitals or care centres for temporary treatment 
until a bed opens up in the city. The seniors of Saskatchewan in 
many circumstances come from areas that no longer have local 
care centres. They also feel many times that being in a hospital 
is what they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mental and emotional health is just as important to 
the quality of life as physical health, is it not? Yes, the 
remaining care centres in Saskatchewan may adequately treat 
physical ailments, but what about the people, especially seniors, 
who need a bed for an extra day or two to recuperate 
emotionally and mentally? These people have nowhere to go. 
 
No, I agree hospitals are not meant to serve as hotels, but they 
are meant to serve as centres for health treatment for physical, 
mental, and emotional health care. It is the seniors who suffer 
the most in this situation. Many of them have little or no family 
around to care for them and many of their friends do not have 
the capacity to care for their ageing friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Hauber was extremely fortunate to have her 
family with her in time of need. She had her daughter there to 
look after her and to get the attention of the overworked health 
care professionals. Had Mrs. Hauber been alone in Saskatoon, 
there is no telling how long it may have taken for her to be 
looked after. 
 
Should the Cudworth Hospital be the next one slated for the 
chopping block, there is no telling how many more people will 
fall through the cracks. The people of Cudworth and 
surrounding towns fear that should their hospital close, their 
access to acceptable levels of care will be non-existent. 
 
I guess if this government does not see the fact that this 
province is ageing, more people are going to be requiring health 
care services and there will be nowhere for the people to go. 
There is no question that waiting-lists are going to increase, not 
only for surgeries but also to get into long-term care homes, 
because they are being closed at an astronomical rate. 
 
It is now not quite five years since this NDP government has 
first been elected, and more than 52 rural hospitals have been 
closed, and care home after care home is being told that there 
just is no more money and they will be forced to close their 
doors. 
 
Do these people not listen to themselves? Do they not hear what 
they have been telling the people of Saskatchewan for the past 
five years? Do they honestly think that if they had  

campaigned on honesty and told the people of this province of 
their plans to shut down most every rural care centre across the 
province, that they would be here today? 
 
Places like the Rose Valley health centre is losing 10 long-term 
care beds; the Souris Valley Regional Care Centre has been 
forced to close 20 long-term care beds; the Nirvana Pioneer 
Villa in Melfort is also losing 20 long-term beds. 
 
How much more can the ageing population of this province 
take? It looks as though this government is asking the ageing 
people to leave. The pioneers of this province have no 
guarantee of anything any more and they are scared stiff, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Introducing legislation such as the one before us today is only 
adding to the fears of the general population. The baby boomers 
are worried that they will be caring for their parents; the seniors 
are worried about being a burden on their kids; and the health 
care workers worry that adequate health care standards will not 
be able to be met if there are any more cuts. 
 
I just cannot understand a government that cuts services to the 
people who will need them the most in coming years. Is it the 
plan to cut care homes now and then build more of them in 20 
or 30 years? I don’t see the logic behind that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a well-known fact that the population of 
Saskatchewan is ageing at a fairly quick pace. The birth rate is 
decreasing and the baby boomers will be moving into 
retirement. Where does this government expect these people to 
go in their latter years? 
 
The scary part of all of this is that the major crunch won’t come 
for another 20 years when all the baby boomers become seniors. 
For a government that claims to be looking to the 21st century, 
for a government that claims to be leaving the past behind, this 
government has not even begun to look at the trends that are 
going to impact drastically on their current plans. 
 
During the current decade the fastest growing segment of the 
population is the over 80, low income women. These women 
are not wealthy. The majority of these women did not have 
careers outside of the home, and therefore do not have much in 
terms of independent savings. As well, many of these women’s 
husbands did not have transferable pensions. 
 
It should come as no surprise to members opposite that many of 
these women are poor and their greatest needs are appropriate 
housing and good health care. These people are receiving 
neither, thanks to the cold and callous way that this government 
has decided to run health and social programs in this province. 
 
The problem facing these people is best summed up by David 
K. Foote, author of Boom, Bust & Echo: How to Profit from the 
Coming Demographic Shift. Mr. Foote states in this book, and I 
quote: 
 

The public sector is too preoccupied with deficit cutting to 
think about imaginative solutions to social problems, and 
the senior seniors are too poor to interest the private sector. 

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2347 

It is true that some seniors are well enough to live in their own 
homes but that does not mean that care homes and hospitals can 
continue to close at the current pace. Many of these seniors live 
in rural communities that no longer have care homes or health 
centres. So where are the seniors supposed to go in time of 
need? 
 
I just cannot believe that members of this government are naïve 
enough to think that if they close hospitals people won’t get 
sick; that if they shut down care homes for seniors, people 
won’t get old. What kind of mentality is that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last five years the number of seniors in this 
province has increased by over 12,000. That means that there 
are 12,000 more people needing, now or in the future, special 
care in their communities. There are over 147,000 seniors in 
this province today. The message that this government is 
sending out to people is that the seniors of this province do not 
count. They are not in the workforce. They are not creating 
jobs, and therefore they do not count. 
 
Now what kind of message is this to send to the pioneers of this 
province? We will all be seniors one day, and we all hope that 
there will be facilities that can take care of our needs. 
 
As families move around the country and there is less of a 
nuclear family staying in small communities, there is no longer 
the option of moving in with one’s children. This just is not an 
option for many seniors today. Where are these people 
supposed to go? Yes, home care is a good solution for many 
seniors who only need light care. But what about the level 3 and 
4 patients who simply cannot be cared for at home? 
 
The Minister of Health goes on and on, saying that no one will 
be kicked out into the street. But he has yet to say where these 
people will be placed. He has yet to come up with a viable 
option for the seniors of this province. Maybe if this minister 
spent a little less time dealing with the legal aspects and spent a 
little more time working with the human side of things, he 
would be able to understand the relevant concerns facing the 
seniors of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former Health minister made some very 
interesting statements on health care reform in 1992. The 
former minister said, and I quote: 
 

The fact of the matter is, if you move people out of 
hospitals and into the community, you provide not only a 
higher quality of health care, but at a reduced cost to the 
health care system. 

 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that we could all agree with the premiss of 
that statement. But the fact of the matter is that this simply is 
not happening. Yes, people are being moved out of hospitals, 
but they are not being moved into their communities because 
their community’s care home has been closed down. Funding to 
care homes that could care for the seniors of our province is 
being cut off, leaving these people alone and faced with a move 
into Saskatoon or Regina. 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill gives the Minister of Health such blatant 
powers over licensing of health care facilities. I do not believe 
that any one person should have the express power to do what 
he wants when he wants, without consulting with the people 
that will be affected by this decision. 
 
This NDP Party is governing like it’s going to be in power for 
ever. I don’t know who they think they’re fooling. The people 
of this province all see how the health care system in rural 
Saskatchewan is being destroyed, and they are not going to 
stand for it. 
 
Believe me, when election time comes around in three years, 
the people of this province will not forget what the NDP Party 
has done to health care. The people whose parents’ care homes 
were closed will not forget. The people who had to wait months 
for surgery will not forget. The people who had to drive for 
hours just to get basic health care will not forget. The doctors 
and the nurses of this province will not forget. Memories are 
not that short, Mr. Speaker, especially considering the fact that 
the problems arising with regards to health care cuts will only 
increase as time goes on, as the number of seniors in our 
province continues to rise. 
 
I would like to close by saying that this government is 
governing as though it is going to be in power for ever. 
Consultation is not an issue for them, nor are the views of the 
general public. I urge this government to open its eyes and see 
what is happening in this province. Listen to what the people 
are telling you, and govern in the way in which you were 
elected to do, by representing the views and the needs of the 
people who elected you. 
 
Therefore I move adjournment of the debate on Bill 82. Thank 
you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 114  An Act 
respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for 
District Health Boards and their Affiliates be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A few days 
ago, my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale spoke on this Bill in 
the House. And in his speech he told the government members 
they were digging themselves deeper and deeper into a hole  
deeper and deeper into a hole over their short-sighted and 
heartless health care policy. And the members opposite, in their 
indifference, laughed. 
 
They laughed at the very notion that the people of 
Saskatchewan are turning against them in their health care 
policy. The members opposite, in their arrogance, are seemingly 
oblivious to the fear that they have created in this province. 
They are seemingly oblivious to the anger that is springing out 
of this fear. 
 
  



2348  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a growing opposition that is out 
there, especially in rural areas. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rural 
people are angry, and they’ve been angry for quite some time. 
They’re angry because they know in a province governed by the 
NDP people, people in rural Saskatchewan have been treated 
like second-class citizens. Since 1991, this government has 
done everything in its power to make the lives of every man, 
woman, and child in rural Saskatchewan just that much more 
difficult. 
 
It began with the tearing up of legally binding GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) contracts. It continued with the 
shameful neglect of the highway system throughout our 
province. 
 
And on and on it went, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The cancellation 
of the RUD (rural underground distribution) program, even 
though it was proven to save lives; the broken promise to return 
VLT (video lottery terminal) money to our smaller 
communities; the cut-backs in education and closure of schools 
in many of our small towns; the closing of government services 
outside of the city, even court-houses, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
How much more can the people of Saskatchewan take? 
 
But probably the worst indignity people have had to suffer 
through is the absolute decimation of health care in this 
province. This is the worst, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it’s 
more than simply a mere inconvenience. It’s a threat to the 
health and lives of people throughout our province  people, 
citizens, taxpayers who no longer have ready access to 
emergency service, who no longer have access to acute care, 
who no longer have access to nursing homes in their 
communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite laugh when they 
hear all is not well in our province. Their so-called wellness 
model has been somewhat of a disaster for most residents of 
this province. 
 
Only the government opposite could hack and slash its way 
through our health care system and ending up spending as much 
as they were five years ago. In fact the Health minister uses that 
telling figure as a defence. He says there’s no problem in our 
health care system because, look, we’re spending as much as 
we always were. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a misleading 
argument because the money is being spent but the minister . . . 
because the money is being spent the minister would claim that 
they’re doing a good job. 
 
But the minister who sits in this House every day has evaded 
answering the question which is on everyone’s mind  where 
is that money being spent? Because it certainly isn’t being spent 
on the sick; it certainly isn’t being spent on the elderly. 
 
I would challenge the minister to actually go out to the 
communities he says he is serving so well  go out to Swift 
Current, go out to Melfort, go out to Estevan, go out to any of 
the dozens of small communities that no longer have direct 
access to doctors, or any health care at all. 
 
I would challenge the minister or the Premier to look out the  

window next time they’re flying from Regina to Saskatoon. 
Look down. There are real people down there. They are the 
people your policies have forgotten. They are the ones that no 
longer fit in your plans. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would challenge them to go out to these 
areas and ask the people what they think of the NDP’s health 
care policies now. I challenge them to go out there and try to 
continue to portray themselves as the defenders of health care in 
our province. I challenge them to go out there and try once 
more to hold themselves up as a party that’s out to protect the 
people. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I doubt if the Premier or the minister 
are willing to take up the challenge because I think they know 
what kind of reception they would get. Try as they might to 
pass the blame off on someone else, the people know where the 
buck stops. It stops right at the desks of the Premier and the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this Bill we see that the 
government does indeed have a plan, a plan to deal with its own 
lack of commitment to health care in Saskatchewan. And that 
plan is craftily constructed, and it’s one relying on charity  
charity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our health care system which 
used to have five basic principles now has a sixth: charity. Or 
perhaps I should say there are now five and a half principles, 
because seemingly the principle of public funding by the 
provincial government seems to have gone by the wayside, or at 
least it’s heading in that direction. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are very 
giving by nature. Prior to health reform, many of our citizens 
helped their communities raise millions and millions of dollars 
to improve health care in their communities. But then along 
came the heavy hand of health reform, and those funds were put 
into jeopardy. 
 
The people saw their truly local representatives, those who 
volunteered to run the local institutions, pushed aside and 
replaced with district health boards. That wouldn’t have been so 
bad if the government had played fair ball and made these 
boards truly effective and truly representative. But the NDP, in 
its cynical brand of politics, struck out on both those counts. As 
the people have come to see, these boards are not allowed by 
this government to be effective. Nor are they representative. 
While many good people were elected to the boards, they have 
neither the power nor the influence to go against the 
government’s bidding. 
 
One need only look a few blocks from here to see that. When 
the Regina Health District Board was trying to decide how to 
cope with the lack of funds provided by this government, 
government officials basically told them they had to close the 
Plains hospital  no discussion. It wasn’t up to the board. The 
government held its gun to the board’s head. What other choice 
did they have, other than to do the government’s bidding? No 
choice whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let’s turn to the representative part of the argument, Mr. 
Speaker. Not only do these boards not have the power to act  
  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

without the government’s consent. The NDP made sure that it 
would get its way by giving itself a way to effectively stack the 
district boards. They couldn’t simply have the people of 
Saskatchewan elect these boards. They couldn’t trust the people 
to do that. Instead they had to reserve spots on these boards that 
would allow them to appoint members they knew would be 
inclined to do anything that the NDP wanted without questions 
asked. 
 
Is it any wonder the people of Saskatchewan are less than 
enthusiastic about these boards? Is it any wonder the people can 
see right through this government’s charade when it tries to 
pass the blame for cut-backs off onto these boards? If the 
government thinks the people are fooled by these kinds of 
games, they should think again. 
 
Now the Health minister wants the people of Saskatchewan to 
donate a fifth of their incomes to these boards. Where does the 
government opposite get off on telling the people that they have 
to do more to ensure the viability of health care in their 
communities? The government is quickly abandoning its 
commitment to health care, and now it wants residents to come 
in and pick up the slack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt that, as always with 
Saskatchewan people, they will do everything in their ability to 
help the health care system to survive. But in return they expect 
the government to do the same. And, Mr. Speaker, they expect 
the government to deal with them openly and honestly. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are among the most generous in 
the world. But people here are also among the proudest in the 
world. They have worked very hard, and they’ve sacrificed time 
and time again to build this province. They will not sit idly back 
and watch this government destroy everything the people built 
and then watch that same government turn around and tell them 
that they have to do more. 
 
Residents of Saskatchewan will not be treated with contempt by 
a government that will not own up to its own responsibilities. 
They will not continue to pay among the highest taxes in the 
world while seeing their basic needs ignored by this 
government. They will not believe in a government which sees 
the need for 19 cabinet ministers, for two ministers of 
Education and two ministers of gambling while ignoring the 
needs of the people. They will not put up with a government 
which cries poor one day and then defends an expensive 
union-preference policy the next. 
 
The people of this province are wise to this, Mr. Speaker. The 
government in its unbelievable arrogance may not want to 
believe that, but we on this side certainly know that. The people 
can now see through this insidious propaganda machine that is 
this government, and they are at the end of their rope, Mr. 
Speaker. Their patience is at an end. 
 
But the government’s incessant preoccupation with control 
knows no bounds. Now it wants to set up a whole new level of 
health care bureaucracy. To oversee the generosity of the 
Saskatchewan people, the government wants to appoint 12 more 
people who will have the authority to control the money  

contributed by the people of this province. Seemingly there are 
no guarantees how this money will be spent. The people can’t 
really be assured that the money stays in their own 
communities. This government-appointed board will control the 
money. And because it is appointed by the government, in 
reality, as everything else dealing with health care in this 
province, it will be the government who will be in control. 
 
Why, if these health district boards were put in place to control 
health care, why can’t people simply make their donations to 
them? And if the donors would so wish, they could specify their 
desire as to the use of the money accordingly. Why the need for 
further appointees? Why the need for even greater government 
control? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, this government knows no bounds when 
it comes to control. Yet even after they have that power, they 
take no responsibility for it. They in fact practise what we’ve 
come to describe as selective responsibility in that regard, 
where they do like to take acclaim when there’s good news to 
be presented, but when there are difficult decisions to make it’s 
quite another case. They continue to throw their hands up in the 
air and say that there’s nothing that they can do. They say 
people should talk to the district boards, or they should talk to 
the federal government. They should talk to anyone but the 
provincial government because there’s nothing they can do  
or so the members opposite would have us believe. 
 
Their problem is, Mr. Speaker, no one does believe them  not 
any longer. The smoke has cleared, and the mirrors have been 
shattered. No longer will the people stand for this government’s 
excuses. People are now demanding they own up to their 
responsibilities, the responsibility they were given when the 
people elected them to govern. 
 
(1645) 
 
The people wanted a government that’s willing to take action, 
to show some leadership. They don’t want and they certainly 
don’t need a government that can only think of more people to 
blame for their own doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you’ve probably gathered from my comments that 
I’m not in favour of this Bill. I’m not against the generosity of 
the people of the province, nor am I against those people using 
their money in any good cause that they would see fit. But I am 
absolutely opposed to the way the members opposite have 
continued to treat the people of Saskatchewan. I’m against the 
abdication of responsibility continuously shown by this 
government. And I’m most certainly against the continued 
deterioration of Saskatchewan’s health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as I’m concerned, Bill 114 is more of the 
same from this government. Because of its own decisions, its 
own choices, the government finds itself in a bind. Their 
much-vaunted health reform program was undertaken with no 
plan in place. Cuts were made. Services were reduced before 
this government had a clear vision of which direction it was 
headed. And now that they find themselves in a worsening and 
deeper pit day by day, they are grasping at any straw that they 
can find. They are pointing fingers in all directions to find the  
  



2350  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

next scapegoat. 
 
The Tories proved a convenient excuse for a few years. Then it 
was the federal government’s turn to take the blame. Then the 
government began blaming the cuts on their own district health 
boards. 
 
And now comes the final insult. Now the finger of blame has 
come to rest on the people of Saskatchewan. In fact I recall 
Health department officials being on record in the media in this 
regard as saying something to the effect that they expect to have 
every fallen sparrow laid at the foot of health reform. And this 
reference was in fact being made to the very victims of the 
health care mess that we find ourselves in today. These are the 
very people who have suffered through cut after cut in their 
health care at the hands of this government. 
 
Now the government is telling them they have to do more. They 
have to donate more. Over and above their taxes, they have to 
scrape up more cash to contribute to the Crown foundation for 
health districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you just have to wonder how far out of touch the 
members opposite have become. And we know, Mr. Speaker, 
how far they’ve gotten out of touch, and so do the rest of the 
people of this province. 
 
And I can just recall a rally in Moose Jaw last week where the 
government was reminded that they will find out at the ballot 
box in this regard. And if the Premier or the Health minister or 
any member opposite actually open-mindedly takes a trip out 
into the areas of the province devastated by this government 
with respect to health care, they’ll also soon know. 
 
So I have nothing further to add at this time, Mr. Speaker, and I 
would at this time move adjournment of debate on Bill 114. 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

MOTIONS  
Routine Proceedings  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2301 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  

Bill No. 21  An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 and to enact a related amendment /Loi modifiant La 
Loi d’interprétation de 1995 et édictant une modification corrélative  

Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2301 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2301 

Bill No. 113  An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc.  
Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2302 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2302 

Bill No. 94  An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act  
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2303 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2303 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2304 

Bill No. 95  An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act  
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2306 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2306 

Bill No. 80  An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act  
Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2308 
Belanger .......................................................................................................................................................................... 2308, 2313 
Draude ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2309, 2314 
Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................ 2310, 2313, 2315 
D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................... 2310, 2315 

Bill No. 84  An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act  
Crofford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2316 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2316 

Bill No. 85  An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act  
Mitchell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2316 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2316 

THIRD READINGS 
Bill No. 21  An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 and to enact a related amendment/Loi modifiant La 
Loi d’interprétation de 1995 et édictant une modification corrélative  

Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2317 
Bill No. 113  An Act respecting Wascana Energy Inc.  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2317 
Bill No. 94  An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2317 
Bill No. 95  An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2318 
Bill No. 80 - An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act  

Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2318 
Bill No. 84  An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2318 
Bill No. 85  An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act  

Mitchell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2318 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2319 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2319 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2319 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2319 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 



 

Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2320 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2320 
Trew........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Ag Biotech International Conference  

Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 
Federal Funding Agreement with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations  

Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 
Ag Biotech Resource Kit  

Flavel ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2321 
Ninth Annual Law Enforcement Run  

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2321 
Liberal Party Donation List  

D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2321 
Banners for Wascana Park  

Hamilton ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 
Foam Lake Community Hall Opens  

Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 
Communities Hold Fund-raising Walks  

Trew........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Political Donations  
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 
Mitchell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 

Health Care Funding  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 

Kerrobert Court-house Closure  
Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2324 
Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2324 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 
Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2325 

Rehabilitation Services  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2325 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

Human Rights Commission Funding  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2326 
Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 

Northern Living Conditions  
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2326 
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2326 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 
Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2327 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2329 
Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2331 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2334 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2335 

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2337 

Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities  
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2340 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2342 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2344 

Bill No. 114  An Act respecting the Establishment of a Crown Foundation for District Health Boards and their 
Affiliates 

Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2347 


