
















































February 29, 1996  Hansard Morning


   LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 

   February 29, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 

 

Clerk:  I wish to inform the Assembly that His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor’s private secretary has informed me that 

His Honour will be opening the first session of the twenty-third 

legislature at 10 a.m. today, the 29th day of February 1996. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

10:01 a.m. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I am commanded by His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor to inform you that he does not see fit to 

declare the causes of the summoning of the present legislature 

until later today when the Legislative Assembly shall have 

elected a Speaker according to law. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:02 a.m. 

 

Clerk:  Members of the Legislative Assembly, pursuant to 

the rules of this Assembly, it is my duty to call upon you to 

elect a member to preside over your deliberations as Speaker. 

 

Pursuant to the rules specified under rule 26(1), the following 

members have declared their intention to stand as candidates for 

election to the office of Speaker. 

 

The candidates are Mr. Glenn Hagel, the hon. member for 

Moose Jaw North. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Harry Van Mulligen, the hon. member for 

Regina Victoria. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clerk:  In preparation for the vote, the Sergeant-at-Arms will 

now bring in the ballot box and the pages will distribute the list 

of candidates to all members and post the list in the polling 

booths. 

 

The ballot box will then be inspected and the sealed ballots 

opened. And then I will announce the beginning of the voting 

procedure. 

 

Members of the Assembly, I will now ask those members who 

wish to cast their ballot to proceed to the registration table 

behind the bar on your respective side of the House to receive 

your ballot paper, and there you will also sign a registration 

sheet. And then would you proceed to the polling booth 

following this path. 

 

May I remind all members to please print the name of your 

candidate on the ballot paper. Please print. Thank you. 

 

The members proceeded to cast ballots. 

 

Clerk:  Order, please. Order, please. May I ask the House to  

come to order, please. 

 

If there are any members who have not voted and wish to do so, 

will you please vote now. 

 

All members having voted, the House will recess to the call of 

the bells while the Clerks at the Table count the ballots. The 

bells will ring for three minutes to recall members to the 

Chamber when the results of the first ballot are ready to be 

announced. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

Clerk: — Hon. members, before announcing the result of the 

ballot, I would like to invite you to acknowledge the 

contributions of the two candidates to this historical occasion, 

the first election of Speaker by secret ballot vote. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 

to inform you that you have elected Mr. Glenn Hagel, the hon. 

member for Moose Jaw North, as your Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish 

to express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of 

the high honour the Assembly has been pleased to confer upon 

me. And while I leave the floor of this Assembly to take the 

Speaker’s chair, I feel that I also leave all political partisan 

feelings in order that I may discharge with impartiality to all 

and to the best of my ability, the various and important duties 

pertaining to the high office of Speaker of the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. I feel honoured and 

humble. 

 

And I would like to speak first of all to the hon. member from 

Regina Victoria, Harry Van Mulligen. I want to say thank you 

to you for your candidacy for this important office and to 

commend you on the way that you conducted your search for 

the office. You took the high road consistently as befitting the 

office and as befitting your reputation in this House and 

beyond. I think you bring honour to this office when someone 

of your calibre and your integrity seeks it, and I will always, 

always welcome your advice. And I join all of our colleagues, 

all of your colleagues here in the Assembly, in saying thank you 

for your commitment and your candidacy. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I’ve thought for some time, particularly 

recently, how do you describe this role. And I have to admit that 

the description that’s come to my mind most frequently in 

recent times is this. You take the 58 most partisan political 

people in the entire province of Saskatchewan and you stick 

them in a room together, face to face. You select one and say 

you’ll never be able to speak and we’ll call you the Speaker.  



2   Saskatchewan Hansard February 29, 1996 

And then you throw him into a black robe and a funny hat and 

toss him into the middle and ask him to get everybody’s respect 

and keep order in the place. And I must admit it feels to be a bit 

of a challenge. 

 

Hon. members, 10 years ago when I made my first speech in 

this Assembly, as 15 of you will in the next few days, I spoke 

about my grandmother who believed to the core of her being 

that government is a noble institution, and to serve in this 

Assembly, to be called to serve in this Assembly, is an 

honourable calling. And when I spoke 10 years ago I committed 

myself to serve my own constituents in a way that would make 

grandma feel proud. 

 

My hon. colleagues, what I say to you today is that I pledge to 

you that as I carry out the duties of the office of Speaker and 

serve you in this Assembly, I pledge that I will do that in a way 

that will make grandma feel proud. 

 

I think we all know that these are times in which there is 

cynicism. Saskatchewan doesn’t have the market on cynicism; 

it’s not just in Canada or North America. But there is cynicism 

about our institution and about ourselves, and to some degree 

even, unfortunately, about parliamentary democracy. 

 

It is my intention in carrying out the responsibilities of this 

office that I will work hard to reduce that cynicism and to 

increase the trust and the respect that the people of 

Saskatchewan have for our institution and for all of us 

collectively. And it is my intention to play a more prominent 

role. 

 

I think the Speaker has not only the opportunity but therefore 

the responsibility to play a more prominent, proactive role as a 

liaison between the Legislative Assembly and the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I think we all understand as well that the respect that people 

have for us and our institution is influenced by the way we 

conduct our affairs in this Assembly. 

 

It seems to me that as we come to this Assembly as 

representatives of those who sent us, that it is always 

appropriate for us to come with reasoned debate; it is always 

appropriate for us to come with the humour in our hearts; and it 

is also always appropriate that we come to this Assembly with 

passion in our hearts. 

 

It is extremely important that the fears and the anxieties and the 

hopes and the dreams and the aspirations of Saskatchewan 

people be reflected in this room. Heaven help us, heaven help 

us if it should ever be that the people of Saskatchewan lose trust 

and feel their passions are not reflected here. 

 

I think all of us, or most of us, perhaps all of us in this room 

today, through good luck, nothing more complicated than good 

luck, happen to have been born into the most wonderful system 

of democracy in the world — one in which we choose to solve 

our differences and to solve problems, to resolve differences, by 

shooting words and not bullets. 

 

Reasoned debate will always be acceptable; humour will always 

be acceptable; passionate debate will always be acceptable. But 

there is one thing that will never be acceptable, and that is if we 

attack one another personally in this Chamber. 

 

If we wish to heighten the respect for the institution and for 

ourselves collectively, then it begins with the way we conduct 

our affairs. And I ask all of you — and I know from talking 

with all of you over the weeks just gone by, that there is a 

collective political will here to heighten the trust and the respect 

for the institution, and I pledge to work with you to achieve that 

— we must always remember that no matter how passionate our 

debate, most importantly we must never ever lose respect for 

the institution and respect for one another. 

 

It is my hope that when my term of office ends, that you will 

judge me to have been fair and to have been consistent and to 

have been accessible to you in the proceedings . . . regarding the 

concerns in the proceedings of this House. 

 

My hon. colleagues, I conclude by saying to you again that I 

commit myself to do the very best I can to carry out the duties 

of this important office and to be your servant in this Assembly; 

and most importantly ultimately, therefore, in service of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 

hon. members, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the 

government members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my 

distinct pleasure and desirable duty to congratulate you, sir, on 

the election and elevation to this very important high office as 

Speaker of the Assembly. 

 

As has been pointed out by our distinguished Clerk of the 

Table, we had a very difficult choice to make this morning 

between two very competent individuals who have served this 

Assembly with distinction. They’re not the only ones. I’m sure 

the new members will prove their capacity to serve in the public 

interest as the elected Speaker and the member from Regina 

who was unsuccessful. But these two people indeed have a 

track record of proven commitment to public service and it was 

a tough choice to make, very tough choice for all of us to make. 

 

I think at the end of the day, although, Mr. Speaker, this is your 

morning and your day in a sense  and I again repeat my 

congratulations  the way I see it, the big victor in all of this is 

this great institution and the democratic process. 

 

When it was my pleasure to assume office as Premier of the 

government in 1991, I thought that I carried with it the 

prerogative and the prerequisite of appointing the Speaker. 

That’s the way it happened in the good old days when I first 

entered the Legislative Assembly. And when all of a sudden 

through the supplications of some hon. members on the 

opposite side and on this side, we instituted the reform of 

election and today’s culmination of it, a true election, a 

contested election, and a tough decision to make, I have  



February 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

concluded that the old ways of doing were wrong and 

inappropriate. 

 

This really does give you, sir, a high level of independence, the 

respect of the Assembly, because you have received the 

democratic vote of the members of the Assembly. And the 

winner, the victor, is democracy in this Assembly, and I think 

we should all be very proud of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, sir, and as members of the House 

will know, you have a number of important functions to fulfil. 

There are of course the ceremonial functions, because you 

represent all of us on many occasions both at home and abroad 

and nationally. There is of course the day-to-day problems of 

maintaining the rules and the orders. Enjoy the unanimity, sir, if 

I may say so with respect, today. Because from here on in I’m 

sure it will be difficult, as you understand, making sure that 

there is honest debate and fair debate. It’s a very, very difficult 

task. 

 

I think it’s the Book of Luke that tells us upon whomsoever 

much is given, of him much is also required or expected, 

roughly translated. The good Book of Luke says that. Well 

you’ve been given a tremendous responsibility and opportunity. 

 

In addition to knowing the rule book, you probably need to 

know the good Book in order to make sure that your functions 

are performed the way that I think that you can perform them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that you’ll do the job. Again on 

behalf of all of us on this side, I congratulate you. I know that 

you’ll perform your duties with integrity, fairness, and 

compassion  the very values which have guided your career 

in this Legislative Assembly to date. 

 

Again, congratulations. May your wisdom and principles guide 

us in the important service to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. members, ladies 

and gentlemen, it is indeed an honour that my first act in this 

House as Leader of the Official Opposition is to congratulate 

you on your election as Speaker of this Assembly. And I echo 

what the Premier had to say, probably for the last time in this 

legislature. 

 

On behalf of all of my colleagues on the official opposition 

benches, Mr. Speaker, I want to wish you nothing but good luck 

in your new role. And yours, sir, is a daunting task  a task 

that must be approached with wisdom, fairness, and dedication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that you possess all these qualities, 

and I wish you nothing but well wishes in this coming session 

of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I’m told there are times that not everyone in this House will 

agree with your rulings. There are times, I am told, those who 

have come before  before me and before us  that we may  

bitterly disagree with the rulings of the Chair. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at no time will members from this opposition 

bench show you as Speaker, anything less than the full order of 

respect you so deserve in taking on this very important role. 

 

Once again, sir, my congratulations on behalf of the official 

opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, hon. 

members, ladies and gentlemen, on this historic occasion I too 

on behalf of the Conservative opposition would like to 

congratulate you in your election as Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

We too would also offer our thanks to the hon. member for 

Regina Victoria, Mr. Harry Van Mulligen, for the service of 

putting his name forward. We appreciate that and certainly feel 

that he has served this province in a very good and exemplary 

fashion over the last number of years. And we thank him for his 

dedication to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker has always had a very important role in 

parliamentary democracies, as you know, Mr. Speaker. Always 

democratic; always consistent; always fair; always reasonable; 

always unbiased. Never to miss a member on their feet at any 

given time. Never to miss the spoken work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the role of Speaker reminds me a little bit of a 

hockey game. After the game is over, if the referee has done a 

good job, no one remembers who the referee was. However, 

Mr. Speaker, if the ref hasn’t done a very good job, it isn’t very 

long before you start hearing the catcalls  kill the ref; kill the 

ref. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when your term is over, we sincerely hope 

that we can put you in the first category, that is, not 

remembering who you are. 

 

Thank you very kindly, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations, Glenn. 

Congratulations and best wishes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  One may have sensed a slight 

deterioration in the atmosphere here already and we haven’t 

started. 

 

Before moving adjournment, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add my 

congratulations to those of the others. I want to congratulate 

both you and the member from Regina Victoria on the way you 

conducted yourself. I think this whole process has brought 

honour to this Assembly and I think there’s no doubt but that 

this institution emerges a stronger and better institution for the 

election that just took place. 

 

With that, I’d like to move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker:  The motion is not in order. We might as well 

start right now. And I simply declare that the House will now  



4   Saskatchewan Hansard February 29, 1996 

recess until 2 p.m. this day when His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor will present the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 



   LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  5 

   February 29, 1996    

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

2:02 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour: 

 

The Legislative Assembly has elected me as their Speaker, 

although I am but little able to fulfil the important duties thus 

assigned to me. 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall 

into error I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to 

the Assembly, whose servant I am, and who, through me, the 

better to enable them to discharge their duty to their Queen and 

country, humbly claim all their undoubted rights and privileges, 

especially that they may have freedom of speech in their 

debates, access to your person at all seasonable times, and that 

their proceedings may receive from you the most favourable 

consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor to declare to you that he 

freely confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to 

Her Majesty's person and government, and, not doubting that 

their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper and 

prudence, he grants, and upon all occasions will recognize and 

allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall 

have ready access to His Honour upon all seasonable occasions 

and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, 

will constantly receive from him the most favourable 

construction. 

 

2:06 p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech as tabled: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

A RENEWED MANDATE 

 

Welcome to the 1st Session of the 23rd Legislature. It is a 

particular pleasure to welcome those of you who are sitting as 

elected Members for the first time. 

 

Election to public office is one of society’s most honourable 

callings. The people of our province have placed a tremendous 

trust in each of you. I know you will do your utmost to maintain 

that trust. 

 

My government accepts a renewed mandate from the people of 

Saskatchewan with enthusiasm. 

 

Our province has restored its financial health. 

 

Our economy is strong and growing. 

 

Saskatchewan today is the best place in the world in which to 

live and raise a family. 

 

The 21st century holds the promise of even greater things to 

come. Now is the time to prepare for that new century; to seize 

the moment with the plans, policies and reforms required to 

build a better and more prosperous future for all. 

 

During my government’s public consultation, Preparing for 

the New Century — Making Choices for Today and 

Tomorrow, people made clear their determination to work 

together to build that better future. 

 

The people of our province have urged this Assembly to tackle 

a number of important challenges. My ministers agree. In the 

coming months, my government will: 

 

 • focus on jobs and growth, with the same determination it 

used to balance the budget; 

 

 • propose wide-ranging reforms to our education and training 

programs; 

 

 • put forward a fundamental redesign of social assistance; 

 

 • move to the next stage of health renewal, with proposals to 

improve the way health services are provided to people; and, 

 

 • restructure government at every level to reduce the cost of 

administration; freeing up money for the vital public services 

our citizens want. 

 

JOB CREATION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

 

My government’s first priority is jobs and growth. 

 

Saskatchewan people achieved a billion-dollar turn-around in 

the public finances of our province, by working together on a 

balanced budget plan and sticking to it. 

 

Similarly, we can achieve the goal of a diversified, 

export-oriented, full employment economy, by working together 

to craft a long-term plan, and advancing it one step at a time. 

 

My government recently released its new economic 

development strategy - Partnership for Growth. It flows from 

consultations with business, working people, co-operatives and 

communities across the province. 

 

Partnership for Growth commits my government to continue 

to improve the climate for job creation and economic 

development. 

 

My ministers will present this Assembly with a four-year 

financial plan that will ensure balanced budgets, and further 

reduction in public debt over the life of this legislature. Prudent 

management of public finances will help maintain consumer  



6 Saskatchewan Hansard February 29, 1996 

and business confidence. 

 

My government will also deliver on its commitment to reduce 

the regulatory and administrative burden on business. It will 

present a plan to review all government regulations; a plan 

which will reduce the regulatory burden by at least twenty-five 

per cent over the next ten years. 

 

Trade is a key component of my government’s economic 

development strategy. One third of Saskatchewan jobs are 

export-related, and we export more than half of what we 

produce. 

 

My ministers will establish the Saskatchewan Trade and 

Export Partnership – STEP – an industry-government 

partnership to provide local business with: 

 

 • research about new market opportunities; 

 

 • techniques for developing new markets; 

 

 • information on existing and potential markets; and, 

 

 • export financing. 

 

My government will continue its strong commitment to 

community-based economic development, co-operative 

enterprise and small business. 

 

Saskatchewan’s network of more than a dozen Regional 

Economic Development Authorities will double over the next 

four years. These community-based organizations will become 

the focal point for economic development in their regions, as 

they deliver more support programs for business. 

 

My ministers are determined to foster growth in our vibrant 

co-operative sector by supporting new co-operatives, promoting 

strategic alliances among existing co-operatives, and supporting 

their diversification through full and equal access to 

government programs and services. 

 

My government is also determined to encourage the rapid 

expansion of Saskatchewan’s small business sector – our 

number one source of new jobs. During this session, you will 

be presented with proposals which will continue to target 

incentives for local businesses that create new jobs and 

opportunities. 

 

Saskatchewan’s public companies, our crown corporations, 

have played an important role in the growth of our economy. 

My government is committed to a strong and dynamic role for 

crown corporations in a prosperous, mixed economy. 

 

My ministers have therefore launched a comprehensive review 

of the crown sector, to ensure that public enterprise will 

continue to play a positive role in a new, deregulated global 

marketplace. 

 

Agriculture remains the foundation of Saskatchewan’s export 

economy, and a source of optimism for the future. In recent 

years, farm incomes have risen steadily as our producers have  

diversified. 

 

My government, in partnership with the federal government, 

will support this positive trend by making more than 

two-hundred million dollars available over the next four years 

through the Agri-Food Innovation, Agriculture Development 

and Agri-Food Equity funds, which encourage research, 

development and diversification in agriculture. This represents 

a huge investment in the future of agriculture. 

 

New products and new markets have already prompted the 

dramatic expansion of agricultural biotechnology in our 

province. Saskatchewan has become a centre of excellence for 

this industry. This June, Saskatchewan will make that point to a 

global audience when we host the International Agriculture 

Biotechnology Conference in Saskatoon. 

 

We must remain alert to the importance of managing the risks 

in agriculture. The farm safety net now in place is only a step 

towards a long-term national package. My government will 

work to achieve a strong national safety net, and will fight to 

maintain national standards and appropriate levels of funding. 

 

Crop insurance will always be a cornerstone of the agricultural 

safety net. My government will submit The Crop Insurance 

Amendment Act for your consideration, to provide more 

flexibility in this important program. 

 

My ministers understand that major pressures continue to 

concern agriculture. Deregulation of rail transportation, the 

increasing influence of international trade agreements, and the 

debate over marketing institutions are all serious issues. My 

government is committed to protecting the policies and 

institutions that serve best the interests of our producers, while 

working with the industry to adapt to change. 

 

The forestry and mining industries are key engines of growth, 

both in today’s economy and in the economy we are building 

for the new century. 

 

My government will propose a new framework for development 

of our forestry industry. The Forest Resources Management Act 

will clarify, update and strengthen the rules by which we 

develop and conserve forest resources. 

 

My ministers remain committed to carefully-regulated growth 

in our northern mining industry, and determined that jobs and 

business opportunities will flow to northern residents from that 

development. 

 

The award-winning Multi-Party Training Plan has made 

major strides in increasing the participation of northerners in 

the mining workforce. Last year, nearly 50 per cent of mine site 

employees were northerners. That compares to less than 40 per 

cent five years ago. 

 

My government will also work with First Nations and Metis to 

continue to promote and foster greater self-sufficiency, and new 

economic opportunities. 

 

My ministers believe that promoting consumer confidence in  



February 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

our domestic market can make an important contribution to 

economic development. That is why my government will 

present for your consideration a new Consumer Protection Act 

and The Direct Sellers Amendment Act. 

 

The Consumer Protection Act updates and codifies a number of 

laws governing the marketplace, balances consumer and 

business interests and promotes protection for vulnerable 

consumers. The Direct Sellers Amendment Act will improve 

consumer protection and benefit business through the 

interprovincial harmonization of certain rules governing this 

industry. 

 

WORKING TOWARDS FULL EMPLOYABILITY 

 

Ensuring that Saskatchewan people are fully employable is one 

of the best ways our province can promote job creation and 

economic development. 

 

For many years the federal government has been the senior 

partner in delivering workforce training in Saskatchewan. The 

federal government has announced that it is largely withdrawing 

from this area. 

 

To respond to this challenge, and to work on a 

made-in-Saskatchewan workforce training strategy, my 

government has organized a new Post-Secondary Education and 

Skills Training Department. 

 

It will be the task of this department to assess the programs and 

institutions devoted to workforce training, and to craft a 

coherent and effective network, focused on student needs. My 

government will work closely with business, labour, students 

and educators to improve the links between industry and 

training. 

 

Our post-secondary educational institutions are central to both 

our economy and our society. To ensure they can continue to 

make their contribution in the years ahead, my government will 

encourage colleges and universities to share more information 

and resources, and to reduce the cost of administration by 

reducing duplication and overlap. 

 

In support of this work, you will be presented with several bills 

related to training and education. 

 

The Education Amendment Act will clarify and improve certain 

rules governing the teaching profession. The University of 

Regina Amendment Act and The Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology Amendment Act will 

modernize certain outdated provisions governing these 

institutions. 

 

SOCIAL PROGRAMS THAT WORK 

 

Saskatchewan has one of the lowest dependency rates in 

Canada. That is, fewer of our fellow citizens rely on social 

programs to meet basic needs than in most other provinces. 

 

However, my ministers, like most Saskatchewan people, believe 

there is still room for improvement. Traditional income  

support programs do an inadequate job of helping employable 

recipients achieve independence and self-sufficiency, and they 

are not adequately addressing critical needs like child poverty. 

 

Over the next two years, my government will work to redesign 

social assistance, replacing traditional welfare as we know it. 

Proposals to achieve this goal have been outlined in a 

discussion paper entitled Redesigning Social Assistance. 

 

Our current system is failing children. Child poverty is poverty 

in its most tragic form. Investing in children is critical to 

breaking the cycle of poverty and dependence. That is why a 

key element of my government’s social assistance reform will 

be a new Saskatchewan Child Benefit and a Working Income 

Supplement. 

 

These initiatives for low-income families with children will 

reduce child poverty, and make work pay for families receiving 

assistance. They will also provide these families with 

supplementary health coverage for children, so they will not 

have to turn to social assistance as a result of health-related 

expenses for their children. 

 

My government's social assistance redesign will help more 

families to become independent of social assistance; will help 

youth to avoid becoming trapped in poverty; will allow people 

involved in training programs to more easily move off social 

assistance; and will ensure that only those who truly need 

assistance receive it. 

 

To further assist children, my government will introduce The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act. This act 

will substantially improve the ability of custodial parents to get 

help in collecting child support. 

 

My government will launch a Task Force on Family-friendly 

Work to bring employers, employees and other stakeholders to 

a common table to discuss how work practices can be 

modernized to help parents better meet family and workplace 

responsibilities. 

 

Our province’s families have the right to live in safe 

communities. My government will propose reforms to the 

justice system designed to: 

 

 • make offenders, including young offenders, more 

accountable for the impact of their actions on their victims 

and their community; 

 

 • toughen the formal justice system where necessary to ensure 

that citizens are protected from chronic and violent offenders; 

and, 

 

 • find new and more effective ways of dealing with 

non-dangerous offenders. 

 

Too many people have lost a family member or a friend in 

accidents caused by a drinking driver. My government will 

introduce The Highway and Vehicle Statutes Amendment Act to 

address this issue. The measures proposed will substantially 

toughen sanctions against drinking drivers; provide avenues for  



8 Saskatchewan Hansard February 29, 1996 

rehabilitation; and introduce new rules governing new drivers. 

 

A SUSTAINABLE, EFFECTIVE HEALTH SYSTEM 

 

Saskatchewan people are firmly committed to universal, 

accessible, publicly-funded health care. The health reforms of 

recent years, placing control of health in local hands and 

focusing more on people’s real needs, have gone a great 

distance towards making our health system sustainable for 

today and into the new century. 

 

Our province must now move to the next stage of health 

renewal - improving the way the health system delivers services 

to people. 

 

That means making better use of nurses, therapists and 

counsellors in delivering health services; considering alternative 

ways to reimburse family physicians; and ensuring all health 

practitioners work together as part of a coordinated team. 

 

In this session, my government will introduce The Pharmacy 

Act, The Optometry and Ophthalmic Dispensers Professions 

Amendment Act, and The Radiation Health and Safety 

Amendment Act. This legislation will improve the framework 

governing a number of health professions. 

 

For many years the federal government has been the senior 

partner in ensuring that health services are universal, accessible, 

and comprehensive across Canada – building on the Medicare 

model pioneered in this province. 

 

The federal government has announced that it is changing the 

federal transfer payment system for health services. The new 

federal approach threatens to lead to a two-tier health care 

system. 

 

My government will not permit federal policy to lead to such a 

system here in Saskatchewan. Therefore, you will be presented 

with The Health Facilities Licensing Act, which will permit our 

province to better manage the development of private sector 

health facilities, and prevent the development of a two-tier 

health system. 

 

FRUGAL, EFFECTIVE GOVERNMENT 

 

Saskatchewan already has the leanest, most frugal provincial 

government in Canada. However, the people of our province 

have urged my ministers to do more. They expect this Assembly 

to continue to search for ways to shift limited financial 

resources, from administration and lower priority infrastructure, 

to the delivery of vital services for people. 

 

At the provincial level, my government will propose measures 

in the budget which will leave citizens in no doubt of its 

determination to achieve greater frugality and efficiency, and to 

shift resources to where they can best serve people. 

 

At the local level, we have a higher proportion of local 

government than any other province in Canada. Our province 

has 847 urban and rural governments and 119 school boards, all  

with elected and appointed officials and the authority to set and 

collect taxes. 

 

The new challenges these local governments face make 

locally-driven, effective restructuring essential. No one knows 

that better than the people who manage our municipalities, 

schools and other local services. They are already co-operating 

to strengthen local government, and to arrive at a sustainable 

level of service for the future. 

 

At the request of urban, rural and northern municipalities, you 

will be asked to consider a number of bills allowing 

communities to modernize local taxation and assessments. 

These proposals – developed in close consultation with 

municipal governments and others – will give communities the 

tools they need to prepare for the future. 

 

To improve medical, police and other emergency services, my 

government will introduce The 911 Emergency Services Act, 

and will work with municipalities, police and fire services, 

health providers, and others to get province-wide 911 service up 

and running as soon as possible. 

 

At the federal level, the recent referendum in Quebec and the 

continued uncertainty about the future of our country may 

provide an opportunity to modernize and improve our 

federation as a whole. My government will work within its 

means to help shape that new federation. 

 

A carefully balanced reform should be our goal – guaranteeing 

the legal and social rights of Canadian citizenship; reinforcing 

the federal government’s ability to carry out its roles and 

responsibilities; and reinforcing the ability of all provinces to 

manage their own roles and responsibilities without wasteful 

overlap, duplication or jurisdictional conflict. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have many hopes and dreams they 

can only achieve in partnership with other Canadians. That is 

why Saskatchewan’s commitment is to a strong, united Canada. 

 

CONCLUSION 

 

It has always been a matter of pride to the people of 

Saskatchewan that this province has one of the highest rates of 

voluntarism in Canada. Last year this Assembly established the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, and a few weeks ago it was 

my privilege to announce the first recipients. I look forward to 

presenting the Medal to these six outstanding citizens in this 

Chamber early in the session. 

 

In conclusion, the agenda my government presents today sets a 

course for the new century, and outlines the first steps we can 

take to get there. It is an agenda of: 

 

 • jobs and growth; 

 

 • reform for our education and training programs; 

 

 • fundamental redesign of social assistance; 

 

 • improved health services; and, 



February 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

 • reduced government costs. 

 

This agenda is consistent with the values and priorities of our 

citizens. 

 

It is built on the strong foundation of the return to fiscal 

responsibility achieved during the term of the previous 

Legislature. 

 

We have tough challenges to overcome as a province, but we 

also enjoy the prospect of remarkable opportunities as we 

prepare, together, for the new century. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with the 

estimates for the year beginning April 1st, 1996 will be 

submitted. I leave you now to the business of the session, with 

full confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties 

and responsibilities. May Divine Providence continue to bless 

our province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

God save the Queen. 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:26 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Notice from the Chief Electoral Officer 

 

The Speaker:  I wish to inform the Assembly that the Clerk 

of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 

Electoral Officer lists of the names of such members as have 

been returned to serve in the legislature. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Sergeant-at-Arms 

 

The Speaker:  I would like to introduce to the Assembly our 

new Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: — I wish also to inform the Assembly that the 

pages have been chosen for this session and I’ll ask them to 

stand as I introduce them to you: Jocelyn Arthur, Ken Dueck, 

Leanna Eaton, Mark Lloyd, and Leasa McDougall. Your pages 

for this session. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the Deputy Premier by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Friday, March 1, 1996. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded again 

by the deputy Premier by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be 

printed after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that 

he do appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but 

such as he shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Members to Compose Lists for Standing Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly I move, seconded again by the Deputy Premier. 

 

That members Bradley, Lingenfelter, Shillington, Krawetz, 

Toth be constituted a special committee to prepare and 

report, with all convenient speed, lists of members to 

compose the standing committees of this Assembly, 

provided under Rule 94: 

 

That the said standing committees be severally empowered 

to examine and inquire into all such matters and things as 

may be referred to them by this Assembly, and to report 

from time to time their observations thereon; with power to 

send for persons, papers and records, and to examine 

witnesses under oath. 

 

That the said special committee consider the size of the 

standing committees and to report thereon with all 

convenient speed. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today pursuant to rule 46 to 

discuss a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. 

 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard February 29, 1996 

The Speaker:  I’d ask the Leader of the Third Party to briefly 

explain why the matter is urgent and to advise the House of the 

contents of his motion. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayment Deadline 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would be my 

preference not to bring in an emergency motion with all of the 

guests present here today to partake in the throne speech 

activities. However, it is imperative that this issue by discussed 

today because today is February 29, a very important deadline 

for 12,000 Saskatchewan farmers. Today is the day these 

producers must pay the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) bills they received from the provincial government. 

Tomorrow the government will start to charge interest on any 

bills which have not been paid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, forcing producers to repay funds received through 

the GRIP program as a result of the provincial government 

retroactively changing 60,000 contracts is both unacceptable 

and unethical. The Premier and his cabinet colleagues promised 

on several occasions that farmers would not have to repay this 

money. In fact last year in the Assembly the Agriculture 

minister stated: 

 

No we will not be collecting the $115 million overpayment 

from farmers. If we do collect it, then we’ll be legally 

obligated to mail it back to them. 

 

Hansard, March 31, 1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on June 3 the Leader-Post quotes the Agriculture 

minister as saying: 

 

Farmers will never . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I will ask the Leader of the Third Party 

to proceed to advise the Assembly of the content of his motion. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

motion is such that farmers believe and we believe in the third 

party that this matter is of urgent necessity and should be 

discussed here today and I would move the motion, an 

emergency motion pursuant to rule 46, to discuss this matter. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion I have a few announcements to make. 

 

I would like to first of all thank the Military Guard of Honour 

from 15 Wing Moose Jaw and the base band for participating in 

this afternoon’s events. 

 

I would like to thank all the guests and members of the public, 

including the grade 11 and 12 students from Imperial, 

Saskatchewan and the grade 10, 11, and 12 students from 

Charlebois School in Cumberland House who have joined us 

today. 

 

I had opportunity to meet with the students earlier today and 

welcome very much the significance and the symbolism of 

having some of the youth of our province here for this very 

important day. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I want to welcome the choir from Luther 

College in Regina. I will be calling on them to sing for us 

immediately following the adjournment. 

 

Following the choir selections I would like to invite everyone to 

join their Honours, the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, 

the Leader of the Third Party, and members of the Legislative 

Assembly at the Speaker's tea which will take place 

immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 

in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and the 

Legislative Library in the east wing. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker: — I would now like to introduce the students of 

the Luther College Choir. The choir is celebrating its 80th 

anniversary this year. They have developed a reputation for 

being one of the finest high school choirs in all of Canada. The 

choir has received many honours and prizes over the years and 

indeed in the past six years, they have received top honours in 

the provincial finals of the Saskatchewan Music Festival three 

times. 

 

The Luther College Choir has been under the direction of Dr. 

Carl Cherland for the last 20 years and I now invite them to 

perform under his direction. The choir will sing two selections 

for us this afternoon — “Arise, Shine For Your Light Has 

Come” and “Bridge Over Troubled Waters”. 

 

(The choir sang.) 

 

The Speaker: —On behalf of all here present to the choir from 

Luther College and Dr. Cherland I want to thank you for those 

two very fine selections just wonderfully performed. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  It will be your pleasure to be able to hear the 

choir a little later. They will be performing again in the rotunda 

following the departure from the Chamber. We hope you will 

stop and listen to them on your way to and during the tea. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 2:45 p.m. 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
Clerk ................................................................................................................................................................................................1 
Shillington .......................................................................................................................................................................................1 
Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................................1 
Romanow ........................................................................................................................................................................................2 
Osika ................................................................................................................................................................................................3 
Boyd .................................................................................................................................................................................................3 
Shillington .......................................................................................................................................................................................3 
Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................................5 
Shillington .......................................................................................................................................................................................5 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................5 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 

Notice from the Chief Electoral Officer 
Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................................9 

Introduction of Sergeant-at-Arms 
Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................................9 

Introduction of Pages 
Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................................9 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
Pro Forma Bill 

Romanow ........................................................................................................................................................................................9 
TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................................9 
MOTIONS 

Speech from the Throne 
Romanow ........................................................................................................................................................................................9 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
Romanow ........................................................................................................................................................................................9 

Members to Compose Lists for Standing Committees 
Romanow ........................................................................................................................................................................................9 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayment Deadline 

Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
 
 


