













































March 1, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 11 

 March 1, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

petition here today that I’d like to present to the Assembly 

regarding SaskPower. I’ll just read the prayer to the Hon. 

Assembly of Saskatchewan: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that Saskatchewan people 

have had to bear the brunt of frequent utility rate increases 

by Crown monopolies with no recourse; that SaskPower 

Corporation has posted net incomes of $107 million in 

1992 fiscal year, $81 million in the 1993 fiscal year, $85 

million in the ’94 fiscal year; that in spite of huge net 

profits, SaskPower has raised power rates by 12.7 per cent 

over the past three years and has proposed an additional 

hike of 12 per cent for home-owners, 13.7 per cent for 

farms, 2.7 per cent for small business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many people all across Saskatchewan 

that have taken part in this SaskPower petition and I would like 

to lay it on the Table before you today. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 

petition to present today. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Carrot River area of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 

present to this Assembly, a petition signed by individuals from 

the Saskatoon, Dalmeny, Dundurn area, and this petition 

suggests that the NDP government’s Crown tendering 

agreement policy is grossly unfair: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately repeal the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement and replace it with a 

fair tendering policy which awards all government 

contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, union or 

non-union, with no union-hiring quotas. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

Mr. Goohsen:  Good morning, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 

petition to present this morning on behalf of people from the 

Saskatoon area of our province  the great city up north. I’ll 

read the prayer for the Assembly. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately repeal the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement and replace it with a 

fair tendering policy which awards all government 

contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, union or 

non-union, with no union-hiring quotas. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I’m happy to present this today. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 

present, coming from Prelate, Saskatoon, Mendham areas. And 

I’ll read the prayer for you. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 

pleased today to be able to present, along with my colleagues 

. . . will be presenting as well, a number of private members’ 

Bills totalling 15, on various items that we believe are of 

significant importance to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The first one that I have, a notice of motion. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act respecting Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan . 

 

The second one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move the first reading 

of a Bill, An Act respecting the Protection of Saskatchewan 

Taxpayers. 

 

The third one, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move the first reading 

of a Bill, An Act respecting the Accountability of the Workers’ 

Compensation Board. The short title for that is The Workers’ 

Compensation Board Accountability Act. 

 

The fourth Bill that I want to present, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act to Amend The Referendum and Plebiscite Act  



12 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

dealing with the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that these are significant pieces of 

legislation that we’re prepared to present to you very soon. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act respecting Property Rights of the People of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act, Legislative Utilities Review Committee (LURC). 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act respecting the Accountability of Crown 

Corporations; short title, The Crown Corporations 

Accountability Act. And I give notice that I shall on Tuesday 

next ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskTel, please provide the 

following information regarding Mr. Don Ching: (1) 

provide details of the severance paid out by SaskTel to Mr. 

Don Ching, including total dollars paid out, any 

investments or other monetary pay-outs; (2) provide copies 

of all correspondence between Mr. Ching and SaskTel 

prior to reaching a settlement on this issue; (3) provide a 

copy of the final settlement. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

would like to give notice of Bills. I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to Amend the 

Education and Health Tax Act Respecting the Taxation of 

Saskatchewan Indians Off-Reserve; short title, The Education 

and Health Tax Act Amendment 1996. 

 

I also give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading 

of a Bill, An Act to Amend the Members Conflict of Interest 

Act Respecting the Definition of Family; short title, The 

Members Conflict of Interest Amendment Act 1996. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act 

Requiring a Union Certification, Decertification and Strike 

Action by Secret Ballot; short title, The Democratic and 

Unionism Act. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act Representing the Right to Work in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act to Amend the Labour Standards Act. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The Speaker is having a difficult 

time hearing the member introduce his Bills, and I’ll ask for 

cooperation of the House. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will read this last 

one over because I don’t think it all got on Hansard. 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act to amend The Labour Standards Act. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act to revoke The Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement; short title, The Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement Revocation Act. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 

amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 

 

I give notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly Council Act. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on Tuesday next move first reading of a Bill 

to Provide for the Enforcement of the Code of Ethical Conduct 

for Members of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly 

(Anti-Corruption). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues 

in the legislature, two visitors in your gallery. The first is a 

former distinguished member of this House for the constituency 

of Canora, former cabinet minister in the Blakeney government, 

Adolph Matsalla. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  And beside Adolph is Eugene Pura who 

is a long-time friend of mine, a graduate at about the same time 

as me from the legendary Sturgis Composite High School and 

I’d like the legislature to welcome Eugene here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 

and to the members of this Assembly a very astute civic 

politician, a good friend, a lady that I admire a great deal. It’s 

our mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle, Mayor Fran Hahn, who’s sitting 

in your gallery. I would ask the Assembly to please welcome 

Mayor Hahn to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to 

introduce through you to the members of the Legislative 

Assembly, two very special guests, my sons Alan and William 

MacKinnon, who are in the gallery opposite. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, if you give two young men a few days 

off school, they head to the most exciting place in the province 

 the Saskatchewan legislature. 



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  13 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 

members of the Assembly, a guest of mine in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, who I invited down for the throne speech yesterday. 

She’s a constituent of Saskatoon Greystone, Mrs. Nancy 

Wilkinson. Stand up, please. 

 

This very young-looking grandmother has recently received her 

doctorate in educational counselling psychology so I should 

have introduced her as Dr. Wilkinson. She did her thesis in . . . 

it’s entitled Women’s Experiences of Self-care in Relationships 

and Dr. Wilkinson convocates this spring at the University of 

Toronto. 

 

The reason she’s here, Mr. Speaker, today with us is because I 

took her out for dinner last night and it got a bit late. Some of 

you will note that the dinner I took her out for was at 

Government House but . . . Anyway, if you would join with me 

in welcoming Dr. Wilkinson here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  It’s my pleasure to introduce to you a 

member who . . . an individual who is sitting in your gallery 

today who has come down to give me a little moral support in 

my duties later on, my stepfather, Ed Leson, who is actually a 

constituent of the member for Prince Albert Carlton. So we 

arm-wrestled earlier and decided that I would get to introduce 

him. So if you would join with me in welcoming him, thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, it is my honour and my pleasure to 

introduce one of the greatest farmers in Saskatchewan, my 

husband, Robert Julé. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured also to 

introduce the gentlemen right beside him, Mr. Marty Draude, 

one of the greatest small-business people in this province. We 

welcome him, and I’d ask you to welcome him also. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 

and through you to all the members of the legislature very close 

family members and friends, Ward and Lorraine Dixon from 

Regina here. They are my aunt and uncle, and important 

supports to our family. Welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I’d like 

to introduce to you and to the Assembly a very good friend of 

mine; he’s also my youngest son. Jordan is sitting in the west 

gallery. Hi, Jord. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you to members of our  

Legislative Assembly, sitting in your gallery, Ms. Nikki Hipkin, 

who is the president of the Young Liberals of Saskatchewan, a 

very devoted person to the province and someone who I think 

has been committed to policy development for all of us in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Please welcome her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) in welcoming two constituents 

of mine and people I would consider good supporters and 

friends, Ward and Lorraine Dixon. And I’d just like to say 

thank you to them for coming today and viewing our first full 

day of operation and ask the members to join with me in 

welcoming them once again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Best Wishes to New Speaker 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, as one grizzled veteran of this 

Assembly to another, I want to, for the first and only time this 

term, to presume on our long and warm association by 

delivering the first member’s statement of your tenure. And I 

want to use this opportunity to speak on behalf of all of my 

colleagues and wish you our best as we assume our duties as 

Speaker . . . as you assume your duties as Speaker. Once I sit 

down of course the august neutrality you inherit from that chair 

takes over, and I become just another noisy parliamentarian 

clamouring for your recognition  all past associations on 

hold, as they should be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the person who sits in your chair must be one who 

knows and reveres the traditions that you are sworn to uphold, 

must be a special person trained in partisanship who must now 

put that aside, and must be a representative of one’s 

constituency who must now speak evenly for all. 

 

As said the great parliamentarian, Edmund Burke, the Assembly 

you represent is “a deliberative Assembly of one nation, with 

one interest, that of the whole; where not local prejudices ought 

to guide, but the general good.” The general good is yours to 

uphold; we know you will. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government caucus, I 

welcome all new members as I take the mantle of parliamentary 

responsibility. And as I resume my seat, I say in the words of 

the famous Dolly Parton, here we go again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Invermay Precision Skating Champions 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 

always been glad to hear tributes being paid here in the House 

to groups or individuals from small town Saskatchewan. Today 

this event is even more special for me as I rise to acknowledge 

the accomplishments of some citizens from my home town of  



14 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

Invermay, Saskatchewan. To honour the successes of young 

people is even a greater pleasure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, February 10 of this year the Invermay 

Icicles skating club won the gold medal at the 1996 

Saskatchewan provincial precision skating championships in 

Melfort. The group also received the club plaque for this event 

 

Members of the Icicles range in age from age 8 to 15. And they 

are: Susie Barteski, Elyse Franke, Halayna Franke, Melissa 

Gray, Salina Gray, Maria Mikkonen, Krystal Nieckar, Kyla 

Puryk, Tegan Puryk, Amy Velichka, Julie Velichka, and 

Sherisse Velichka. The group’s coach is Glenna Nord, a young 

lady who lives in Foam Lake, a community also in my 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the same competition in Melfort, Katherine 

Belitski, an Invermay native who attends the U of R (University 

of Regina) and skates with the Regina Silver Blades senior 

competitive precision team, captured a gold medal and earned 

the right to advance to the Canadian nationals in Hamilton on 

April 4 and 7. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Assembly join 

in extending congratulations to the Invermay club, and best 

wishes to Ms. Katherine Belitski in her venture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The stage is set; the 

entertainers are in place; the volunteers are willing and able; 

there is an air of excitement around the Saskatchewan Centre. 

 

I am referring to, of course, the Kinsmen Telemiracle telethon 

which will be held this weekend in Regina. This year’s event is 

special because Telemiracle is celebrating its 20th anniversary. 

 

There has never been a telethon so successful on a per capita 

basis. When the first telethon was held in 1976, Saskatchewan 

residents demonstrated their generosity by donating $1.2 

million. Since then the amount collected for this worthwhile 

cause has doubled to $2.4 million last year. 

 

Twenty years ago the entertainers at Telemiracle, many of 

whom were from outside Saskatchewan, were so impressed 

with the telethon that there was an unanimous feeling that they 

would do it over again, any time. Mr. Speaker, all of the money 

raised through Telemiracle stays right here in Saskatchewan and 

helps physically, mentally, and socially challenged children and 

adults. 

 

The telethon, which will be broadcast on television starting at 9 

o’clock on Saturday evening, has become a source of miracles 

for the people of Saskatchewan. So to everyone I say: “Ring 

those phones.” 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Big Valley Jamboree 

 

Ms. Murray: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know that the 

Kinsmen and Kinette clubs in Saskatchewan do wonderful work 

right across the province for so many good causes, and 

Telemiracle is no exception. 

 

In the riding which I represent, each year thousands of people 

from across western Canada get together for the biggest country 

musical festival ever held in Saskatchewan  the Big Valley 

Jamboree. 

 

While Kinsmen members are busy preparing for Telemiracle, 

the Regina Queen City Kinsmen are also busy organizing the 

jamboree for this summer. I would like to congratulate the 

Queen City Kinsmen for keeping this worthwhile event alive by 

deciding to sponsor the 14th annual jamboree. 

 

Big Valley and the community of Craven will benefit from the 

decision because the organizers have a proven track record in 

Saskatchewan. They can attract many volunteers, and the 

jamboree will be run by a charity. Saskatchewan people have 

always been country music fans, and I am sure that the Regina 

Queen City Kinsmen Club will be arranging the very best 

entertainment possible. 

 

I encourage the people of Saskatchewan to support the 1996 

version of the Big Valley Jamboree which  I am sure  will 

be the best ever held in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Condolences 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in every 

one of our lives we all reach a point of time where the loss of a 

family member is very special and very dear. And I believe it’s 

very fitting in acknowledging the fact the member from Regina 

Dewdney has recently lost his father. His father has left us. 

 

And I would like to extend, on behalf of our caucus, to the 

member from Regina Dewdney our deepest sympathy, 

condolences, and trust that the member will find comfort in 

knowing that his friends and foes alike are thinking of him at 

this time. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Freedom to Read Week 

 

Ms. Lorje: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we heard His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor say that child poverty is 

poverty in its worst form. Ninety years ago, the Fabian socialist, 

George Bernard Shaw, said that: “The greatest of evils and the 

worst of crimes is poverty.” This week, February 26 to March 3, 

has been declared Freedom to Read Week by the Book and 

Periodical Council of Canada — a week dedicated to the 

defence of intellectual freedom in this, the best country in the 

world. 

 

I mention the two together, Mr. Speaker, because the freedom  



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  15 

to read with no interference is intimately connected to freedom 

from poverty. Or put differently, one way to perpetuate poverty 

is to keep people in ignorance by restricting their reading and 

thus their knowledge. Illiteracy is the best friend of the 

totalitarian. 

 

It is shamefully astonishing that in some quarters, ignorance is 

still seen as a social good. There are still those who would tell 

us what we should be allowed to know. 

 

We legislators have not done our job as long as these forces of 

repression are still heard in our land. Despite our best efforts, 

poverty is still with us. Despite our spoken support for 

individual freedom, censorship still imprisons our minds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no book was ever used to kill a human being, no 

novel ever beat a spouse, no poem ever molested a child, no 

essay ever robbed a bank, and yet we still must set aside a 

period each year to honour and observe Freedom to Read Week. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 

 

Condolences 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, I would 

respectfully wish to add our sincere condolences, as has the 

member from Moosomin. Sir, on our behalf as well, I would 

like to extend condolences. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Police-Fire Games 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last November the city 

of Regina and the province of Saskatchewan changed from the 

little city that shouldn’t, to the great city that did. Saskatchewan 

people restored the Grey Cup to its proper place in the 

Canadian consciousness and we gave a very necessary boost to 

the Canadian Football League. The extra revenue that came into 

our province wasn’t bad either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All of this was the result of hard work by an army of volunteers 

and some judicious support by our Premier. But that’s last 

year’s news, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This year I’m delighted to acknowledge that Regina is at it 

again. The 1998 Can-Am Police-Fire Games are coming to 

Regina. With the games will come approximately 7,000 athletes 

and visitors. With them will come between 10 and $12 million 

right into Regina’s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the linchpins of economic development in 

Saskatchewan is tourism. Because of the Grey Cup and because 

of the very impressive effort put forth to attract these games, we 

are becoming known as the place that can the place to hold 

professional games. 

 

It’s no accident also that in 1998 the Scott Tournament of 

Hearts will be held in Regina  more good news and more 

cash jingling in our registers. I congratulate the chairperson,  

Dick Rendek, and his group of volunteers; Mayor Archer and 

the city department of public affairs; our own Minister of 

Economic Development, for their efforts to attract these games 

to Regina. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

 

Mr. McLane: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 1992 

this government broke a contract with the farmers of 

Saskatchewan and they have not looked back. The record of this 

government with farmers in the province is poor to say the 

least, and they have as much as admitted this by promising last 

spring in this very legislature not to collect the GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) overpayments. 

 

Will the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, now own up to 

his government’s promise and cancel the bills his department 

has sent to Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for the question. The direct answer to the member’s 

question of whether or not the bills will be cancelled is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess that does 

confirm in my mind the lack of sincerity and interest in rural 

Saskatchewan agriculture by the minister. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, today is the day that this government 

begins adding interest to GRIP bills that they had promised 

again not to send to Saskatchewan producers. 

 

The farmers of this province need and deserve an answer from 

the Minister of Agriculture that is acceptable. They are calling 

on the minister to do what is appropriate and honourable. The 

choice of the minister to date of course is to ignore the farmers 

of Saskatchewan, as he is doing, and that is not acceptable to 

us. 

 

What does the Minister of Agriculture intend to do then? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t know if the member opposite is aware of how the GRIP 

wind-down and the GRIP contract operates. I assume he does 

not know that or he would not be asking the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you were in any other place of business, not to 

ask for an overpayment returned, and in particular in this 

situation, you’d have one farmer subsidizing another. Because 

all the overpayments were put back into the main pool, and then  



16 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

they were paid out individually. 

 

So if the member opposite thinks that that’s a fair way to do 

things, he may; I think that’s not the fair way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program is wound down. It’s going to be 

gone. I’ll tell you, we’re looking to the future, not to the past, 

for farm programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess we’re happy 

as farmers that the GRIP program has wound down. What we’re 

unhappy about is the way it’s wound down and the lack of 

commitment from the Minister of Agriculture and the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my belief and that of 12,000 other farmers 

who have received GRIP bills that the issue is at the very least 

worthy of debate in this Assembly, in this legislature. 

 

Unfortunately for the producers involved, interest will be 

accruing on these bills after today, and today. Will the Minister 

of Agriculture provide an assurance in this House today that 

interest will not be charged on this matter, on these GRIP 

statements, until we have a chance to fully debate it in this 

House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the member opposite, I’m glad to see that he finally understands 

that the GRIP program wasn’t a good program and he’s joining 

with us and getting right behind us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  It took him four years to understand that, 

and it might be another four years before he understands the 

contract that was arranged between the federal and provincial 

governments and how this contract dictates the rules by which 

the program operates. 

 

If the overpayments have not been repaid, then, Mr. Speaker, 

then there will be interest charged. 

 

Again, it’s a matter of fairness for those people who have paid 

their bills; and those people who have not paid their bills, to get 

their interest waived, it doesn’t make any sense. It’s not fair; the 

rules are there. 

 

I just ask the member that when he gets up to ask his next 

question, if he’ll ask the . . . tell the people of this province 

what he would like to see in a farm program. He’s going to 

have opportunity to do that. Tell us your policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, if the minister opposite wishes 

to ask questions, we’d very much like to oblige in the next 

election so he can sit here and ask us the questions. We’d be  

very happy to do that. Otherwise we’d appreciate an answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must question of the Minister of Agriculture: is 

he so far out of touch with agriculture that he does not realize 

the costs that the farmers are going to incur over the next 

several months with spring seeding — the cost of the inputs: the 

fertilizers, the fuel, all those things? 

 

And does the minister not realize the financial burden he is 

placing on farm families with the biggest bill of all from his 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, thank you. Thanks for the 

question, Mr. Member. This program is a program that’s been 

put in the past. We have processed . . . we wound down the 

program. That process is going to be adhered to. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the problem that we have here with the 

GRIP over there is that . . . And again I’m glad to see that the 

members are joining with us in the wind-down. I was right  

even the member from Shaunavon who sort of left because part 

of the GRIP wasn’t not what . . . now he’s happy. So that’s . . . 

we’re all happy now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this to the member opposite. I want 

to say this: early in your political career, do yourself a favour 

and be credible. Because what you’re doing and what you’ve 

been doing over the last few weeks is raising false hope, false 

hope to the farmers of this province. You know and I know, we 

all know, the rules and the rules will be adhered by and people 

have to pay interest on overdue accounts. 

 

So be honest with yourself, starting . . . and be honest with the 

people of Saskatchewan. Maintain your credibility. Don’t listen 

to some of your friends over there, and you will go places in 

this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that I ran in 

Arm River to get elected was for that very reason as the 

minister opposite talks about: integrity and honesty. And it’s his 

own predecessor in this very House that has broken the 

promise. Where’s the honesty and integrity there, Mr. Speaker? 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I have received bills from hundreds and 

hundreds of Saskatchewan farmers from across the province 

that have asked us to debate this issue on their behalf. I believe 

in Saskatchewan farmers that this is a question of honour and 

trust  none of which the government appears to possess. 

 

I would like to quote from a letter from one particular farmer, 

and I’d like to table a copy of it, Mr. Speaker, so that the 

minister and the government can deal with this person to 

person. And I quote from the letter, Mr. Speaker: 

 

If we stole money belonging to someone else, we’d be put 

in jail, but the government can do what they want with the 

farmers’ money. 



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  17 

One of the hundreds of examples, Mr. Speaker, of the 

frustration that producers out there are feeling. 

 

It’s only appropriate that this issue be debated in this House so 

the Minister of Agriculture today will announce that interest 

will not be charged on these bills until we have a chance to 

debate it. What’s your problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had three or 

four or five questions on this issue, and the problem is, is to be 

a direct answer. The problem is that the members opposite 

either don’t care to understand the program or can’t understand 

the program. The rules have been laid out. If you want me to go 

into detail, I can go into detail. 

 

Farmers were sent a letter in December 1994, another one in 

January 1995, explaining how the wind-down would be put 

forward, explaining that they would have so long to pay the bill, 

and after that interest would accrue. These were all laid out. 

 

The grandstanding and trying to provide false hope to the 

farmers by the members opposite does nothing  and I say 

nothing  to help the integrity of that party or to help the 

farmers, who many of them have problems paying bills these 

days. Although things are starting to improve. It doesn’t help 

them. 

 

I think the member opposite should take another tack to his 

questions and talk about the future rather than the past, because 

all you’re going to do by talking about the past is bury yourself 

in it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. For 

four years now we have heard one throne speech after another 

promising jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. For four years 

now we have seen the NDP (New Democratic Party) erect one 

barrier after another to prevent job growth here in the province 

of Saskatchewan. Higher taxes, over-regulation, union 

tendering policies, changes to labour standards, occupational 

health, workers’ compensation  the list goes on and on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in January there were 5,000 fewer people working 

in Saskatchewan than in the previous year. And once again the 

NDP is making the same empty promises of job creation. Mr. 

Speaker, why should we believe the Premier on this, this time 

around, when he’s talking about creating jobs, given your 

dismal record, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to answer the 

question. I thank the Leader of the Third Party for it. 

 

I want to tell the Leader of the Third Party that the Minister of  

Economic Development, our Deputy Premier, advises me that 

we’re averaging about 3,500 jobs, new jobs, a year since 1992 

 10,000 new jobs during the term of our administration. And 

we’re well on the course to achieving the target which has been 

set out for us in Partnership for Growth. 

 

And we’ve done this notwithstanding the fact that your 

administration has saddled the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan with a $14 billion debt and has thereby really 

stifled economic activity. 

 

And I have to tell you that we’ve done this through a very 

balanced approach. And if the Conservative Party thinks that 

the way to get jobs is by what they did this morning  getting 

up and tabling the Bills which they’re going to debate, Bills 

which would revert Saskatchewan to Alabama or Arkansas with 

right to work  I just invite the Leader of the Conservative 

Party to take a look at what the jobs record is there in one of the 

poorest states of the Union. I tell you, that may be your 

approach; it is not the approach of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, this 

government has loaded one unnecessary regulation on business 

after another. And now the Premier is promising to reduce 

regulation. That’s like the arsonist promising to help put out a 

fire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from January of ’92 to January of ’96 there were 

3,000 jobs created in Saskatchewan. During that exact same 

time frame, there were 103,000 jobs created in Alberta. That’s a 

hundred thousand jobs in Alberta that is ahead of us in four 

short years. That’s the records of the two provinces, Mr. 

Premier. And the Finance minister says Alberta’s low tax 

regime is overrated. That’s what she says about it. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s time the NDP took some lessons from Alberta. 

 

Reduce the tax burden, reduce the regulatory burden, get off the 

backs of business and start creating a positive job-creation 

climate for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When can we expect to see that happen, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

the question again. If he asks when we are going to take some 

lessons from Alberta, I have news for the Leader of the 

Conservative Party. We’re not going to adopt the lesson of the 

elimination of the kindergarten program for preschool kids. We 

are not going to adopt the lesson from Alberta of an $860 per 

year premium for a family of four on health care, which 

somehow they say is not a tax. We’re not going to adopt the 

approach from the province of Alberta of entirely denuding the 

social safety net and the protection of the people of the province 

of Alberta. 

 

No, we’re not going to adopt that approach whatsoever. 

 

And when the Minister of Finance on our side says that the  



18 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

taxation situation of Alberta has got to be looked at very 

carefully, it’s got to be looked at very carefully. They pay a 

premium of $860 for a family of four for health care. We don’t 

do that here. 

 

You Tories say that’s not a tax; I tell you it smells an awful lot 

like a tax to me. And our tax regime compares very, very 

favourably to Alberta, and our jobs creation record, in the face 

of the mess that you left this province, is getting better and will 

be better with every passing year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my two 

remaining questions are for the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks ago I happened to run into the 

Minister of Agriculture at an evening reception. He probably 

recalls that. And he told me how much he was looking forward 

to debating the GRIP bills in the legislature here. 

 

Well you can imagine my surprise, Mr. Speaker, when 

yesterday we proposed that very debate and he chickened out. 

We were quite surprised that he did that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is very simple to the minister. Why 

did you, Mr. Minister, break the NDP campaign promise, a 

promise made by the Premier, a promise made by the former 

minister of Agriculture and promises made by all of your people 

during the election campaign? 

 

Mr. Minister, why did the Minister of Agriculture send out 

12,000 GRIP bills after both the Premier and the former 

minister of Agriculture vowed that no farmer would receive a 

GRIP bill from you people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there is words to describe the question that the member 

opposite posed in this House that I can’t use in this House and 

it’s referring to something that’s not usually true  and he 

knows that. The member opposite, Mr. Speaker, knows there 

was no campaign promises broken. And the people of 

Saskatchewan know. 

 

The member opposite also should know that in the throne 

speech he’s got seven days to debate anything he wants to. All 

the members can take all the time they want, and the throne 

speech debate’s wide open. And so that proves the fact that the 

little grandstand yesterday, which was quite out of character 

with the dignity of the opening of the legislature . . . But that’s 

fine, that’s fine. All it was, just that  grandstanding. 

 

And the member opposite knows, and the people of 

Saskatchewan know that we again . . . and we see the 

Liberal-Tory plot here — try to stay buried in the past. Again 

the people of Saskatchewan are going to be moving forward 

with the new crop insurance program this winter to ensure that  

we have covered your farmers, and this government will 

maintain that. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, for years you stood in this House and moaned about 

how the government is not doing enough for farmers when you 

were on the opposition side. For years we’ve heard you talk 

about the different things that you would do if you ever were in 

charge. Unfortunately, you are now. Finally your turn has come. 

The Premier has entrusted you with the Agriculture portfolio. 

That he has frankly no one else to choose from, as I understand, 

I can recognize that. 

 

But what is your very first act? What was the very first thing 

you did for the people of Saskatchewan, the farmers of 

Saskatchewan? The very first act that you did in any meaningful 

fashion was to break your party’s word and to break your 

Premier’s word. That was your first action. And then you sent 

out 12,000 bills to GRIP producers, farmers in this province, 

Mr. Minister. That was your first act. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you take the opportunity to correct that 

problem, your actions. Will you admit that you’ve made a 

mistake, honour the Premier’s campaign promise, and let 

Saskatchewan farm families know that the GRIP bills have been 

cancelled? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to tell the member opposite something he should 

know. The commitment of this government to Saskatchewan 

farmers, as opposed to Alberta, is $460 per capita; as opposed 

to Alberta, that’s $173 per capita. Now that’s commitment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the other 

thing that shows to me the member being stuck in the past, as I 

say, we’ve seen the GRIP program come and we’ve seen the 

GRIP program go. And it’s gone. 

 

And you know what this tells me, Mr. Speaker, it tells me that 

the member opposite, and as the Liberal Party, doesn’t have 

anything else to talk about in agriculture. That tells me they’re 

stuck in the past because the 450-some dollar commitment that 

this government has to farmers is doing well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Size of Cabinet 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. For 

the last several weeks, we have heard the Premier using 

municipal governments as an example of waste in this province. 

Yet those governments by law, Mr. Speaker, balance their 

budgets year in and year out. And, as the Premier tells us, the 

so-called waste of local governments has to be cleaned up. He 

tells the people of Saskatchewan they’ll have to wait 18 months  



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  19 

to 2 years for him to begin cleaning up his own house and 

appointing a smaller cabinet. Two years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How can the Premier possibly point his finger at those low-paid 

municipal representatives as a source of waste when he 

continues on his merry way with a cabinet that is too large, 

filled with members who have too few duties? 

 

Why won’t the Premier reduce the size of cabinet immediately 

if he is so worried about waste in government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen this 

morning is selective interpretation of campaign promises by 

both the Conservatives and the Liberals  which does not 

surprise me, since they barely conducted a campaign in the last 

provincial election; they’ve got to refer to our situation  and 

the Hon. Acting Leader of the Liberal Party, Leader of the 

Official Opposition, talks about using municipal governments 

as an example of waste. 

 

Totally false, totally wrong. I do not use them as an example of 

waste. I say here is an example of how we can modernize for 

the 21st century; that the levels of government need to be 

rationalized, not from the point of view of eliminating waste. 

There may be waste to eliminate there, but that’s not the point. 

It’s a point of getting cooperation and providing the best 

possible infrastructure that we can for rural Saskatchewan and 

for Canada. 

 

What we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is we’re building for the 21st 

century. This government and this party is about preparing 

Saskatchewan for the growth and the opportunity and the hope 

and the equality around the values of Saskatchewan. We’re for 

change. Those are our values. That’s where we stand; where the 

Liberals, they simply stand still. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question again to 

the Premier. Mr. Speaker, you’ll forgive me if I felt a little 

sceptical yesterday during the throne speech when we heard of 

this government’s new-found commitment to job creation, 

especially what has transpired over the last four years. In 1992 

this government promised to create 30,000 jobs. And what did 

we get? We got tax hikes, we got utility rate hikes, and we got 

oppressive labour legislation. And strangest of all, Crown union 

preference policy that costs the government money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: given all that 

this government has done to kill jobs in its first term, is this 

new-found determination to create them an admission that this 

government made the wrong choices during the last four years? 

And will the Premier commit to ending some of the practices of 

the first term, particularly the Crown tendering policy and high 

taxation policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again the Acting Leader 

of the Liberal Party  I should say the official Leader of the 

Opposition for the time being  has his facts wrong. 

 

Our promise is to have 30,000 new jobs by the year 2000. We 

have been going at 3,500 a year since 1991-92. If that record 

continues, we’re going to exceed it, and we’re going to do it 

without the necessity of going back to Arkansas or Alabama or 

right-to-work laws or your attacks on the working men and 

women of the province of Saskatchewan who contribute to the 

wealth and the job creation in this country and in this province. 

That’s our position, and we know that to be the case. 

 

And you have some members of your caucus who are very 

much the recipients of job and economic activity — I don’t say 

because of our government — because of their risk and their 

entrepreneurial activity. But they know that the numbers are 

there. They know the numbers are there. You know the numbers 

are there. The stats are there. 

 

Please don’t play with the facts. If the Liberals hope to gain 

some semblance of credibility after what took place in the last 

several months  I say sadly  if you have any hope of getting 

some credibility, please stick to the facts. I know the member 

from Shaunavon is laughing because he’s very, very pleased at 

what took place in the Liberal Party. I for one am very saddened 

at what took place in the Liberal Party. Elevate the debate 

please, Mr. Acting Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dore Lake Forest Resources 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, as you know doubt heard on the 

morning news, there’s a great amount of concern by the people 

of Dore Lake about clearcutting practices in northern 

Saskatchewan. These people have been waiting for months and 

months to meet with the Minister of Environment and Resource 

Management. The question I have is, why hasn’t the minister 

met with these people to discuss these very pressing, serious 

concerns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the hon. member for the question. I am happy to tell the 

hon. member and the members of the legislature that I have met 

with these people as recently as last week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, that’s news to us because this 

morning, the newscast indicates that . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. I’m having difficulty hearing 

the member put his question. Allow the member to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, the clear-cutting methods being 

used in the Dore Lake region — for the minister’s sake — are 

threatening to significantly destroy the forestry potential of the  



20 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

area because of the poor soil conditions. This was on the news 

this morning, Mr. Speaker, and it’s surprising that the people of 

Dore Lake are asking for this meeting and yet he met with them 

last week and they’re still asking. 

 

The question we asked before, we haven’t got an answer yet. 

But can the Minister of Environment assure the people of Dore 

Lake and the people of Saskatchewan that these clear-cutting 

methods and poor soil will not adversely affect their forestries, 

their fishing industries, their wildlife industries, the hunting, 

and so on and so forth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

hon. member for the question. And I certainly agree with the 

hon. member  our forests and all of our natural resources in 

the North and the Dore, Smoothstone Lake area are very 

important to us and we are committed to work with the forest 

industry, the people in the Dore Lake area, and all the people of 

Saskatchewan to utilize and manage our resources to the best of 

everybody’s interest. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, members of the 

Legislative Assembly, pursuant to rule 27, it is now your duty at 

this time to elect a Deputy Speaker and Chair of the Committee 

of the Whole. 

 

Procedures to be used in this election are the same as those used 

to elect the Speaker, and I now ask the Clerk to initiate the 

proceedings. 

 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 

 

Clerk:  Pursuant to the procedure specified under rule 27(1) 

and 27(5), the following members have declared their intention 

to stand as candidates for election to the office of Deputy 

Speaker: Mr. Dale Flavel, the hon. member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clerk:  And Mr. Don Toth, the hon. member for Moosomin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. 

 

Clerk:  In preparation for the vote, the Sergeant-at-Arms will 

now bring in the ballot box and the pages will distribute the list 

of candidates to members and post the list in the polling booths. 

The ballot box will then be inspected and the sealed ballots 

opened. 

 

The members proceeded to cast ballots. 

 

Clerk:  If there are any members who have not voted and 

wish to do so, will you please vote now. 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order, please. Order in 

the House, please. All members having voted, the House will 

now recess to the call of the bells while the Clerks at the Table 

count the ballots. 

 

The bells will ring for three minutes to recall members to the 

chambers when the results of the first ballot are ready to be 

announced. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

The Speaker:  The House will come to order to hear the 

results of the ballot. 

 

Clerk:  Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 

to inform you that you have elected as your Deputy Speaker and 

Chair of Committee of the Whole, the hon. member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. Dale Flavel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, members 

of the Legislative Assembly, I take this opportunity to thank all 

members for the trust and the confidence that you have placed 

upon me by electing me as your Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to say thank you to the hon. member from Moosomin for 

letting his name stand and therefore making this procedure a 

true democratic procedure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: — I look forward to working with you, Mr. 

Speaker, and the members of the Legislative Assembly in 

reducing the amount of cynicism that the public has against us 

as servants of the public. And in doing so, to increase the trust 

and the respect that the people of Saskatchewan have for this 

institution and for all of us. 

 

I want to echo the words of the Premier from yesterday to say 

that the big victor in all of this is certainly this great institution 

and the democratic process. 

 

I close by making this commitment — to do the very best that I 

can to carry out the duties that you have honoured me with 

today. And in the service of the people of Saskatchewan, I 

thank you for your trust and confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  The House will now proceed to other business 

before orders of the day. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Before orders of the day, by leave of 

the Assembly, I would move, seconded by the Deputy Premier: 

 

That Mr. Kim Trew, member for the constituency of  



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  21 

Regina Coronation Park, be appointed to preside as Deputy 

Chair of committees of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to your 

attention and to the attention of this Assembly that under rule 

. . . or point of order, pardon me, I guess. 

 

The Speaker:  Point of order. 

 

Mr. Toth:  My point of order is this, Mr. Speaker, is that 

under rule 88(3), it is my understanding that “A Deputy Chair 

of Committees shall be elected at the commencement of every 

Legislature.” 

 

And while the Premier has put forward the name of an 

individual to be appointed to the Deputy Chair, I just want to 

remind the Assembly that the rules do state that this individual 

should be elected by the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker:  I have heard . . . Order. I have heard the point 

of order put by the member from Moosomin and I understand 

what he says. I also do recognize that the tradition has been 

honoured over the years in this Assembly in exactly the same 

way that it is being presented today and I find his point of order 

not well taken . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order, order. 

Order, order. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Annual Reports to the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Before orders of the day and with leave of the Assembly, I 

move: 

 

That the annual reports and financial statements of the 

various Crown corporations and related agencies as were 

tabled during the twenty-second legislature and not 

reported upon by the Crown Corporations Committee 

during the legislature be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

I move that, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Reports of the Provincial Auditor to the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move, by leave of the Assembly, seconded by the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton: 

 

That the various reports of the Provincial Auditor, as 

tabled during the twenty-second legislature and not 

reported upon by the Standing Committee on Public  

Accounts and as tabled in the present session, be referred 

to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Public Accounts to the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 

from Shellbrook-Spiritwood: 

 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 

as tabled during the twenty-second legislature and not 

reported upon by the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts, as submitted to the Clerk of the Legislative 

Assembly pursuant to The Financial Administration Act, 

1993, and as tabled in the present session be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1130) 

 

Referral of Retention and Disposal Schedules to the 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 

from Cumberland, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved under 

The Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee be 

referred as tabled to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to 

 

Referral of Annual Report to the 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote: 

 

That the annual report of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Library, as tabled during the twenty-second Legislative 

Assembly and not reported upon by the Standing 

Committee on Communication and as tabled in the present 

session, be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Continuing Select Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Regina Wascana Plains: 

 

That members Bradley, Lingenfelter, Lorje, Kowalsky, 

Renaud, Whitmore, Draude, Krawetz, and Toth be 

constituted a continuing select committee pursuant to rule 

92, with the power to call for persons, papers and records, 

to examine witnesses under oath, and whose duty it shall 

be to establish from time to time select committees with 

the power to call for persons, papers and records, and to 

examine witnesses under oath; with the power to travel and 

to hear testimony away from the seat of government; and 

that the continuing select committee will have the power to 

set the terms of reference for each select committee; and 

that each select committee shall report directly to the 

Legislative Assembly from time to time. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Legislation 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, under rule 

19 we would propose an emergency debate on the GRIP 

legislation. 

 

The Speaker:  This morning a notice under rule 19 was 

delivered to the Office of the Clerk to seek authorization to 

proceed with the priority of debate motion. The requisite two 

hours’ notice was provided, but I note that the text of the 

proposed priority of debate motion required under rule 19(2) 

was not received as part of that notice and was in fact received 

after the notice deadline. I advise . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Order. I advise all hon. members to be aware that the 

motion text is required as part of the priority of debate request. I 

shall now address the matter at hand. 

 

With regard to the importance of this issue, I believe the Leader 

of the Third Party has established a case that the matter does 

warrant urgent consideration. The Speaker is obliged, however, 

under rule 19(5), to pay “regard to the probability of the matter 

being brought before the House within reasonable time by other 

means.” 

 

Yesterday this Assembly adopted an order that the Speech from 

the Throne be taken into consideration today. I advise the 

Leader of the Third Party that the debate on the Address in 

Reply to His Honour’s speech is an important opportunity for  

him to forward his case through amendment. 

 

Order. I point out paragraph . . . Order. I point out paragraph 

267 of Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th 

edition, page 82, which states: 

 

Amendments to the Address in Reply to the Speech from the 

Throne are used by the Opposition for the purpose of 

challenging government policies or actions. 

 

Furthermore, I submit to the Leader of the Third Party that an 

amendment is a more effective means of forwarding his 

argument because amendments to the Address in Reply are 

considered confidence motions. 

 

Because the Leader of the Third Party will shortly have an 

opportunity to participate in the debate on the Address in Reply, 

I find that pursuant to rule 19(5), the matter he has raised could 

be brought before the Assembly within reasonable time by other 

means. 

 

For this reason it is the Speaker’s decision to deny the request 

for priority of debate. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Bills 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 

pursuant to rule 46 to ask leave of the Assembly to engage in a 

debate of urgent and pressing necessity regarding the recent 

sending of GRIP bills to farmers. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’ll ask the Leader of the 

Opposition to briefly put his case as to why it should be 

considered urgently and advise the Assembly of the content of 

his proposed motion. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, as a result of the immediate 

interest being charged as of today to those farmers, those some 

12,000 farmers who have received these bills, these bills 

contradict a solemn promise which this government made to the 

farmers of this province in this House on March 31, 1995. The 

participants of the GRIP program relied on the word of the 

former minister of Agriculture and made their financial plans 

accordingly. Now they find that this government is going back 

on its word, creating financial problems for farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that priority should be given in the 

House today to discuss the implications of this move. I now ask 

for leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Will members come to order. I 

hereby table the annual report on operations of the Office of the 

Provincial Auditor for the year ended March 31, 1995. 



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  23 

I also hereby table the annual report of the Saskatchewan 

Freedom of Information and Privacy Commissioner for the year 

ended March 31, 1995. 

 

In accordance with section 35 of The Members’ Conflict of 

Interest Act, I hereby table the opinion of the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner pursuant to section 29(1) of the Act 

respecting an inquiry in the matter of the Hon. Robert Pringle. 

 

And finally, in accordance with section 30(5) of The Members’ 

Conflict of Interest Act, I hereby table the opinion of the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner pursuant to section 29(1) of 

the Act respecting an inquiry in the matter of the Hon. Carol 

Teichrob. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Ms. Murrell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a friend who 

once taught a class inside the walls of the Prince Albert 

maximum security prison. The first day he was escorted to the 

classroom. When the guard left, locking the door behind him, 

my friend looked at the 15 students who had done he knew not 

what to qualify for entrance into this school. His first words 

were: I’m nervous; are you? Well, Mr. Speaker, for reasons 

somewhat, but perhaps not totally, different, I am nervous and I 

wonder if you are too. 

 

Nerves aside, I am honoured the Premier has chosen me to 

move the motion in support of this Speech from the Throne. I 

have the lucky distinction to be the first speaker of this, the 

second term of the Romanow government, and the first MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) to address you in your 

new position, Mr. Speaker  a strong assignment for a rookie, 

but the Premier obviously believes in the old navy tradition of 

throwing the new sailor overboard to see if he sinks or swims. 

I’m referring to myself, not to you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I feel especially privileged to be here in this Chamber which 

echoes with the history of our province. This is a new 

experience for me, but it is one I have shared with elected 

members in the British parliamentary tradition throughout the 

world and through the generations going back to the 13th 

century. 

 

Our province is 90 years old, our legislative traditions, 

somewhat more mature. I am privileged and humbled to be part 

of this tradition, a feeling I know I share with all members. 

 

And as members from the beginning have done, I begin my 

remarks by congratulating you on your election to the Speaker’s 

chair. You have learned and demonstrated wise impartiality as 

caucus Chair, knowledge which I know you will transfer to 

your new position. My colleagues tell me we should promise to 

be less rowdy than in the past. Whether we keep our promise or 

not, I know you will preserve the order and the decorum of this 

Chamber with the wise firmness of your predecessors. 

On June 21, the people of the new constituency of 

Battleford-Cut Knife elected me to be their first MLA. I thank 

them, and I pledge to give them the best representation I can in 

repayment for their confidence in me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1145) 

 

Ms. Murrell:  The constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife is a 

large, diverse area in north-west Saskatchewan, a constituency 

where farming, entrepreneurship, oil, and small business are 

integral parts of the economy. I represent people who are 

hard-working, creative, adaptable, and resilient  people who 

believe in community and cooperation. In this respect, it is a 

traditional Saskatchewan region. 

 

But like Saskatchewan as a whole, there are exciting new 

ventures taking place because our people have the 

industriousness and the ingenuity that is the Saskatchewan 

trademark. Plans for a mineral spa, a community feedlot, and 

for a pelletization plant are under way. A project that I’m very 

excited about and which I will report on more fully is an 

environmentally friendly leather tannery which already has 

gathered interest from around the world. As the kids say, 

Battleford-Cut Knife is a happening place. 

 

And it is a progressive place with progressive people who are 

taking the responsibility themselves for improving our quality 

of life. For instance, the people of Poundmaker Reserve are in 

the process of making their home an alcohol-free reserve. And 

the four other reserves in my constituency are also striving to 

improve living conditions. I congratulate them for their 

initiative. 

 

The 4-H students of Unity and the Wilkie school division both 

have undertaken projects to improve the environment and 

conserve energy. Thirty years ago, John Kennedy said that the 

supreme reality of our time is the vulnerability of our planet. 

Our children are responding to this truth. 

 

And as is the case throughout Saskatchewan, we have a host of 

volunteers who make life more amenable for the less fortunate 

and more rich and varied for the active. It is these support 

groups that build and sustain our communities. I am proud to 

represent this unique constituency and I thank the people for 

their trust. 

 

I also thank the members from Lloydminster, North Battleford, 

and Rosetown-Biggar from whom I inherited many of my 

constituents. Because of their tireless work during the last term, 

the voters were kindly disposed to me. Of that I am sure. I am 

proud to be your neighbour and colleague. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  I suspect as well, Mr. Speaker, that my 

election had something to do with the record, the platform, the 

whole team of candidates, and the leader of the New 

Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. 

 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  To the Leader of the Third Party, my 

neighbour to the south, I offer my congratulations for his re-

election  not only his election, but his party’s survival, 

something some pundits said was in doubt before the election. 

The old line about the reports of my death being greatly 

exaggerated certainly applies here. 

 

To the temporary Leader of the Opposition, we look forward to 

constructive criticism and suggestions for viable policy 

alternatives. the very honourable role of the opposition. 

 

Finally, I feel that all of us on both sides of this House, veterans 

and rookies alike, have a great deal in common: the common 

goal of conducting the people’s business to the best of our 

ability, mindful of their trust and expectations. We have 

differing views, allowing for stimulating discussion which will 

enable each of us to raise the concerns of our constituents. 

Despite our differences, we have this Assembly in common. 

The working out of our differences within these walls is the 

essence of democracy, and I look forward to this honourable 

and necessary exercise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell: — His Honour the Lieutenant Governor began 

yesterday by talking about a renewed mandate. I intend to 

follow his lead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on June 21 the people of Saskatchewan gave this 

government a new mandate, a mandate to prepare the way into 

the new century. This is a pivotal time, Mr. Speaker. Once 

every thousand years all the numbers on the calendar change, a 

very significant milestone on the odometer of human 

development. We can approach this marker fearfully, or we can 

come to it positively and enthusiastically. In Saskatchewan we 

have chosen the latter course. This throne speech, which I am 

proud to support, sets the direction for the first lap of our 

second term. 

 

The budget we will hear from the Minister of Finance in a few 

days will outline the means by which the race will be run. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the achievements of the New Democratic Party 

Government of Saskatchewan in the past four years have put us 

in proper shape to prepare for the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell: — As His Honour said, we are tackling our 

challenges, building in a manner consistent with our long 

established values. 

 

This is a new session, my first. And although I have been a 

long-time enthusiastic member of my party, I do not want to use 

this first opportunity in this House reliving the past, except for 

this: the election last June was about trust. It was about record. 

It was about vision. We put our record on the line. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that was the easiest thing I’ve ever had to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Murrell: — We reminded the people that in 1991 we 

promised to put our financial house in order. We did that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell: — We reminded voters that we promised to get 

medicare off of the sick bed, and we did that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell: — We said that we would restore open, 

accountable, efficient government, and we did that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell: — I am told that the Premier often waves the 

election card from 1991 at the members opposite, and checks 

off our campaign promises one by one. In 1995 we ran on our 

record because we kept our promises from 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  And the people trusted us to keep our 

promises again. The result of the election was the largest 

second-term victory in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  That’s what keeping your word will do. 

 

I mention the past four years to remind us that the people’s 

choice was not an accident. Our success in the past leads to our 

eager ability to meet the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I learned I was to give this speech, I read the 

last mover’s speech eloquently presented by the current member 

from Weyburn-Big Muddy I was particularly impressed by her 

mention of the Boundary Commission of 1874 and how it 

demonstrated many of the virtues which have come to typify 

our province and our people. 

 

In 1874 the Boundary Commission went about its business of 

marking the border under incredibly harsh conditions. As the 

member from Weyburn said, they were quiet, unassuming, 

unheralded, and thorough. And they defined our nation for us, 

the line that separates us from the more flamboyant, more 

individualistic, more violent society to the south. 

 

We are continuing in that tradition because, like the 

commission of the last century, we are quietly doing a job  a 

job with a plan, a purpose, and a foundation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  The job is to govern with insight, compassion, 

ingenuity, and wisdom befitting the people we represent. The 

plan is to rethink, review, and retool every aspect of 

government  every department, every policy, every program. 

We will make them work better and more efficiently. We have 

no intentions of driving into the new century on a Red River 

cart. 



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  25 

The foundation is those tried and tested values which have 

guided the people of this province from the beginning, the 

values best defined by the second great commandment which 

simply says: thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  And, Mr. Speaker, the job and the plan are to 

be carried out in cooperation and in consultation with the 

people. We whipped the deficit together. Everyone helped. 

Everyone sacrificed. 

 

As we have already seen, we are preparing for the new century 

together. We have recently been engaged in the largest public 

consultation process in the history of Saskatchewan. It was an 

exercise in listening. We held public meetings, electronic town 

halls, enlisted responses through an 800 telephone number, and 

through that exotic new tool of technology, the Internet  all of 

this in addition to the normal daily contact we all try to keep 

with our constituents. This was effective and useful 

consultation. We are preparing  and the people of 

Saskatchewan are preparing with us  the direction we should 

take. 

 

Here’s what they told us. They told us they want an emphasis 

on economic development and jobs. And they want education 

and training to prepare students for the future. They told us they 

want social programs that work. They told us they want 

sustainable health care. They told us they want us to continue 

making government frugal and effective. 

 

And we listened. The proof that we listened is in the throne 

speech and in the actions we have already undertaken. For 

example we know that our ability to deliver the kinds of social 

programs we desire depends on a vibrant economy. We also 

know that the economy does not come from government but 

rather is facilitated by government, hence the Partnership for 

Growth announced last week by the Minister of Economic 

Development along with the cooperative business and 

community leaders. 

 

It is important to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the 

announcement was made together in partnership: no one acting 

alone, all acting together for the good of all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  The opportunities for growth are good, and 

the response has been favourable even in our naysaying media. 

The partnership announces that this government will be doing 

what it should do, and that is cultivate a positive business 

environment which will allow all partners to build on their 

economic strengths, to help nurture small businesses that are 

responsible for creating most of the new jobs in Saskatchewan. 

We will reduce regulations which impact business without 

relinquishing the protection our progressive labour legislation 

gives to workers. We’re striking a balance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The key to economic development is local control. That is why 

the Partnership for Growth will make regional economic 

development authorities the vocal point for development in  

their local communities. 

 

It is a truism that we are a trading province in a trading country. 

Increased trade will be a key to our growth  now and into the 

21st century. Therefore we are establishing the Saskatchewan 

trade and export partnership to help our exporting firms develop 

and expand their markets, thereby creating more jobs and 

wealth for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Partnership for Growth also includes plans to 

build on our strengths in agriculture, forestry, mining, energy, 

culture, tourism, and information technology. We believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that this partnership will create the new jobs that are 

necessary for our continued growth and prosperity. 

 

We are confident of growth because, as I said earlier, we have a 

solid record of economic good news to build on; 1995 was a 

good year, and we expect more of the same. In the first nine 

months of 1995, retail sales in Saskatchewan increased by more 

than 5 per cent to $4.7 billion. 

 

Oil and gas production increased by around 9 per cent each. 

And in agriculture more than 23 million tonnes of grain, oil 

seed and specialty crops were harvest. There was real cash, not 

grant money, in the pockets of farmers, and we all know the 

ripple effect in our economy when there is cash on the farm. 

 

As that last figure indicates  and this is something we all 

know  no matter how much we diversify, no matter how 

many new industries we develop, Saskatchewan’s economy will 

always be driven by agriculture. We have the land. We have the 

farmers. We have the initiative. And, Mr. Speaker, in 

agriculture too, we are redeveloping and redefining partners to 

prepare our traditional industry for transition into the future. 

 

Agriculture today faces many challenges from new technology, 

from differing consumer tastes, from transportation pressures, 

from environmental problems and so on, all of them deserving 

of discussion by itself. Here too we have developed a strategy 

with rural residents that grows directly out of consultation. That 

strategy is called Agriculture 2000, a direction for the future of 

Saskatchewan agriculture and food industry, and it goes hand in 

hand with the Partnership for Growth. 

 

(1200) 

 

This plan focuses on diversification, on secondary processing, 

and on long-term research to develop new ideas, new products, 

and better crops. Agricultural biotechnology, a phrase that 

didn’t even exist a few years ago, has tremendous potential for 

all of us. 

 

A few years ago I was listening to a radio call in show. The 

guest was the leader of the opposition, now our Premier. I 

remember one caller who said, and I quote, what will you give 

me and other farmers if you are elected? Mr. Speaker, that is a 

dangerous and defeatist attitude, an attitude that I believe is rare 

in Saskatchewan at any time and practically gone now. We are 

developing an agriculture policy of real work, real production,  



26 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

real contributions, real protection, and genuine partnership. 

That’s the Saskatchewan way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  As I said earlier, the people said we must have 

social programs that work, that suit the times. Here too we have 

responded. Our social assistance program was established more 

than 30 years ago. During that time it has worked well. But 

times have changed. Unemployment across Canada is 

substantially higher. Unemployment insurance has shrunk. 

Case-loads have increased, and the problems of the unemployed 

or under employed have become more difficult. 

 

We had two options: the Alberta option or the humane option. 

We could have had the one-time expense of a bus ticket, or we 

could redesign the system in light of current realities so that 

those caught temporarily in the net would not be condemned 

forever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  We chose option two. As former New York 

governor Mario Cuomo said, we will never curse or castigate 

our way out of the welfare program. Throwing people off the 

rolls might make welfare itself go away, but it won’t make the 

problem go anywhere because the real problem is poverty and 

the real solution is producing jobs and opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  The discussion paper, Redesigning Social 

Assistance, recently released by the minister, prepares us to do 

just that, train recipients for jobs and give them an opportunity 

at the same time that it increases their responsibility to 

themselves. 

 

There are several proposals which extend the traditional 

applications of welfare. The end result, we believe, will be 

reducing a system that keeps too many capable people alive but 

at the poverty level. That way lies hopelessness, and that’s not 

good. 

 

We don’t want to perpetuate a system; we want to eliminate it 

as much as possible. Punishing the unfortunate is not the 

answer. Nor do we need more band-aid solutions. Unlike the 

federal government which seems bent on abandoning its 

responsibility to social programs, this government has the 

courage to design a program that is compassionate, challenging, 

coherent, cost effective, and credible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell:  I want to say just a word about health care and 

wellness. I know that much of the last term was taken up with 

what Tommy Douglas called the second stage of medicare and 

we are well on the way to implementing the necessary reforms 

which quite literally saved this most treasured Saskatchewan 

institution. The health board elections have taken place. And 

even though there are growing pains, health care is now in the 

hands of the local people who know the needs of their area. 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the essence of democracy. Only a 

government dedicated in practice and not only in word to the 

ideals of democracy would dare put it into the hands of the 

people  this most basic instrument of the people. And while 

we listen to the members opposite decry the health boards, I can 

flatly say that no government now or in the future will dare try 

to take back control from the people. 

 

Compare our commitment to the health care to that of the 

federal government. What do we make, Mr. Speaker, of a 

questionnaire sent out last fall by Saskatchewan MP (Member 

of Parliament), Mr. Goodale? He asks his constituents the 

following questions. Number one, if individuals are willing to 

pay for health services, should they be able to access medical 

treatment ahead of those who are either unwilling or unable to 

pay? Number two, should user fees be introduced to help offset 

the cost of medicare? Number three, should premiums be 

re-established as an additional source of revenue? And most 

frightening, Mr. Speaker, is the last question, number four, do 

you support the five basic principles set out in the Canada 

Health Act  universality, portability, accessibility, 

comprehensiveness, and public administration? 

 

Why did he ask those questions? What possible reason could he 

have had to call into question this fundamental institution of 

Canadian life? And if he sent out these questions, did Liberal 

MPs across the country also send them out? I don’t read 

commitment from that document. I read a government 

desperately looking for a way out or another way out of its 

responsibilities. 

 

The obvious fact is this. Liberals are looking for a way to 

sabotage medicare. New Democrats have found a way to save 

it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell: — Mr. Speaker, I could name other examples of 

cooperation and consultation, of how this government is not 

leading, not following, but going together with the people into 

the future, in education and training, in government reform, in 

municipal streamlining, in fiscal management, and in numerous 

other ways. 

 

Certainly there are voices today that say government should 

absent itself from all meaningful activity. That government is an 

enemy of the people. We reject that opinion, believing as we 

always have, that government is the instrument of the people  

a tool like any other that can be used for good or ill, depending 

on who wields it. We believe in cooperation, not in desertion. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the world is changing, perhaps 

faster than you and I might like, but it is changing. We are 

having to live with computers, freeze-dried peanuts, the 

500-channel universe, Internet, and rap music  well, maybe 

not rap. 

 

You might be familiar with the comic strip Calvin and Hobbes. 

We are just learning to function in an economic world which 

resembles a huge game of Calvin ball. A game in which the 

rules change with every play, and no one knows the rules  



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  27 

except the person who makes them, until the next person 

changes them on the next play, and so on. 

 

We now live in an ongoing game of Calvin ball. Deregulation, 

realignment of populations, information technology, the global 

economy  these are the buzz words of today. We can resist 

today and deny the future, or we can use our traditional values 

as a base to come up with new solutions to a new age. 

 

These solutions are not the sole possession of any single group 

 private, corporate or government. We know that, and I 

believe the actions I have just described prove it. Together, in 

the past four years, we the people have turned this province 

around. Together in the next four years we will see our province 

realize its economic potential while it enhances its social 

framework. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have come to this Legislative Assembly as a 

member of my party because I like many other members, have 

been inspired and motivated by the exceptional men and women 

before me; by the dedicated work of all members of all parties 

who served before us, some of whom we will remember in a 

few days. 

 

As well, I am in the debts of my parents who taught me the 

fundamental principles of caring and sharing by the example of 

their own lives. I am proud of my personal and my public 

antecedents. I am thankful for the society they built for me. 

Because of them, Saskatchewan is the best place in the best 

country in the world to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murrell: — I believe we are all responsible to do for our 

children what our forebears did for us. I believe we should 

leave for them a Saskatchewan as good or better as the one we 

were given. We can do no less. 

 

Therefore, because I believe we are on the right path to 

economic plenty and social generosity, and because I believe 

this throne speech outlines a workable and democratic plan to 

keep us on that path, I move, seconded by the member from 

Regina South: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable John E.N. Wiebe, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to address you today and in particular to have had 

this opportunity, not to have simply gone directly to the vote. 

 

It is a pleasure today to rise as a member of this Legislative 

Assembly. I am particularly pleased to have been asked by the 

Premier to second the motion in response to the throne speech. 

To be permitted this honour on the occasion of my first address 

to this Assembly is in fact very humbling. 

 

It’s a unique privilege to be elected by one’s peers to serve in 

this House. It’s a unique privilege to be able to speak on their 

behalf and to vote on the legislation as they desire. 

 

For four generations Saskatchewan and its leaders have 

gathered in this chamber to debate the issues that define our 

province. I am particularly humbled to be here in one of the 

truly historic assemblies of our nation, for it was here that many 

of the greatest debates to shape this century have occurred. 

 

These debates have profoundly changed and defined the 

Canadian experience and in the process they’ve helped to 

define our country. Saskatchewan has been well served by its 

elected representatives; however, as the Speaker mentioned 

yesterday, there’s no doubt politicians today are viewed poorly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you on being elected to 

your position within this House. I know that you’ll do well in 

discharging your duties. 

 

I also want to thank you for your words yesterday to this 

Assembly and indeed for your advice to me personally over the 

past several months that we’ve served together as colleagues. 

 

I don’t want to draw you into the debate, but I do want to say 

that I think you were right when you say there is broad cynicism 

in our community. And I guess after how many decades of 

scandal and disgrace by those who’ve used their office for 

personal gain or greed, after how many court cases, after how 

many lectures by the unelected elite and the media telling us 

that we are ineffective and inept, is it any wonder that there is 

cynicism in our population. 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Speaker, you and I both know that change will only occur 

when people are presented with real alternatives. The 

stereotypes can seem to become real. I don’t believe that to be 

true. I believe that we can change the system. I believe each of 

us is here to change the system. And I want to join with you in 

doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, your comments yesterday in 

many ways mirrored the reasons I decided to enter politics. 

 

When I was running for my party’s nomination I was frequently 

asked two questions. First of all, why would I want to take a 

pay cut to go into politics . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It is a 

good question. And why, as a young man, would I want to give  



28 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

up my position in the civil service to take on a role in public 

service . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not exactly the most 

encouraging response, thank you. 

 

I guess the answer was relatively simple. I decided to run for 

office, I decided to take a pay cut, I decided to give up my 

career in the civil service for the simple reason I still believe 

there is no greater honour than being elected to serve your peers 

in the public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I grew up in a family where we 

saw the good the government could do. We saw that 

government had a role to play in doing as a province and as a 

community what we could not do individually. 

 

Both my mother and father have been politically active, not 

because their families were but because they too sought change. 

It’s with some pride that I stood in this Assembly with my dad 

the day I took the oath of allegiance, because the first campaign 

I really remember was one that he fought almost 20 years ago in 

Kindersley. 

 

At that point he was fighting against a would be Liberal leader 

named Neil McMillan and a soon to be Finance minister named 

Bob Andrew. Although he managed to beat Mr. McMillan, he 

was not quite so successful against Mr. Andrew. 

 

It was a pleasure some 20 years later  or almost 20 years later 

 to be campaigning again with him. And even more 

pleasurable that this time not only did we win but that I too was 

able to join him as the second Thomson to defeat a would be 

Liberal leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member:  There’s so many of those would-be’s. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  There are a few of them still about. While 

my dad was the person in the family who sought elected office, 

it was in fact my mother who taught me most about party 

politics. She was the one who served on the governing council 

of the party and who would drag me off to party meetings to sit 

and to vote and to colour. Actually I guess even at that young 

age I would have been well qualified to be a member of some 

of the opposition caucuses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, in our party we 

strive for more. As I introduced to the Assembly earlier today, I 

am particularly pleased to have my stepfather, Ed Leason, 

seated in the galleries today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Ed is really one of my closest friends and is 

perhaps one of the people who has helped to shape my view of 

politics most. He’s taught me that this is not in fact a debating 

society. He’s taught me that there is more to politics than  

simply being a spectator sport. 

 

Rather, he has served to remind me that change is brought about 

by people. That the forces in our society that are important are 

not necessarily the forces of history, but the forces of 

biography. I think that those are important things for us to 

remember. 

 

I agree with that assessment because Saskatchewan for 

generations has been shaped by the vision of its leaders. From 

our first premier, Walter Scott, to perhaps our greatest premier, 

Tommy Douglas, the 20th century has been shaped by the 

people who have served in this Assembly. 

 

An Hon. Member:  We’ve got a great Premier now. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  I’m coming to him in a minute. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  If I was a couple of rows closer I would 

come to him quicker. 

 

For those of you who have served in this Assembly before, you 

know the importance of the debates and the discussions that go 

on here because you have seen the results. Four years ago, 

Saskatchewan stood on the edge of the abyss. Talk of 

insolvency was at hand. Expectations of give-aways and greed 

continued to be fuelled by the opposition, and the province 

stood divided on which course to take. 

 

On the eve of one of the most important sessions in this 

legislature’s history, the government presented its vision for 

rebuilding our province. In moving the speech in reply to the 

throne speech at that session, my colleague and current 

bench-mate, the member from Meadow Lake, stood here to 

caution the province on the arduous journey ahead. In so doing 

he said, Rome was not built in a day; Saskatchewan was not 

bankrupted in a week, and it would not be rebuilt in a month. 

 

Wise words. As we are aware, he was of course right. It had 

taken eight years and $8 billion of taxpayer borrowed money 

for the Tories to turn Saskatchewan’s economy from one of 

bread basket to basket case. And it took four hard-fought years 

to bring it back from the brink of bankruptcy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  In 1992 the government set in motion a 

variety of initiatives that would put Saskatchewan on the road 

to recovery. After being stalled by two terms of tax and spend 

Tories, in 1992 we started to see tax relief for business. We 

started to see tax relief for consumers. And this has resulted in a 

retail economy today that is envied across Canada. 

 

The jobs plan introduced in that session, The Partnership for 

Renewal, spurred on renewal and resulted in an improving 

economy. After a decade of jobs created on the false economy 

of unprofitable oil upgraders, high risk insurance companies, 

and bloated bureaucracies, we saw small business start to hire 

again. After 10 years of economic upheaval, we saw 10,000  



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  29 

new jobs created. And after a decade of out-migration and job 

losses, Saskatchewan people began to come home. 

 

Four years ago you came together with the objective of 

rebuilding our province and once again restoring honesty, 

integrity, and confidence to government. Today we see the 

results of your initiatives. Today we have a balanced budget. 

Today we have a climate for job growth and investment in our 

economy. Today we have a health care system that’s built on 

wellness, not illness. Today we have a debt that’s shrinking. 

Today we have a province that’s united. And today we have 

hope. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, these changes were not lost on 

the people of Saskatchewan, and that’s why on June 21 they 

returned this government with the largest second term mandate 

afforded any party in the history of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  I don’t either want to be particularly partisan 

or provocative today. It’s not my style. But let me offer this 

observation of that campaign in 1995. In many ways, I think the 

campaign was a campaign of clear choices. It offered a choice 

between an NDP government that stood by its convictions or a 

PC opposition that stood by its convicts. It offered the choice of 

an NDP government that would offer change and leadership or 

a Liberal opposition that simply offered to change their 

leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, change is an important part of what we’re here for 

today. I know that the Liberals agree with me when I say that 

they too want change. They’re prepared to change their party 

membership. They’re prepared to change sides of the House. 

They’re prepared to change leaders. 

 

But that’s not really the change I’m speaking of. When I look at 

the House today, I have to admit I’m a little bit confused. I look 

across at a Liberal opposition that’s leaderless. On the other 

hand, I look at a Liberal leader that’s oppositionless. I’m new to 

this, but I think I’m starting to catch on to how the system on 

the other side of the floor works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we can see, all parties support change of one 

kind or another. Our party supports real, substantive change that 

will move Saskatchewan forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  The voters of Regina South, like voters in 70 

per cent of this province’s ridings, voted to stay the course of 

real change. They opted for the kind of change that 

Saskatchewan has had over the past four years: a reversal of 

fortunes that saw our jobs increase, saw retail sales rebound, 

that saw a balanced budget plan introduced; and, even better, a 

balanced budget passed. It saw a new balance struck between 

business and labour that recognized the needs for profit and the 

needs for jobs. Saskatchewan saw real change during this 

government’s first term. 

In many ways, Mr. Speaker, I believe Regina South is 

representative of the changes we have seen in Saskatchewan 

politics. Once the bastion of establishment Liberalism, today 

Regina South represents a changing, more modern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Where once long-established Liberal 

families ruled the riding, today ours is a community of young 

families. It’s a community of small businessmen. It’s a 

community of seniors. Regina South remains one of this 

province’s most affluent and confident communities, but it’s a 

confidence that’s built on compassion and, dare I say, common 

sense. 

 

It recognizes that we need a balanced approach to leadership; 

that government provides labour with jobs; it provides 

consumers with cash flow; and business with customers. That’s 

the business we’re in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I say that the days of 

give-aways and greed are quickly declining. Instead we’re 

starting to see a new self-reliance emerging in our province. As 

New Democrats, we can be proud of those changes. 

 

But we too know the value of change within our party. You 

might remember that last session, this particular spot in the 

Assembly was held by the former member from Regina South. 

And while there are many similarities between us, not the least 

of which are our good looks and charm, I tend to be a little bit 

younger. And in fact Regina South has again opted for 

distinction in this Assembly. Last term it was represented by the 

oldest member to serve in the Assembly; this year it’s 

represented by the youngest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I think that change is testament 

to the strong leadership and the future-oriented vision of the 

leader of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  It took a while. Not only, under his 

leadership, have we seen 42 New Democrats return to this 

House, but we’ve also seen a strong contingent of first-time 

members. In fact six of us in this side are serving for the first 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I said I did not want to be 

particularly partisan and provocative, and perhaps I’ve failed. 

However, I want to make one further comment about the 

campaign in Regina South. 

 

As you know, the political pundits said I would not win. They 

said that given the option of a middle-aged lawyer from the  



30 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

Liberal Party and an unknown 27-year-old New Democrat, the 

people would choose the old-line Liberal. Mr. Speaker, they 

were wrong. People in Regina South rejected the cynicism in 

the politics-as-usual approach presented by the Liberal Party 

and the media. 

 

There are those in the province today that still don’t get it. 

There are people that believe that politics today is still about 

special-interest groups. That it is still about power. It’s not. It is 

about people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry, but one of the 

reasons people are cynical about politics is for the very reasons 

that they were told a Liberal should be standing here and not 

me. They were told by the media and others that you need to be 

a lawyer. They were told you need to be a Liberal. They were 

told you need to be part of the elite. 

 

Well let me tell you this: after Regina South on June 21, 1995 

there should be no doubt that politics today is all about people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  My colleague from Saskatoon says the times 

are changing and in fact that is true. This is all about change. 

People want change. People want to be listened to and people 

want to be represented. 

 

During our consultation process, people told us they wanted 

change. They told us they wanted the government to live within 

its means. They wanted us to restore fairness to Saskatchewan’s 

politics and our public policies. They wanted to restore balance 

between rural and urban communities. They wanted to establish 

a balance between young families and seniors. They wanted to 

establish a balance between business and labour. 

 

(1230) 

 

They told us that high spending, high debt, and high taxes were 

not the way of the future. They told us they wanted lower 

spending, lower debt, lower taxes. They told us they wanted 

change. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, nowhere is that desire for change more 

prevalent than in the new generation of Saskatchewan people 

who today are starting their families and joining the workforce. 

In large part that’s because of this party and this government’s 

ability to deal with the complex issues of the economy while 

making government simpler and smaller; that this new 

generation, my generation, strongly supports this government’s 

agenda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  I think in part that’s because we’re a 

generation that knows we’re not likely to see the standard of 

living our parents have enjoyed. I think we know we’re not 

likely to have the opportunity to get a job and stay with it until 

retirement. Our generation’s unlikely to know the same benefits  

at retirement that seniors today do. One thing we know for sure 

though is that the bills for decades of over-billed, under-funded 

government are coming to us with our names on it. We’re a 

generation that’s concerned about managing the affairs 

carefully today. We want to ensure that tomorrow there is some 

degree of hope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe there’s good reason for this concern. On 

Monday The Globe and Mail reported on an article done by The 

Institute for Research on Public Policy that showed members of 

my generation will pay almost $300,000 more in taxes over 

their lifetime than they’ll ever receive in services. That’s not 

new services, that’s simply the cost of maintaining the current 

services. 

 

Those costs have been built up by previous governments that 

have simply desired to spend. They have desired to build 

bureaucracies. They have desired to build and make big 

government. 

 

An Hon. Member:  With no purpose. 

 

Mr. Thomson:  With no purpose. The Premier is right  

with no purpose. 

 

I’m part of a generation that’ll soon assume full responsibility, 

fiscally and morally, for maintaining the social security system 

that people have come to depend on. That’s why the changes 

being contemplated this session are so important. 

 

The legislative and budget changes that’ll be introduced in this 

Assembly this session will help to provide Saskatchewan with a 

firm foundation to move forward into the new century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, these changes that have been 

announced in the throne speech will help to create jobs. They 

will re-establish a system of labour force development that 

meets the needs of people and the needs of the market. And 

they will also continue to reform government at all levels in 

recognition that while there are different levels of government, 

there is still only one taxpayer. 

 

As a young person and part of a new generation of New 

Democrats, I’m pleased to support this blueprint for a better 

Saskatchewan. In so doing I want to share with you my views 

on how this plan will help us ready ourselves for the new 

century. 

 

Let me talk first about our jobs agenda. There was a time when 

Saskatchewan’s economy was relatively simple. It was 

supported by dry land farming. It was a time when townships 

actually contained towns, when land was affordable and crops 

sustainable. It was a time when all jobs related back to the land 

in one way or another. And we’ve built on that foundation and 

we’ve expanded. 

 

Our economy from that time has been built to not only deal 

with the staples of growing food but to providing shelter, the 

materials for shelter and fuels for heat. We have been the  



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  31 

hinterland of Canada’s economic engines for generations. 

Today, however, we stand poised to enter a new era of growth 

and expansion in this province. Reforms undertaken by our 

government in the first four years of its mandate, called the 

Partnership for Renewal, have provided the basis for rebuilding 

an economy better suited to match the new global economy. 

 

And as a result, we’ve seen remarkable growth. While the rest 

of Canada has seen a jobless recovery from the recession, 

we’ve seen job growth. While the rest of Canada has seen retail 

sales slow, we’ve seen them grow. While the rest of Canada has 

seen record business and personal bankruptcies, we’ve seen 

them decline. 

 

In short, the Partnership for Growth . . . Partnership for 

Renewal saw a growth in profits, growth in jobs, growth in the 

economy and new industries, and a growth in consumer 

confidence. 

 

Today we seek to build on that agenda. In doing so, our 

government intends to outline an agenda for growth. This new 

agenda, this new plan, will highlight the importance of the new 

sectors of our economy. It will provide new opportunities for 

business to enter into new ventures that are now just emerging 

in the world economy, And it will provide us with an 

opportunity to add value to our already existing commodities. 

 

Our jobs agenda will continue to be built around partnerships. It 

will continue to be built around prosperity and it will continue 

to be built around people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, our economy is built in several key 

sectors, including agriculture, forestry, mining, engineering, 

energy, and information. Because of our commodity-based 

economy, we have been able to build opportunities for people 

throughout Saskatchewan on a regional basis. 

 

We’ve started the process of regional economic development. 

This is a process that will allow individual people in local 

communities to make the decisions about their own future. 

 

We remain committed to providing the new tools of a new 

economy. We remain committed to ensuring that local 

communities are able to participate in a changing global 

environment. This includes a commitment by our colleague, the 

Minister of Economic Development, who proposes a new trade 

development corporation. This in turn will help innovative 

Saskatchewan products get to Saskatchewan’s markets. 

 

It includes a commitment to new tools like the Internet, that the 

Premier has noted our province is one of only two in all of 

Canada to offer universal access to businesses and citizens 

through our phone company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  The Internet is more than simply a fancy 

telephone. It is in fact an ability for us, no matter where you are 

in Saskatchewan, to be anywhere you want to be in the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Thomson:  It includes a commitment . . . our proposals 

include a commitment by the Minister of Finance to maintain a 

balanced budget plan; a plan that over the past four years has 

provided for tax relief for selected businesses, that has 

promoted job growth in new industries like 

telecommunications, and a commitment on behalf of the energy 

sector that has helped Saskatchewan, not Alberta, lead the 

country in the renewal of our oil sector through new 

technologies like horizontal drilling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  We’ve seen responsible development in our 

northern mines. And through better representations by 

government we are seeing better opportunities for Northerners 

to work in them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, our economy is built on the 

strength of our commodities: oil, natural gas, uranium, 

agriculture, forestry, information, and energy. But there is one 

final commodity that is important for us to remember, and that 

commodity is hope. 

 

Our plan for economic development is built on a single, simple 

principle. It is built on the understanding that through 

individual initiative and cooperative action this province’s 

economy has grown over 90 years. And it is on that same 

principle of individual initiative and cooperative action that we 

will ensure that this economy grows for another 90 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  It is because of that understanding, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government will introduce a solid and secure 

plan to help Saskatchewan’s economy grow. It’s a plan that will 

target scarce resources to leverage maximum benefits. It’s a 

problem that will . . . it is a process that will target tax relief to 

provide for job growth. It’ll reduce government regulation and 

spur on innovation. And it will provide infrastructure to help 

the emerging technologies move from the microscope to the 

market-place. 

 

Our plan for economic growth is a plan for job growth. We 

know that it’s more than just profits that make our economy 

strong  it is people. That’s why we’re committed to providing 

a made-in-Saskatchewan strategy for workplace training. That’s 

why we’ve taken the first steps in this regard by establishing a 

Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 

 

I am a strong supporter of this move. I believe education must 

be about more than just learning. We need a comprehensive 

skills training program that includes universities, the technical 

colleges, and local business. We need to develop an education 

system that returns us to the focus on accessibility, 

affordability, and accountability. 

 

The system we have today is antiquated. It’s redundant and it’s 

unresponsive. It is permeated by massive overlaps in some areas 

and huge gaps in others. It’s a system that’s come to  



32 Saskatchewan Hansard March 1, 1996 

represent complacency rather than scholarship excellence and 

achievement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say this not to be critical of those who are 

involved in our post-secondary sector. As you are likely aware, 

I too have for many years worked in that sector. I served four 

years on the University of Saskatchewan senate. I spent five 

years on their academic council and spent a term on the 

university’s board of governors. During that time I joined with 

many others in that senate, including the member for 

Lloydminster, in arguing for change. 

 

I’m a firm believer that the system must change to recognize the 

facts of the modern information age. 

 

Gone are the days of Ivy League institutions, isolated from 

markets the graduates compete in. I say gone are the days of 

students being able to earn their tuition by working part time in 

the summer. They simply don’t exist. And gone are the days 

when we can afford a system that is more focused on academic 

meritocracy than on accreditation and marketability. 

 

We must change the academic system, not by subjugating 

academic freedoms, but by subjecting an antiquated system of 

governance to the realities of the modern economy. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Sounds like a Meadow Lake quote. 

 

Mr. Thomson: — It could be a Meadow Lake quote, but it’s 

not. It’s direct from Regina South. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few comments about the future 

of our province. I believe that students are in fact a vital part of 

our changing economy. They’re the people who are prepared to 

forgo the short-term earnings in order to achieve longer-term 

benefits in our economy and to provide jobs and opportunity. 

They’re the people who have hopes and who seek opportunity. 

And our academic institutions are failing them. For all the 

opportunities education presents people with, it is still 

unattainable by many. 

 

I find it distressing that women continue to be under-

represented in our universities, that parents are under-

represented, that aboriginal people are under-represented, and 

that the poor are under-represented. The reason for this is that 

we see rising tuition, we see expanded course lengths, we see 

increased entrance requirements. And I would argue, for the 

Tories in the crowd, that we see a law of diminishing returns. 

 

No longer does a degree guarantee you a job. No longer does it 

guarantee you a decent wage; no longer does it even guarantee 

you the security of knowing you’ll be able to pay off your 

student loan. 

 

That is the product of the system we have today. The result is 

that rather than having a system of education that supports 

growth and jobs and industry, we have an industry of education. 

 

Our universities and technical colleges provide Saskatchewan 

with a remarkable opportunity for economic advancement.  

Take, for example, the University of Regina. This university is 

among the best in Canada in a number of areas. Unlike its Ivy 

League counterparts, it has pioneered in providing co-op 

education programs that pair students with business. It provides 

real opportunities to apply your academic education in a real 

workplace environment. 

 

Its College of Engineering is one of the most advanced in 

western Canada in the area of software engineering, and it’s 

providing Saskatchewan with a foothold in the new information 

age. We have software engineering in Saskatchewan because 

we have the University of Regina. Because we have the 

University of Regina, we have companies like ISM 

(Information Systems Management Corporation) and CDSL 

(Co-operators Data Services Limited) located here. These are 

the examples of government policy, through its post-secondary 

sector, supporting the economy. They’re examples of us using 

technology transfer to move technology from the microscope to 

the market-place. They demonstrate the potential our 

universities hold. 

 

As such, we must find ways to improve them. We must create 

real centres of excellence  excellence in all areas  

education, economic development, and employment upgrading. 

That’s the challenge this government is presented with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of where the reforms lead us, we must 

ensure that we remain vigilant in ensuring that accessibility to 

the students, to employers, and to taxpayers is maintained. We 

must ensure the system remains affordable and accountable as 

well to these people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education reform at the post-secondary level can 

be a cornerstone of our economic development. It can provide 

us with improved linkages between our labour force and our 

labour market. And it can provide us with the opportunity to 

ensure that all people in Saskatchewan, regardless of race, of 

gender, or of economic advantage, have the opportunity to 

contribute to renewal of our province. 

 

If we decide to forgo meaningful education reform, the type of 

meaningful reform that will be presented in this session, 

whether it’s because it’s politically unpopular or politically 

unpalatable, I say then that the decision has been made that we 

are confident the institutions and laws that governed the 12th 

century are the same ones that can guide us into the 21st. 

 

I think that that is an ill-founded decision. This government will 

be providing you with a plan for leadership and vision and 

growth. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan stands on the edge of a new 

century. For most of the past 50 years, Saskatchewan has been 

governed by CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation-New Democratic Party) administrations that have 

firmly established Saskatchewan on the cutting edge of the 

Canadian experience. Saskatchewan people have again chosen 

to support this CCF-NDP tradition as we make choices over the 

next four years that’ll shape our entry into the new century. 



March 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  33 

The changes our government is proposing in building a climate 

for jobs and economic growth, in reforming and modernizing 

our education system, in protecting the future of our families 

through a balanced policy of fair taxation, fiscal responsibility 

and reforms to our social programs, these are the changes that’ll 

ensure that the new century is Saskatchewan’s century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  In closing, Mr. Speaker, permit me to say 

that as part of a new generation of New Democrats in this 

Assembly, I am proud to second the motion by the member 

from Battleford-Cut Knife 

 

I am proud to serve in a government that is led by one of the 

most experienced and innovative Canadians in our time. And 

I’m proud to be part of the great social experiment called 

Saskatchewan . Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

begin my remarks on the reply to the throne speech by 

congratulating you, Mr. Speaker, and the Deputy Speaker as 

well. I’m sure you’ll hold the institution in high honour, and 

we’ll help you do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to congratulate the mover and seconder of the 

throne speech. Being new members, you know, it was rather 

interesting to listen to them begin debate in the House today. 

It’s quite an experience. I barely recall when I first did my 

maiden speech, and I do congratulate them. 

 

But I found it most interesting listening to the seconder in 

particular, the member for Regina South. You know he made 

some comments about standing up for convictions and the how 

the public’s rather cynical. He talked about real change. And 

the only real change I saw really from that member is from the 

election, which he referred to on many occasions, was his 

position on the Plains Health Centre, and I’m sure we’ll have 

lots of time to get into that. 

 

Real change, Mr. Member, is not changing your mind; it’s 

doing things, you know, proactively for the economy and such. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Come to due order. Thank you, 

and I’ll recognize the hon. member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

for bringing them to order. I also heard them talk about the fact 

that what people have been telling them and what people have 

been telling the member from Regina South in the election was 

in fact they wanted lower taxes and such, and I’ll get into that 

more on Monday. I would like him to take the weekend though 

and maybe contact the Minister of Finance and just bring her up 

to speed on that, given her remarks the other day in the news. 

 

But getting right to the point of what was and what wasn’t in 

the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I see that that on the first page 

it talks about Preparing for a New Century  Making Choices 
for Today and Tomorrow. But I think to get a real good  

understanding of where we’re going in the future, one has to 

judge them by where they’ve come from in the past. And that’s 

where we’re going to talk about some of the choices that they 

have made in the past. And those are the ones I think that will 

come around to haunt them more than not. Those are going to 

be choices of how it’s affected their government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact, we don’t see from their choices that they’ve had a lot of 

effect that the other people have had, where their cabinet is as 

big as ever, they’re still continuing with policies of Crown 

tendering for their friends, continuing with patronage. And 

nobody knows that better than the member from Regina South, 

who of course was on the receiving end of that patronage. 

 

But yet when we look at some of the choices that have affected 

the people out there, the people of the province that really 

would like to see some changes, the change that they’re looking 

for though, is not to have to give up their hospitals, not to have 

to give up some of the services out in the rural areas, the 

SaskPower offices and their rural underground programs. Those 

are the type of things that they want to see changed from that 

government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, on Monday we’ll get into a lot more of the 

discussion on choices and the breaking of promises. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I think given what has transpired earlier today and the 

fact that I’m sure there’s farmers all around this province that 

would like to have access to some of the members opposite to 

explain why they took some of the actions they did today, and 

refusing to debate something as important as what was put 

before the government today, I would move adjournment of 

debate on the special order of the throne speech. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:53 p.m. 

 


