













































May 6, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1397 

 May 6, 1996 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me, to my 

immediate left, is Duane Adams, the deputy minister of Health, 

and beside him is Barry Lacey, who works in the finance branch 

of the department. Glenda Yeates is behind me. She is the 

senior associate deputy minister of Health. And Lois Borden, 

who is the district support branch head of the department. 

 

And we will be joined shortly, I believe, by Carol Klassen, so 

I’ll mention that. And she is the executive director of the acute 

and emergency services branch. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 

want to welcome your staff here this evening for another round 

of entertainment, I’m sure, that we’ll get into throughout the 

evening. 

 

Mr. Minister, I guess when you were up in estimates last, we 

were dealing with acute care. I think we’ll get back to that, but 

first I just want to ask a few questions on capital spending. If I 

look on page 68, long-term care services, $248 million. Is there 

any capital spending in this amount? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. The $268 million identified for 

long-term care would not include capital spending. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, can you give me a 

breakdown, exactly what that $248 million would all include 

then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think I had said $268 million a few 

minutes ago but I meant 248 million. 

 

I’m advised the $248 million is given to the districts to support 

long-term care in the districts, based upon population. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, then if it’s given to the 

districts, that full amount is just for operating salaries and such? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, that would be correct, but I could 

expand that a bit to say it’s everything other than capital that 

would go into long-term care would be included in the 248 

million. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, so then on page 70 with the 

Health capital spending, some forty-one and a half million 

dollars, do you have a breakdown as to what that spending will  

be for the year, on what projects and where? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. Of the forty-one and a half million 

dollars the member refers to, thirty-six and a half million dollars 

has been announced, and $5 million has not yet been 

announced. The capital plan for this year hasn’t been fully 

approved. What the thirty-six and a half million dollars is: 

Prince Albert acute rationalization, 1.7 million; Prince Albert 

long-term care at Mont St. Joseph Home, $5 million; Regina 

acute care rationalization, $27 million; Regina Allan Blair 

cancer clinic, $2 million; health centres  these are projects 

not identified, pending joint infrastructure program 

announcement with the federal government  of $.8 million; 

for a total of thirty-six and a half. 

 

And then you would have another $5 million to be allocated to 

various projects but we have not yet told the districts or publicly 

announced which projects are getting capital funding yet. But it 

is thought that another $5 million will be approved quite shortly 

and I would hope to be in a position to tell the member, you 

know, in the near future what other capital projects would be 

approved. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, are you able to table that list 

from the document that you are quoting from? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The document I’m reading from, no, I can’t 

table that because it’s got some information we haven’t 

announced yet. But the thirty six and a half million dollars that 

has been publicly announced, we could provide that to you 

tomorrow if that would be satisfactory. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, of this amount  forty one 

and a half million  do you have . . . can you tell me also when 

you provide this information, I guess tomorrow, is it broken 

down as to how much came from the federal government, I 

guess by way of infrastructure or whatever other programs are 

out there; how much they matched; or in fact how much money 

went into these projects from a community or local government 

level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Any community or local contributions 

would be on top of the figures we’re talking about so they 

wouldn’t be included. There is, I’m told, a quite small amount 

in this figure that would be infrastructure money. And we will 

give you the exact figure tomorrow, if that’s satisfactory. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, then can you tell me what 

the process would be for a community that’s in need of a 

nursing home from the Department of Health’s perspective or 

from your perspective? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Chair, the district would prepare a 

capital management plan which it would submit to the 

department. So the local community wanting the facility would 

ask the district board to include its facility as part of the capital 

management plan and the district . . . If the local community 

convinced the district to include its facility as part of the 

district’s capital management plan, then the district would 

submit that plan to the Department of Health, and the  



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Department of Health would then go through a whole list of 

requests from all the districts and would try to priorize those on 

the basis of need. 

 

And you probably, as with . . . there’s a similar process in the 

education area, I believe. Sometimes you have pressing needs 

for school construction or hospital or a nursing home. You 

don’t always meet all of them because of course it depends how 

much capital is available. But you’d try to get the information 

from the districts and then priorize them on the basis of which 

is the most pressing need. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, what I’ll . . . but I’ll get right 

to the point then. The community of Shaunavon, where I live, 

has for many years been asking and fighting for a new nursing 

home, a level 3 to level 4 care home, and the need is great. And 

I’m sure . . . well the former Health minister agreed . . . I guess 

they still have four beds in some of the rooms. 

 

So clearly they’ve established a need and I know that the 

district board and other community associations have been 

lobbying you and your department and the Premier. So are you 

able to tell me where that project is in the stream of things? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I did see your correspondence, and I 

did follow it up in the sense of informing myself what was 

happening with the request. And I’m not in a position this 

evening to give you an answer, definitively, as to whether it will 

be approved, simply because we haven’t advised the district or 

the community. 

 

But I will tell the member that I would expect very shortly to 

make an announcement in that regard. And I would simply say 

that this project is one that actually is a high priority. And while 

we’re not announcing what projects were approved this 

evening, there is room for optimism with respect to this project. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  All right. And I’ll take that in a very 

optimistic way, Mr. Minister. How long then does it take for the 

actual . . . if a project like this was approved and the funding is 

in this budget year, how long until construction or the project 

itself would get under way and when would you see completion 

dates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  If it was approved at this stage, very 

shortly. We would anticipate that the next six to eight months 

would be the planning stage and that construction would 

commence and perhaps be completed in 1997. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister, I won’t follow 

down that course then. I’ll wait for the announcement, and with 

a lot of optimism. And I thank you for your answer, too. 

 

Mr. Minister, on page 68, getting back to the long-term care 

services, I noticed from last year we’ve dropped $2 million. But 

if I recall from . . . with my figures here, ‘93-94, ‘94-95, there 

hasn’t been much of a change. In fact it’s been rather flat  

239 million in ‘93-94; 243 in ‘94-95, and the other figures you 

have in front of you. 

What I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, because level 1 and level 2 

care funding would have come out of this pool also, and I’m 

just wondering as you’re, I guess, weeding out the level 1, level 

2’s out of the system, I think people would have expected more 

of a dramatic decrease in the funds. And you could you tell me 

why this is remaining flat? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I would say to the member that, if you look 

at the Health budget generally, the Health budget generally has 

been fairly level in the sense that we’re spending about the 

same today, I think slightly more, than we did in ‘91-92. Acute 

care has been reduced, as the member will know, by 40-some 

million dollars and that money has been put into community 

care. It’s not surprising that long-term care is. . . the funding is 

somewhat flat. 

 

But I’m advised that the other aspect to it is that there are 

increases that the districts would receive by way of fees when 

the nursing home fees that the residents pay go up as their 

pensions are adjusted. Those increases accrue to the districts 

directly so that the budget funding from the Department of 

Health may be somewhat flat, but the districts may actually be 

getting increases, or would be getting increases for long-term 

care as the resident charges are increased on a quarterly basis. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, then so I guess what you’re 

saying is because of income testing the seniors, that’s taking 

care of all the increases, but you’ve done away with two levels 

of care that you don’t fund any longer. And in fact not only are 

you not funding them but those people that were in nursing 

home beds  level 1, level 2 beds  they’re not having their 

portions brought into the health district budgets. So it shouldn’t 

have remained flat. Otherwise, I’d like to know how much was 

being spent on level 1, level 2 care in previous years, and at 

what point will we see this drop off? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. The explanation would be that the 

level 1 care was never funded; the resident paid the charges. 

The level 2 care, the level of care was funded. But when level 1 

and 2 care was phased out, the commitment was made that level 

2 care people would not be removed from the institutions they 

were in. So that the funding would continue because the people 

would continue to reside in the centres that they resided in. 

 

And moreover, because they are ageing, the level of care that 

they require is also going up. So that you don’t have any saving 

there because you’re still funding the people that were level 2; 

and the people that were level 1, we never were funding. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, are you able to provide us 

with a list of the number of people in long-term beds at the 

level 2, 3, and 4? Do you have those lists and in what facilities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  We could provide you with a list of levels 

of care per district, but not at the present time. But we could get 

you that information. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 

officials. I have just a few questions that are more local, for my 

own constituency. And one of the first ones I guess maybe is 

province-wide. I’m wondering if all the patients that were  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

covered under the grandfathering clause, if they remain in that 

category now that the district health boards are in place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, they were all grandfathered. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. For the two hospitals  or 

used-to-be hospitals in my area that are no longer considered 

given that status  can you tell me if there’s future plans 

through your department for the Leroy lodge or if there’s any 

consideration given by the department to that facility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  With respect to the LeRose Lodge at 

Leroy, that facility I understand was an army barracks from the 

1940s. And the Fire Commissioner had serious concerns about 

the facility and it really is not up to code. Nor was it considered 

to be suitable for its use. The department has no plans for the 

use of that facility and indeed that would be a decision made at 

the district level. 

 

And then the other facility that you’re referring to would be 

which facility? 

 

Ms. Draude:  Rose Valley . . . former Rose Valley hospital 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  My understanding is that the Pasquia 

Health District has converted the Rose Valley integrated facility 

to a health centre. So they plan to use the facility for a health 

centre. 

 

Ms. Draude:  After the initial downgrading of the Spalding 

hospital to an emergency centre, later on this year it was also  

I guess I could call it downsized again  so that it’s only used 

during the day for more of a treatment centre. Does the 

department look at it in a different light or is it definitely just up 

to the district health board with what happens to it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  It is up to the district to decide what their 

needs are, and then to decide which facilities they want to use 

and the extent to which they will use those individual facilities. 

 

Ms. Draude:  If there was a suggestion or a plan put forward 

to use it as a study centre for any type of . . . for disease study, 

would it have to be considered by the Health department first of 

all before it went to the district health board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, it would be considered by the district 

in the first instance. Of course, if the district felt that there 

should be additional funding for that purpose, they might 

consult with the province or the federal government or someone 

else. But the district would have the authority to give the 

approval to use that facility for another purpose, or to have 

another purpose in the facility along with whatever they were 

using that facility for. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Going back to the Rose Valley hospital, 

because there is an Indian reservation nearby and it was used 

considerably by the native population, was there any additional 

funding that came directly from the federal government for the 

natives using that hospital? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, there was not. 

Ms. Draude:  One of the main concerns that we have in our 

area now is the lack of doctors that are available to come out to 

rural Saskatchewan. I’m wondering if there’s any . . . if the 

department has any help or if they’re offering any help to the 

district boards to find doctors to fill these positions? 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  We’re attempting to do several things. One 

that has been in the news is we’ve been working with SAHO, 

the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, to place 

a recruitment officer in the College of Medicine at the 

University of Saskatchewan to try to encourage students there 

to locate in rural Saskatchewan. And that program has not 

actually started yet, but we’re working on that. 

 

We also have allocated an additional amount of money this year 

to the Saskatchewan Medical Association for rural and remote 

incentives to recruit and retain physicians. And in particular, 

$1.14 million is to be allocated to the SMA (Saskatchewan 

Medical Association) to do that, but I can’t give you the details 

of how it’s going to be done because that remains to be worked 

out with the SMA. 

 

Also we provide bursaries that just started a few years ago, I 

believe, in the College of Medicine where Saskatchewan Health 

will pay the tuition and living expenses of medical students on 

the understanding that upon graduation they will spend a certain 

amount of time practising in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And the college of physicians and surgeons recently, with our 

approval, changed the rules with respect to locums to make it 

more possible to get overseas physicians into rural 

Saskatchewan for a longer period of time. I don’t have the 

by-law change in front of me, but it’s something that some of 

the districts have been asking for for some time. 

 

There’s undoubtedly more that could be done, and one thing . . . 

I’ve spoken to the dean of medicine a few times to discuss with 

him the possibility of maybe taking medical students out to 

rural Saskatchewan as part of their training. And that’s actually 

a decision for the College of Medicine to make, but it would 

seem to me that that might be a good idea because there’s so 

many places in rural Saskatchewan where I’m surprised that 

there aren’t people that want to go out and practise there, 

because there are so many beautiful places, places that would 

be very nice to work in and to earn a living in. 

 

I can tell the member as well that the number of rural physicians 

in Saskatchewan in the last four or five years has been relatively 

stable, as has the number of physicians generally. We haven’t 

had a major exodus of physicians overall. It’s true that you’ll 

get approximately I think 100, let’s say, physicians leaving the 

province each year; but at the same time you have some 

graduates who stay and some who move in. And overall, the 

numbers have been fairly stable. You do get some problem 

areas, however, throughout the province, where there seems to 

be a challenge in keeping physicians. And this is not an entirely 

new problem, but nevertheless it is a challenge and we’re 

concerned about it as well. 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m interested to 

know how many of the rural districts do have problems with 

either keeping or trying to entice doctors out to their area. I 

know that my constituency has . . . there’s two areas where 

we’re looking for doctors and I’m just wondering how many 

more there are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think it would be fair to say  I don’t 

have an exact number of districts  but I think it would be fair 

to say it is a common problem and it’s a problem that goes back 

many years and in fact several decades. 

 

And it’s one of the reasons why Mr. Douglas, when he was 

premier, wanted to start a medical school at the University of 

Saskatchewan to try to resolve that problem. And of course we 

know it hasn’t entirely resolved the problem. And obviously 

there are some other steps that maybe we and the educational 

system should be taking. But it’s a common and long-standing 

problem. 

 

Ms. Draude:  In the recent budget, can you tell me how 

many of the rural health districts received cut-backs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I can tell the member that 11 of the 30 

districts received an increase and 19 received a decrease. I think 

the member knows that, of the 30, they received overall the 

same global sum. And the ones that received a decrease I will 

report to the member. 

 

The Assiniboine health district received a .4 per cent decrease; 

the Central Plains, 1.2; Greenhead, .2; Living Sky, 1.1; 

Midwest, 1.5; North Central, 3.3; North Valley, 1.9; 

North-East, 1.2; Parkland, 2.1; Pasquia, .6; Pipestone, 1.3; 

Prairie West, 1.8; Rolling Hills, 1.4; South Central, 2.7; South 

Country, 2.0; Southeast, .5; Southwest, .6; Twin Rivers, 1.8. So 

that would be 18 rural health districts received a decrease. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Rather than waiting 

to read it in Hansard, could I get a copy of that? 

 

And can you tell me what your department feels is the main 

reason for the cut-backs. Is it the migratory reason? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, it is migration. I would say that from 

our point of view, and I think everybody’s point of view, we 

would prefer it not be that way in the sense that many people 

access physician’s services or acute care services, 

hospitalization, in one of the seven larger districts when they 

really could have the procedure done at home, in their home 

community. 

 

And so you get the seven largest districts have 61 per cent of 

the population but they’re doing 94 per cent of the surgeries and 

79 per cent of the births. And some of those surgeries and some 

of those births could be done in the local area. And it’s 

something that I’ve been talking to people about a great deal, 

including some of the health boards, the SMA, SAHO, when I 

recently spoke to them. Because there are things that we should 

be thinking about. 

 

For example, when the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health  

District is talking about doing an informational campaign to say 

to people that there are things that they could have done in 

Moose Jaw that they’re having done in Regina, I think that’s a 

positive thing. And I said to the SMA, we should be talking to 

people about the fact that when they leave their district to get 

care that they could get in the district  I’m not talking about 

something that they’ve traditionally got done in a larger centre 

 it also means that dollars go out of the district. 

 

The other thing I’d like to encourage is more itinerant surgery 

 that is, some of the surgeons from the city going out to some 

of the centres, as they do now but doing it more so, to do some 

of the operations in the centres. Because it would be good for 

the person who lives in that community. 

 

It may also be better in terms of a waiting-list and getting an 

operating room because perhaps a surgery could be done 

quicker in the rural areas. And I’ve asked the department as 

well as the SMA to try to put together some information about 

how perhaps we could reverse some of this. But it is very much 

simply a factor of migration into these larger centres. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering 

if you have arranged conferences or conventions that provide an 

opportunity for the CEOs (chief executive officer) of all the 

district health boards to get together so that they can discuss 

these common concerns. Have they been all together at a 

meeting since we started this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I should have said, in answer to the last 

question, that there’s migration factor; also the fact that there’s 

a movement toward population-based funding. And if the 

population of the district has gone down, that will affect their 

funding as well. So it’s the second aspect to the change in 

funding. 

 

In so far as getting the CEOs together, SAHO has quarterly 

meetings which are all the CEOs of the 30 districts plus the 

Chairs of the boards plus the Vice-Chairs. They get together . . . 

well quarterly meetings so presumably four times a year. At 

those meetings they spend a day or two talking about various 

issues including the one we just spoke about. The Minister of 

Health customarily would attend the meeting, speak to the 

group, and then answer questions. 

 

In addition, there is an advisory group, made up of 

representatives of the health districts, with respect to the 

funding question. And also a Health Districts Advisory 

Committee with which the Minister of Health would meet every 

six weeks or so to discuss the concerns of the health districts. 

And of course the member will appreciate that there’s not 

necessarily any unanimity of view with respect to any of these 

issues. You usually end up reaching some kind of compromise, 

not necessarily a formula that everybody will be entirely happy 

with. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. I’m wondering if I can get 

that tabled so I can take a look at it. The list that we were 

discussing, could we get a photocopy of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I’ll provide that to the member, you  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

know, during the next session. I don’t have a list that’s 

unmarked available for the member at the moment. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. I’d asked if the CEOs had got 

together. At the same time, are the chairmen of all the district 

boards together at the meetings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, they have quarterly meetings where 

they’re together four times a year. The Chairs, the Vice-Chairs 

and the CEOs, yes. And I attend those meetings as well as other 

representatives of the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

before I start I’d also like to welcome your officials tonight. 

 

You’d made a comment on one of your answers a few minutes 

ago about level 1 and level 2, Mr. Minister, and if I understood 

you right did I hear you say that you would not turn out, now 

that the funding has been dropped for 1 and 2 care, you would 

not turn away any people that are already in homes of level 2 

quality . . . would not be turned out? Is that what I understood 

the answer to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The answer is that they have been 

grandfathered a few years ago when the policy changed and 

they have not been turned out of long-term care. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to go now 

to Eaglestone Lodge which I’m sure you’re aware of. There’s 

quite a fear up there right now over level 1 and level 2 part of 

the Eaglestone Lodge closing. And at a meeting the other night 

the Assiniboine Valley Health District really didn’t give us that 

impression. They tried to answer the questions that were asked, 

but when it came down to assurances of where these people 

would be going, they said well, they hoped that they could be 

taken to other areas and fill in the most needy. But when it 

came right down to where they were going, they couldn’t really 

answer. 

 

And I think that was the question these people were asking, is 

where would these level 2’s especially end up. So can you give 

me an idea of where you think they might end up or what will 

be done with these people in that facility? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member will appreciate that when 

I say that the people that are level 1 and 2 have been 

grandfathered for the last few years, that doesn’t mean that they 

have necessarily stayed in the same place that they have been. 

 

In some cases, such as the member from Kelvington-Wadena 

raised the issue of the LeRose Lodge in Leroy, that place has 

been shut down and the people have been moved to, I believe 

it’s Watson, where incidentally I think it actually is a better 

facility for them in terms of the facility itself. 

 

And this has happened in several instances around the province. 

In each case the district has been responsible to ensure that 

there is appropriate accommodation for the residents, and they 

have worked this out on an individual basis. And that would be  

the responsibility of the district health board. And I’m sure  I 

know  that they would take that responsibility very seriously. 

 

I also know that with respect to the Eaglestone Lodge, there are 

other discussions taking place and other options being 

considered. And I know that the district and the local 

community and others are anxious to see the new personal care 

home regulations which may impact on what the solution is 

there. 

 

And so the member knows that the situation may in fact work 

itself out in a satisfactory way right in that location. And if it 

does not, then I’m sure the district will take its responsibility 

very seriously to find appropriate accommodation for each of 

the, I believe it’s 18, individuals in that category. 

 

I don’t believe the other parts of Eaglestone Lodge  I believe 

there are 25 more independent living units, if I can use that term 

 would be affected adversely one way or the other. And 

indeed with respect to the 18, if something satisfactory happens 

as a result of the personal care home regulations and other 

negotiations that are going on, the situation may work itself out 

quite nicely. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But I think that’s 

part of the problem you just touched on a minute ago, was the 

other 25 beds that are there. And they are actually very 

independent, but on the other hand they rely on the 25 beds of 

level 1 and 2. With the staff there to help them, it makes them 

independent. 

 

I think Kamsack is a unique area because of possibly of the 

descendants of the Russian and Ukrainian descent, but a lot of 

their families have moved away and a lot of these people that 

are actually going to be turned out now have absolutely no one 

left in that community to look after them. And I think for them 

to be moved 100 miles, possibly  and that’s a big health 

district  is completely scary for these people. And a lot of 

these people are 80 and 90 years old, as I’m sure you’re well 

aware of, Mr. Minister. So this is a very serious issue out there. 

 

You touched on the regulations and I was very glad to hear you 

give the answer today that within two weeks we should hear the 

regulations, and I hope they’re the way we want to see these 

regulations come out. 

 

Martin Luther, as you know, has made an offer to the 

Assiniboine Valley Health District but I believe the community 

of Kamsack is also looking at other options from other people. I 

think time is of the essence here, the problem being that May 1 

. . . or May 17, I believe was the closure date, and the final 

closure date was August 30. I’m not sure if the community has 

the time, Mr. Minister. 

 

Would you at this time be willing to, if time alone ended up 

being the problem, would you become involved and possibly 

see an extension to this  talk to the Assiniboine Valley Health 

District and possibly have an extension of time? Because it 

would be a shame to see this building closed for a matter of 

maybe a month or two. 

 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I would say to the member, Mr. Chair, that 

we will be talking to the district to ensure what I am sure is the 

case, and that is that, whatever happens, they will be consulting 

with the families of the people involved to make sure that 

anyone who has to be moved is appropriately placed. But it may 

well be the case that it will not be necessary to move anyone, 

because in a very short time we’ll see the personal care home 

regulations and we will see whether the interest of the Martin 

Luther group or some other group comes to fruition and the 

matter is handled that way. 

 

And I think I would say that there is room for optimism that a 

very reasonable solution will be worked out here. And I realize 

that the uncertainty is very upsetting to the residents of the 

home and also to the residents of Kamsack, and I understand 

that. But it’s my hope and the department’s hope that this 

matter will be resolved to everyone’s satisfaction. And certainly 

we’ll be talking to the district to ensure that the residents are 

properly dealt with. And I know that that is the intention of the 

district in any event. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we’re 

actually hoping for the same resolve here, but I think the point I 

was trying to make is that Martin Luther was one offer. The 

community of Kamsack is a very buoyant and lively community 

and they really look out for each other. And I think today . . . I 

talked to them this afternoon and they’re also looking into 

other, you know, not just Martin Luther but other . . . and 

they’re checking out Martin Luther and these other options they 

have. 

 

And I think where my worry comes in, and I believe the town of 

Kamsack is the same, is because when the Assiniboine Valley 

Health Board the other night had made a comment there  and 

I gather, you know, these people are in a tough spot too  and 

they made a decision that these were the dates. And I think 

they’re scared if they back off then it opens it all up again. And 

I think where we’re caught now is possibly I see where maybe 

the health board itself doesn’t really want to back down on 

these dates and the town and the community may not have time 

to work a resolve out. 

 

And I think that’s where you come in, Mr. Minister. I would 

hope you would anyway. What I’m saying is that I hope for the 

sake of two or three months here that we don’t come to the 

wrong solution, that’s good for the community and the people 

especially the residents. So I guess what I’m asking, if we got to 

that point and we were close to a resolve, would you step in and 

give this thing an extension? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I have to say to the member that no, it 

would not be my intention to step in and tell the district that 

they should pick a different date. That date came about as a 

result of their assessment and their planning. We will monitor 

the situation to ensure that everything which might possibly be 

done is done; and that everything that is done is done in a 

proper fashion in so far as the residents go. And it’s my hope 

that there’s a very satisfactory solution. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Well I know where your coming from, Mr. 

Minister, but I think at some point then you are the overseer as  

the minister. And I believe the health board feels they’re caught 

in the middle here and if they start to bend their own rules then 

they have no . . . they just can’t stop doing it all over no matter 

what decisions they make. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that’s where you really do come 

into play because you can see there could be a resolve within a 

short period of time. The health board itself is scared to start 

bending their own rules and I would think that’s where your 

responsibility would come in and say, let’s take a second look 

at this; let’s extend it for a couple of months. So I would hope 

that was done if it comes that close. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I must say, Mr. Chair, the member 

and I have a different view of this. I understand where the 

member’s coming from too. But it is my view that the health 

districts and their boards, like school boards or municipalities, 

should be allowed to make the best decisions that they can 

fashion within their jurisdiction. 

 

And as the member knows, two-thirds of the members of the 

local boards are elected, one-third are appointed, except in 

Regina and Saskatoon, where there’s two extra appointed. And 

it is my view that the Minister of Health ought not to 

case-manage what is going on in the districts. The districts, to 

be strong and independent, should be left to make the decisions 

that are decided by the local community to be the best 

decisions. And I would prefer community decision-making and 

input to constant intervention from the Minister of Health. 

 

And I make this point because I’m sure this question will arise 

again and again, in the sense that the member’s concerned, and 

I think he’s right to be concerned, about a situation in Kamsack, 

and I’m concerned about it as well. 

 

There are many, many other situations that will arise, or even 

exist now and are in the news, where the districts are making 

decisions, and those may be contentious within the districts. 

People may have disputes, quite often about the level of 

funding, just as we do here. I will not be intervening in those 

situations, even though I know it will be the job of the 

opposition to say I should. I will be trying to respect the local 

decision-making authority of the elected district boards. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d just like to 

quote you from A Framework of Accountability, and I quote: 

 

The Minister has the highest authority and responsibility 

for the Province’s health system. As the only level of 

authority which has a provincial mandate and perspective, 

the Minister (and the department which acts as the 

Minister’s agent) has a clear role in setting provincial 

health objectives, program and service standards, and 

ensuring that they are achieved and maintained. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I agree with you; no one out there wants you 

to intervene, or your department to intervene, every time health 

boards make decisions. But I would suggest in this instance that 

this is a very big issue out in that community, and that’s a large 

community. And it’s not just the 20 or 25 people in level 1 or 2 

care, but this actually affects 50 people and a lot  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

of families out there. And I would hope possibly there’s 

exceptions, when you yourself or your department could come 

in  and I’m not saying overrule the health board; I think what 

I’m asking you is to maybe at that point talk with them and see 

if a compromise couldn’t come to extend it. 

 

Hopefully this never comes to pass. Maybe we’ll never need 

that to happen. I think what I’m asking, in the case it did, I 

would hope that you or someone from your department could 

step in and make common sense actually work out there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I understand the point that the 

member is making, Mr. Chair, but I won’t repeat the answer I 

gave earlier. But it is the same answer and it is that we will 

monitor what is happening in the districts. We will be in 

communication with the districts. We’ll talk to them about these 

problems. We’ll satisfy ourselves that people are properly 

treated. 

 

But we won’t interfere in the day-to-day decision making of the 

districts. And if we do so in this case, it’s very difficult to draw 

the line in terms of what case you don’t intervene. And if we go 

to that kind of system, then basically we should go back to the 

old system where we interrelate with the 400 boards we used to 

have as opposed to the 30 district boards we have now. 

 

And so I won’t repeat my answer, but it is not my intention to 

intervene in that fashion. 

 

(2000) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I notice that in 

this document entitled, A Framework of Accountability, on page 

7 there’s also a statement that says: 

 

The district health boards have a corresponding 

responsibility to establish certain expectations and to 

ensure that those expectations are achievable and are 

communicated effectively. 

 

So my question is, you know, with taking into consideration 

that the Minister of Health is responsible to the people of 

Saskatchewan for the performance of the reformed health 

system, as such the minister must be accountable to the 

communities throughout Saskatchewan who are concerned 

about the direction and process of health reform. Would the 

minister please tell me how these communities can express their 

concerns directly to him so that the minister will clearly 

understand what is happening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well of course we receive correspondence, 

telephone calls, on a daily basis from people around the 

province to express any concerns they might have about what is 

happening in their district. But with respect to most of the 

issues, we do refer people back to their local district board 

because most of the time the matter they’re talking about is 

within the jurisdiction of the district board. 

 

But I should say to the member that in terms of the 

accountability of the district health boards to the minister, they 

have . . . they’re required by the district health Act to provide  

the minister with regular forecasts on financial and program 

status; a detailed, audited set of annual financial statements 

including an audited schedule of investments; a report on the 

health status of the residents of the health district and the 

effectiveness of the district health board’s programs; and any 

other report that the minister requests. 

 

So that on an ongoing basis, the Minister of Health is 

responsible to receive information from the districts with 

respect to their programs and with respect to the health status of 

the people in their communities, and we’re responsible to 

monitor that. The districts are responsible to administer it. And 

ultimately of course the minister, as a member of the provincial 

government, is accountable to the people of the province. And 

I’m accountable to yourself and the other members of the 

opposition to answer questions about the health system, 

accountable to present a budget, and ultimately accountable to 

the electorate. 

 

So there are various ways in which the minister is accountable, 

the district health boards are accountable. Ultimately, I believe 

that one very good way to keep the health system accountable is 

to participate in the district health board elections and elect 

people in local communities to the district health boards so that 

there are people accountable to local residents. That’s 

something we never have had in the province up until the last 

few years. I think ultimately elections  both locally and 

provincially  are the best system of accountability. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the case 

of a district health board having some trouble, I guess you could 

say, in putting forth various goals from various communities of 

what they need in their community and not maybe coming to a 

consensus on how this should be done within the district health 

board, is there someone within the board or what is the 

mechanism that people can in fact ensure that their plan, should 

they have one, if they come to a plan for the whole district, how 

can that plan be relayed to you? To ensure that if in fact it is a 

plan that meets all expectations within the mandate and that’s 

financially effective, and within the boundaries of the budget, 

how is that relayed to you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The districts are required to develop a plan 

on an annual basis and they are required to engage in a process 

of public consultation with respect to their plan  lay out their 

plan, lay out their financial plan, and then on the basis of that 

plan that they approve, then proceed. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I take it 

that you would be informed of these plans? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Well, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a very direct 

question and it is: does the minister accept his direct 

responsibility to the people and communities of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I wonder if the member might 

indicate what she means, Mr. Chair, when she says, direct 

responsibility. 

 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Ms. Julé:  Well it’s stated in your framework for 

accountability that you have a direct responsibility to the people 

of Saskatchewan in regards to health. I’ll rephrase the question 

in this way: is the minister ultimately responsible for the 

performance of our publicly funded health system? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  The minister is ultimately accountable for 

the performance of the health system and ultimately will be 

judged by the electorate every four years. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I would repeat my original question then. Would 

the minister please tell me how these communities can 

communicate with him and receive satisfaction that their 

concerns are understood by the minister and taken seriously by 

the government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Concerns are expressed in a variety of 

ways. They can be expressed through correspondence. They can 

be expressed through members of the legislature  both in the 

opposition and on the government side. 

 

And normally with respect to the role of the provincial 

government and the Minister of Health, individuals who have 

concerns will express those concerns to their elected 

representatives, their MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly), as they should. And their MLA, such as yourself, 

will bring these concerns to me directly or raise them in the 

legislature, meet me, or provide me with correspondence. And 

both opposition members and government members do so. 

 

They also will talk to their district health board elected 

members which is an equally appropriate course of action. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’ve 

been listening with great interest as you’ve been discussing this 

topic of level 4 care and funding . . . or heavy care in our 

province. And I’ve listened to the way you have basically beat 

around the bush and laid a lot of the blame on the local district 

health boards. 

 

When the fact is, Mr. Minister, the reasons district health 

boards have had to make some of the choices, some of the 

decisions  many of the decisions  comes right down to your 

office and the department surrounding you and funding cuts 

that your government is levelling at. 

 

And if those funding cuts were not laid on their doorstep, they 

would not be forced to make those type of cut-backs. They 

would be able to offer the level of support. Then even if you 

held it at zero, they’d have to make some choices. But as you 

cut them back, they have no other choice. Mr. Minister, it’s not 

fair that you can come back and lay the blame at the feet of 

district health boards, when that first decision should be at your 

doorstep. 

 

You made the choice. Your government made the choice to cut 

the funding to these health districts and you’re laying . . . 

Where’s all the funding going in this province? Where are all 

the expenditures going? It seems to me we’re losing it in the 

very basic services that the people of this province and even 

Mr. Douglas fought for. Mr. Douglas fought for a good, solid,  

sound health care. And what we’re seeing around us today, 

other than in the large urban centres, we’re seeing it being torn 

apart on a daily basis, Mr. Minister. 

 

So I don’t know how you can say, Mr. Minister, that’s it’s the 

responsibility of the district board when they have no other 

alternative because you have cut their funding. So how do they 

provide care for that heavy-level care in their district? 

 

And the reason I ask that is, you just were mentioning . . . 

mentioned to the member from Saltcoats that well, the board 

may be able to find another bed outside or at another location in 

the district. Maybe it’s a hundred miles away, maybe it’s 150, 

maybe it’s 50. I’ve dealt with individuals who had their parents 

moved from a local community to within a hundred miles or 

better. And while that person was at the local level, they had 

family who could visit them and they were in a much healthier 

state. As soon as they were moved further and it was more 

difficult for family members to go visit, then their health 

deteriorated and that’s got to be a cost to the province as well. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I challenge you on the facts, the fact that it’s 

not fair and not right for you to lay the blame at the feet of 

district health boards when you yourself made the initial cuts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, it was not my intent to lay 

blame at anyone’s feet. I hadn’t considered anything that I had 

to say an exercise in blame-laying, although I think the member 

is trying to lay blame at our feet over here. 

 

But I want to say to the member that what we have done in our 

budget this year in health care is really quite remarkable. And I 

say it for this reason, Mr. Chair. What we have done in health 

care in Saskatchewan this year is maintained our level of health 

care spending. We are spending the same amount on health care 

as we did last year, which is quite remarkable considering  

and I know that the member doesn’t like to hear it, or especially 

the members of the Liberal Party  we have had significant 

cut-backs from Ottawa in terms of health care dollars. 

 

And I want to say to the member that I agree with the member 

that budgets are tight and people have to make tough decisions 

for which I don’t want to blame anybody. That’s just the way it 

is. But it’s a simple fact of life and reality that we all have to 

live within a certain budget  the government does, individuals 

do, school boards do, universities, and health boards. There’s 

no question about that. And our approach has been to keep the 

level of health care spending level. There have been some quite 

small reductions really to districts, not that far off zero, but it’s 

still tight money. 

 

But I would remind the member that if you looked at 

Conservative Alberta for example, the overall level of health 

care spending there in the last few years has been reduced by 

about 15 per cent. And per capita, their spending, which used to 

be similar to ours, has gone down quite a bit. In Conservative 

Manitoba, their most recent budget, their health care budget 

was cut back by $37 million. There’s a lot of pressure in 

Manitoba, a lot of problems. I’m not saying that we don’t have 

a tight situation here, but I’m just saying to the member, Mr. 

Chair, that our approach, unlike Conservative governments, has  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

been that we have maintained health care funding. Our 

approach, unlike the Conservative government with which the 

member was associated, has been that we do ask people to 

actually have financial plans, budgets, and to live within those 

budgets. 

 

Because I think we’ve all seen, as a result of the experience we 

had in the ‘80s, that if we don’t make those decisions which 

sometimes are tough to live with, and we don’t think about 

tomorrow, ultimately the situation just gets worse for all of us. 

So we’re trying to sustain our health care system but also do so 

in a very fiscally responsible manner. 

 

And the member mentions Mr. Douglas. I would say to the 

member that if you look at the level of health care funding 

under Mr. Douglas, you will see that one thing that Mr. Douglas 

and his government always did was balance the budget and 

maintain a fiscally responsible health care system. Because they 

knew that if you bankrupted the province and you became 

beholden to the bankers and the international financiers, 

ultimately you would have no health care system. 

 

That of course was the direction our province was headed in 

when we replaced the administration with which you were 

associated, and we really don’t want to go back to those days, 

Mr. Chairman. That’s why sometimes it’s tight to stay within 

budgets but that’s what we want to do. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I thank you, Mr. Minister. We still haven’t 

addressed that fact of the number of beds, the level of service. 

You can talk all you want. 

 

Number one, what was the actual expenditure for last year? 

What I’ve got in front of me is the estimates; the estimated 

expenditure of 1,560,252 for ‘95-96 and that’s the same as 

‘96-97. Well let’s see the actual. I would think we’re years or 

months past the year-end date. There must be at least a fair 

number or dollar value of what the actual expenditure was last 

year. 

 

And also, Mr. Minister, you talk about maintaining that level of 

service. Well I would suggest to you that people throughout this 

province, the major centres included, people working at the 

Plains Health Centre tonight, people working in many of the 

communities where they lost hospitals and lost beds, and people 

like Kamsack community that are looking at losing level 4 

funding, would have a different idea of whether or not we’ve 

maintained that service. 

 

And on top of it, Mr. Minister, I find it very interesting that you 

talk about balancing budgets. It’s easy to balance budgets when 

you can always put the debt behind you in another location. 

Take a look at the Crowns. The former treasury minister, the 

member from Regina East and actually the current member 

from Regina Centre, I believe, was talking . . . when we were 

talking about Crown debt back in 1991 and the debt that was 

there in 1982, the unfunded pension liability, which it’s 

interesting to note when you look at the auditor’s fund, that 

unfunded pension liability has grown by $600 million in the  

last five years  five years of an NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government. 

 

And you talk about the debt. Who bought all the land-bank 

land? Who spent the money on potash mines? Buying up holes 

in the ground that were already producing, and raising taxes for 

the province and the people of Saskatchewan? And you talk 

about the level of service that you’re offering. Must be hitting a 

nerve, but I’m enjoying it. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, go and talk to people on the street 

and ask them if they feel that they are achieving that level of 

service. And, Mr. Minister, if you’re talking about total 

accountability, I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, it’s time 

that you had totally elected health boards. We have eight 

elected members. You were just telling the one member from 

Humboldt that members have an opportunity, or people have an 

opportunity, to get involved by electing their health district. 

Well let them elect all 12 of them. 

 

And then on top of that, give them a global sum; that global 

funding. We’re talking to the Pipestone Health District  the 

Minister of the Environment was with me the other day  and 

the one thing the Pipestone Health District said . . . and other 

health districts said the same thing: give us a global fund. Don’t 

tell us that so much has to be spent here and it can’t be moved 

from this pot; came to this pot. We may be short here, but 

we’ve got a surplus here and we can’t move it. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you’re talking about the level of service, if 

you’re talking about giving people that opportunity to provide 

the service, then give them that global funding that you’re 

talking about right there, in a pool. Elect all your health district 

board members and allow them to provide the service that they 

feel . . . and put the funding towards the services that they feel 

are essential. 

 

And I would go one step further. Give them a little bit of an 

ability to be creative. And if a district finds a way to provide an 

extra service in their district, give them that opportunity. Or are 

we going to get back to this argument that we’re just creating 

another two-tier system? 

 

Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, there are a lot of people around 

this province that would be willing to put something into their 

health care system if they knew it was coming to meet their 

needs and to provide the services in their community. But 

they’re not willing to put it into your pocket so it just sits in the 

capital city of Regina, and sits in Saskatoon, while you knock 

down walls of two hospitals because it’s the best thing to do. 

 

And I was just visiting in the Plains Health Centre  I’ve done 

a fair bit of that in the last little while  and it’s interesting 

chatting to the personnel that work there, Mr. Minister. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, what I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, if 

we’re talking about accountability: number one, get out of the 

way of district boards and elect all board members. When 

you’re appointing four board members, you’re channelling the 

direction of that district health board. Elect them all; give them 

autonomy to decide how to spend their funding, of where to  



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

place it. And then I’m sure, Mr. Minister, you wouldn’t have 

communities like Kamsack wondering how they’re going to 

continue to provide for the needs of those heavy-care patients 

rather than shipping them off to another community. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member was saying he maybe 

touched a nerve over here with some of his lengthy dissertation. 

But I want to say, I think I may have struck a nerve when I was 

talking about the record of the Conservatives in office here in 

the ‘80s and their record of financial management. And I want 

to say, I did not mean to embarrass the member if I embarrassed 

the member by talking about that. 

 

But I want to say to the member, he talks about a debate that he 

had with the member from Regina Dewdney about whether 

Allan Blakeney ran up a debt and so on. I guess I would just say 

to the member, I will take my cue from the organizations like 

the Investment Dealers Association of Canada and the Royal 

Bank of Canada that have looked at the financial management 

of this government and have given us very high marks  I 

think about the highest in the country in terms of the way we 

have managed the financial situation that we inherited from 

your administration. But I don’t want to go on about that 

because I really don’t want to embarrass you or indeed go on 

and maybe even humiliate you by talking about your record in 

office. 

 

But I want to say also that I realize that it is the job of the 

opposition to complain about the health care system. And they 

complain and they complain and they complain. But I talk to 

people as well. I talk to people in my community and other 

communities across the province and I very, very often get the 

comment from people that say, you know, I had a problem, I 

fell down, I broke my hip; I broke my shoulder, whatever, I had 

a heart attack. I went into the health care system and I was well 

taken care of. I have no complaints about the health system. 

And I’m not saying that people don’t occasionally have 

problems in the health care system. What I am saying is, what 

you in the opposition concentrate on are the small percentage 

 and it is a small percentage because 90 per cent of the people 

are very, very satisfied with the treatment they get by our 

wonderful health care system. And it is a wonderful health care 

system. Sometimes it doesn’t work the way it should. That’s 

always been the case. No system is perfect. But it is a good 

health care system of which we should be proud. 

 

And not only do I communicate with people in this province 

about our health care system; I communicate with people in 

other countries. And I want to say to the member, and I think 

the member may know this, that when people in other countries, 

whether you’re talking about Taiwan, Israel, some of the South 

American countries, South Africa that was here recently, when 

they want to look at a health care system and how to run it, and 

they come to Canada, they occasionally go to Ottawa and 

Regina, but usually they just come to Regina. Because people 

around the world model their health care system on the way we 

organize our system here and they consider our system to be the 

best health care system in the world. 

 

Now does the health care system meet everybody’s wants? No,  

it doesn’t. Does it meet their basic needs in a reasonable way? 

Yes, it does. And when I talk to people from the United States, 

and I correspond with them . . . Quite recently I was quoting a 

veterans’ organization the other day. Last week I got a letter 

from a physician in the United States talking about our system 

compared to the American system. I’m very proud of the system 

we have, that we invented right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The member talks about, why don’t we elect all the health 

board members. Well I would remind the member that his party 

was in office in this province, but during the tenure of his party 

we did not have elected health boards. It was only when the 

New Democratic Party came to office that any members of the 

health boards were elected. When the member was in office, 

zero members of the health boards were elected. It took the 

NDP to put the district health boards in place and to come up 

with a system where two-thirds of the people are elected. Now 

the member may say, well they should all be elected. But I’m 

simply making the point that, well I understand what the 

member is saying, but when his party was in office, none of 

them were elected. 

 

Now why would you have some appointed members, Mr. 

Chair? The reason is that there are groups that you may want to 

have represented in the district health boards that are not 

represented as a result of the electoral process. There may be 

seniors’ organizations, there may be aboriginal people, there 

may be handicapped people who should be represented, and 

those people are not always represented. Sometimes through 

appointments you can round out the board to make sure that 

you represent every group. 

 

And I want to say it saddens me when I hear the member say 

that the solution to the health care problems  and I’ve heard 

the member say this before  is creativity. Well I think there’s 

a lot of creativity in Saskatchewan, a lot of creativity at the local 

health board level. But then he goes on to say that his idea of 

creativity is that we would allow people  allow people  to 

start paying for their health care services. That’s his idea of 

creativity. 

 

And I say the real creativity, Mr. Chair, is to find a way to 

improve the public system so that people don’t have to pay for 

their health care services, so that we meet health care needs 

collectively through the tax system. 

 

And I want to use an example for the member. And that 

example is cataract surgery. And the member and the Liberals 

can talk about people having to go to Alberta to get their 

cataracts done or waiting. But I want to say to the member that 

since this government came to office the number of cataract 

procedures that we perform in our public system in 

Saskatchewan has gone up quite dramatically. And the number 

of people that have to go out of province and pay thousands of 

dollars to get their cataracts done has gone down dramatically, 

to the point where today I believe it’s less than a hundred; 

whereas when the Conservatives were in office it was in the 

hundreds, and I think more than a thousand. 

 

And that is no accident, Mr. Chair, because the party with 

which the member is associated  and they’re on record in this  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

regard  does not believe in the public system and does not 

believe in a single-tiered system where everybody’s treated the 

same. They believe that you should be able to get better health 

care, depending upon how much wealth you have and how 

much money you have. And the Liberal Party has refused to 

come onside with us in saying that’s not the kind of system we 

want. 

 

And I say to the people of Saskatchewan that the member can 

get up and he can talk about this and that, and we haven’t got 

everybody elected, and how they would do better. But when he 

talks about creativity and wanting to allow people to have the 

privilege to pay for their health care, what he’s talking about is 

setting up an American style of health care. 

 

A system where 35 million people have no health care 

coverage. Where health care costs are the leading cause of 

personal bankruptcy in the United States. Where people don’t 

understand the coverage they have. They pay $9,000 per year 

U.S. for insurance coverage to get their medicare and if a 

woman has a baby, $9,000 more extra; caesarean section, 

$16,000. 

 

Where you have people like Dr. Kevorkian, who counsel people 

and assist people to commit suicide. Why? Because they don’t 

want to bankrupt themselves and leave their families penniless 

by using their entire estate for health care costs. And that’s not 

the kind of system we should have. 

 

But make no mistake about it. When they talk about allowing 

people to pay, that’s exactly the kind of system they’re talking 

about and it’s the kind of system we don’t need here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I find that very interesting. I 

find the scenarios that the minister draws upon to be . . . I’m not 

exactly sure what word I guess I should use to describe it, but I 

won’t get into that comment. 

 

But, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And we’ve got 

the little member from Regina South chirping from his seat. He 

wants to get into the debate. 

 

Mr. Minister, you talk about elective; you talk about appointed 

boards prior to 1991. Who appointed the boards? Who are the 

boards accountable to? Government didn’t appoint the boards. 

It was local governments electing people and then asking 

people to sit on the different boards. 

 

Those boards were accountable to their ratepayers, at that time, 

by the local governments. And, Mr. Minister, it was interesting 

the way people kept track of what was happening and asked 

their local board members what was going on. It was also 

interesting, Mr. Minister, to . . . I’d like you to check and see 

how much a board member made in those days versus where we 

are today. 

 

(2030) 

 

What were the administrative costs in the districts? Take any 

district and pick out all the boards that were involved and what 

a board would have achieved for a per diem and their minimum 

travel  I happened to be on one so I have a pretty good idea of 

what the numbers are  and check out where the 

administration is today and how many meetings that a board 

member attends; how many committees they’re on. What is the 

total expenditures? And, Mr. Minister, we had hospitals around 

this province providing services  and good services  to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you’re suggesting that people shouldn’t 

have some say and involvement, then you’re belittling the 

number of people . . . including people at Yorkton. Individuals 

who stood up at the public meeting in Yorkton, and the minister 

from Social Services was at that meeting, and he heard people 

suggesting that there be a health premium that they could put 

into providing the service. 

 

Now obviously, Mr. Minister, you’re not listening to very many 

of the people of Saskatchewan. You’re just listening to your 

appointed body around you that gives . . . would give you the 

information that you’re looking for so you can stand up in this 

House all grandiose and tell us how good it is out there. 

 

Mr. Minister, it isn’t as good as it is. Mr. Minister, let me give 

you an example  and it’s one that hits close to home because 

it happens to be a constituent who doesn’t live that far from me 

 over a very minor operation, Mr. Minister. This individual 

was discharged shortly after the operation. This individual 

ended up in the hospital on two different occasions for a month 

at a time for a very major and a serious infection. Mr. Minister, 

instead of making sure that that person was well on the way to 

recovery, we ship them out because we’re going to cut down 

the days. 

 

Now it would seem to me that our hospitals, there’s pressure 

being put on to them to discharge people because of funding. 

And they’re discharging people in many  in some  cases 

too quickly. As a result we have people then tying up hospital 

beds, and in this one particular occasion  and this is just one 

of the number I’ve heard of  where people have then tied up 

another hospital bed for a month at a time afterwards. What 

kind of cost did that incur to the tax people of Saskatchewan? 

What kind of costs were added to the health system when we’re 

trying to provide this basic service that you’re talking of, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Mr. Minister, there are many examples around this province of 

these types of circumstances where we’re short-circuiting the 

system to try and achieve what you suggest are savings, so that 

the investment dealers will look at this province in a positive 

situation. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, where were your colleagues back in the 

‘80s, mid-80s, ’86, even early ‘80s, when there was talks of 

cuts? They weren’t there. They could care less about the 

investment dealers. They were only interested in bringing 

personal situations into this House time and time and time again 

of individuals, and many times it was false. It was worse than 

what the Liberals are bringing in today, Mr. Minister. 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Mr. Minister, I think before you start talking about what the 

investment dealers have done you should be asking your 

colleagues where they were. Where was the Minister of Social 

Services when he was demanding more for Social Services, 

when he was demanding more in the area of health care 

spending? Where is he today when his own community of 

Moose Jaw is losing beds and jobs, Mr. Minister? 

 

Or some of the other members, where were they when the 

opportunities . . . And that would have been the time to really 

put the brakes on, but because of an opposition that wasn’t 

responsible, and unfortunately a government that in some cases 

caved in, the brakes should have been held on. There’s no 

doubt of it and I don’t disagree with you on that matter, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

But don’t tell me and don’t tell people across this province that 

this is a much better health system. There is a lot to be desired. 

We have offered alternatives. The Liberal opposition have 

offered up alternatives to you. Unfortunately they seem to be 

falling on you like water falling on a duck; they’re just running 

right off. You’re not interested in listening. Maybe you’d like to 

respond to some of those, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I want to assure the member, Mr. 

Chair, that his suggestions and the suggestions of the Liberals 

don’t fall off me like water off the back of a duck. I take them 

very seriously. And they certainly don’t fall quite as fast and as 

far as the Liberals seem to be falling in the polls these days. 

 

But I want to say to the member that I think it’s a mistake  

and I know the member doesn’t mean to do this  to denigrate 

the contribution that people make on the health boards of the 30 

districts. Those people on those 30 boards are people from all 

walks of life, as the member knows  and I’m sure the member 

knows some of them in his own community, as do the other 

members  and they are people from all political persuasions 

who have been elected to those boards. 

 

Well unless the members are saying that all the people elected 

are New Democrats. I don’t believe that, and if they are, well 

they are. But those people were elected by their communities 

and I think there are people that represent all political parties on 

those boards. 

 

And those people on those boards work very hard. And one 

thing that I will never do is apologize for the payment that is 

made to the people that are on those boards. Because as far as 

I’m concerned, they are really doing a labour of love. They are 

doing a very good job. They work very hard, long hours on 

behalf of their communities. Nobody’s in that for either the 

money or the glory because there is no money and there is no 

glory in it. 

 

But the member talks about administrative costs and the old 

system that he would want to bring back versus the new system. 

There used to be 400 boards, each of them meeting. Now there 

are 30 district boards. So obviously 30 boards versus 400 

boards, your cost, the number of meetings, is not nearly as 

great. 

 

And by the way, the people on those 400 boards, as the member 

said and I agree with him, were also very fine, 

community-minded people who worked very hard. Nothing 

wrong with them. But we’ve moved to a new system because 

we want to coordinate things in each district, and we want to 

have some elected people having some say at the local level in 

the health system. 

 

The member talks about administrative costs in the health 

boards. I want to say to the member that, because there is a 

smaller number of boards, there being 30 district boards versus 

the 400  we don’t have 400 separate administrations  the 

number of administrators in the health system across the 

province has been reduced by about 15 to 23 per cent in each of 

the districts, the number of people that are employed in 

administration. Much bigger cuts in administration and 

management than have occurred with respect to the people 

delivering the service. 

 

The member mentions health premiums and says why don’t we 

charge a health premium. And I would put it to the member this 

way. That you could have a health premium as they do in the 

province of Alberta, and it’s about $900 per family per year 

now. Many people in Saskatchewan, when they talk about 

having a health premium, say that they’re prepared to pay $100 

per year for their health care. They used to pay $72. So they say, 

pay $100 and I don’t mind. 

 

But if you have a premium today, the premium would probably 

be more like $1,000. It’s $900 in Alberta. And then the question 

becomes, do you want to tack on what is, in essence, another 

tax on top of the income taxes people pay? Now we all know 

that income taxes are higher in Saskatchewan than in Alberta 

but in Alberta you also pay a health care premium which in 

effect bumps up your taxes. 

 

But the difference is that in Saskatchewan if you fund the health 

system through the income tax system and have higher income 

taxes, it’s a progressive system in the sense that if I make 

$70,000 a year, I pay a certain amount of income tax. If I make 

$20,000 a year, I pay a much smaller amount, maybe no income 

tax, depending upon my circumstances and the size of the 

family. 

 

If I live in Alberta and I make $70,000, I pay $900 per year 

premium for my health care. If I make $20,000 a year, I pay the 

same $900. And we say that’s not a fair system because it’s not 

progressive in the sense that it doesn’t take your income into 

account. But even with the premiums they have in Alberta at 

$900 per year per family for health care, I would still say that 

even in Alberta where they’ve cut health care spending by 15 

per cent, which we haven’t done, they at least have a better 

system still than they have in the United States where you’d 

probably pay $9,000 per year for your family for health care 

coverage  and of course, many Americans don’t have it  

because we have a fairly fine system. 

 

In terms of the member’s comments about what happened in the 

1980s . . . and it was actually refreshing, Mr. Chair, to hear the 

member say that what the government did in the 1980s was not 

responsible. I think that’s what the member said. And then he  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

blamed it on the opposition. He said, well that’s because the 

member from Moose Jaw complained so much about 

everything, and everybody complained, and we really didn’t do 

a very good job, and things got out of hand. 

 

And I’d like to say to the member, who I have a great deal of 

respect for, that we have been waiting for five years for the 

members of your party to apologize and take responsibility for 

the events of the 1980s. And it is refreshing to hear you do so 

tonight and I commend you for that. And with that I’ll take my 

place and let the member get on with his next question. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, it’s 

unfortunate that you feel you’ve been waiting for quite a while. 

I think the leader of our party has certainly indicated as much as 

two or three years ago, and certainly the former leader 

indicated, there were some mistakes made. And I’ll bet any 

money . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  I’ll say $14 billion worth. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Fourteen billion dollars the member from Regina 

South says; $14 billion of which  if you take the time and if 

the man had any intelligence and any economic intelligence, to 

go back and look at, including everything the way the auditor is 

telling us to do it today  the fact that you leave out the 

Crowns and you leave out the unfunded liabilities, it’s certainly 

easy to come up with some easy numbers. 

 

It’s all of a sudden interesting to note that we’ve got some 

assets that have some value so the total debt that has grown to 

over 20 billion from 14. Who is responsible for that extra $6.5 

billion? The members on this side of the House? And the $8 

billion that was there before? Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. I appreciate that questions under 

item 1 of Health will generate a great deal of discussion and 

interest in all members of the Chamber and that’s very good. 

 

Order, order. I remind . . . Order. I remind hon. members of the 

committee that the item before us is item 1, administration, of 

the Department of Health. And I invite the hon. member for 

Moosomin to address the issue of Health. Order. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, as we’re discussing Health, 

economics comes into play here when we look at the figures 

and the expenditures in the area of Health. And that’s just one 

of the small points of the total economic picture in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, when we get back to and we start discussing the 

responsibilities, we can stand here and we can argue back and 

forth as to who is responsible. I’m waiting for the day, Mr. 

Minister, when you’ll accept some of the responsibility for your 

actions. I think I’ve indicated that yes, there was some 

responsibility on our part but I don’t believe it was all the 

responsibility that should be laid here or laid with the official 

opposition, and certainly with the government. But we’re all, as 

elected members, we’re all working for the people of 

Saskatchewan, for the province of Saskatchewan. I happen to 

represent a rural riding, a rural constituency that feels  and I  

hear it every day, on the coffee shop, in my office, on the phone 

 where people feel, that the rural communities are being 

targeted. They feel that they’re being hit. 

 

You made the comment recently about the fact that the funding 

is going to follow the services. Well if we discontinue services 

in a district, then yes, Mr. Minister, people will go to the area or 

to the district or to the community that provides that service. 

Now I think you and I will agree that not every district in the 

province of Saskatchewan can provide a large . . . or access to a 

fairly large amount of surgery, which means that most people 

have to leave the district. But just because they have to leave 

the district because they can’t get it locally, does that mean that 

all the funding should follow them to the other districts? 

 

And therefore they find themselves with lower budgets to work 

with and as a result, they’ve got to make the cuts in the services 

that they’re providing, whether it’s bed closures or whether it’s 

nursing positions, Mr. Minister. So how do we address this 

shortfall that you’re talking of? How do we address the 

shortfall? I don’t think you should be just lumping all the 

services where people must leave a district unless you have 

already come up with an idea or criteria. 

 

And maybe, maybe just maybe, part of that could be answered 

in this report that you just released the other day about 

midwifery. That might meet some of the criteria if that is 

approved and it goes ahead. And some of these communities 

that do not have obstetrical care or birthing available to them, 

through midwifery, might have it at home, or might have it in 

the local area which then means the funding stays there. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Minister, that’s what people are asking of me and that’s 

what I’m trying to get through to you, that it’s easy to say the 

funding’s going to follow, but if the service isn’t there, yes, 

people will move over here and then they lose their funding. 

 

And you just made the comment, we have to educate people to 

get the services at home. Well it was interesting to note at the 

budget speech, a couple of people that happened to be in at the 

speech come from out in my area, and I was chatting with them 

afterwards. And I was quite surprised to see them and I was 

asking them about their retirement. And I had thought they had 

just moved into the local community. I find that they moved 

into Regina. You know why they moved here? Because they 

didn’t feel comfortable that the health services will continue to 

be available in their local community. So when they left that 

district, Mr. Minister, that district lost the funding to Regina. 

 

And those are some of the problems we’re facing and we need 

to find ways of addressing it, not that I’m saying we don’t 

acknowledge the services, but we need to find ways of making 

sure we can provide an equal access to services. And coming 

back to a couple of these couples I guess . . . and I look at it 

from another heartening comfort  in both cases they never 

voted for me so I don’t have to worry about those four votes 

counting against me next time around. But, Mr. Minister, those 

are real, legitimate concerns out there. 

 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

And I have one other question, Mr. Minister. You made a 

comment today about the regulations. You commented that 

within two weeks you will be releasing regulations about 

personal care homes. Mr. Minister, if you can assure us today 

you will be releasing them in two weeks it would seem to me 

that they are already in your possession. What are you waiting 

for? Are you waiting for the Victoria Day long weekend so that 

if they come out and they’re not quite what everybody was 

looking for, that they’ll be lost in the shuffle as everybody runs 

off to get their round of golf in? 

 

Or, Mr. Minister, why not make the commitment to announce 

them tomorrow so that people can get on with their lives and 

start putting into practice and into play . . . even the folks in 

Kamsack can address the concern that they’re having regarding 

the care home there. I’ll leave that with you for a minute, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well in answer to the last part of the 

question about the regulations, the reason is simply that, as the 

member knows, the regulations have to be approved by cabinet 

and then they are published, but I can’t publish the regulations 

before they’re approved by cabinet. They have to go through 

that process and at the present time I’m waiting for cabinet 

approval of the regulations. Once that occurs I’m sure that the 

regulations are published immediately thereafter and they 

become public. 

 

That’s the only reason I’m waiting. I’m waiting for approval of 

the regulations, proper procedure to take place, and that’s all 

there is to it. There’s no hidden agenda as the member fears 

might be the case, that for some reason I just don’t want to 

publish them. I’m as anxious as the member in fact to have 

them published. 

 

I understand what the member is saying about the couple from 

his area that moved into Regina because they were concerned 

about health care. I would suggest that the idea of people 

retiring to Regina or Saskatoon or Moose Jaw or Swift Current 

from a smaller centre is not entirely new. This has been the 

history of the province for many years if not decades. This is a 

choice that people make and it’s true that when that happens it 

affects the funding of the various health districts because the 

funding is based upon population. 

 

But I want to say to the member that actually I am very much in 

sympathy with what the member is saying about trying to see 

what can appropriately be done in areas other than the larger 

centres, and also having a good and secure health system for 

people in the rural areas. 

 

And the member says that I said that funding follows services. 

That is not what I said. I said funding follows people, so that if 

a person from your area comes into Regina for, let us say, 

neurosurgery  which is something that obviously could not be 

done in Moosomin but could be done in Regina  where they 

might have their brain operated on, that is something that has to 

be available to people from all across the province on an equal 

basis. And that is something that when the person comes in 

from a rural area to a larger centre to have that surgery done, the 

surgery should not only be available to them but it should  

be paid for. 

 

And the fact is, as I said before, the seven largest districts have 

61 per cent of the population but they do 94 per cent of the 

surgeries. And I say to the member that the people that live in 

every part of the province, including his riding, have to have the 

right to choose where they’re going to get their health care. And 

if they choose to get some surgery or some service in a larger 

centre, we have to respect that choice and we have to pay for 

that to be done. And if we don’t pay for that to be done, then I 

think, Mr. Chair, the member would have a much larger 

complaint than the complaint he’s making, because in essence 

what he’s saying is when people go in from the smaller centres 

to the larger centres, you’re paying for the services that they 

receive. And I say to the member, well yes, that’s true, of 

course that’s true. 

 

But the reverse would be that we would say if you don’t live in 

the city and you come in for some kind of treatment, we ain’t 

going to pay for it, and that would be totally unacceptable to the 

member and it should be unacceptable. 

 

But what I say to the member is two things. Some of the things 

that people come into the city for to have done could be done in 

the local area where they live. Some of them are fairly 

straightforward, simple matters that could be done in some of 

the smaller centres. We don’t make the choice as government 

and the health districts don’t make the choice that people 

should choose to come into the city to have something done. 

And we, like you, Mr. Member, say to people, look, let’s have a 

look at this and see if there are some things that you have done 

in the city that you could have done at home because that might 

be better for you, better for your family, and better for your 

district because the funding would stay there. 

 

And I’d like nothing better than for us to look into that and try 

to do that and maybe reverse some of this trend that is 

happening where people make this choice. And I might say to 

the member that this is not something that happened in 1991 or 

1992. This is something that I think rapidly expanded in the 

1980s. Even though we were building more hospitals in rural 

areas, the trend was for people to want to go to larger hospitals. 

 

But I say to the member, I appreciate what you’re saying but I 

very sincerely would like the health districts to examine what 

services are being provided outside their district that could be 

provided within the district which would improve their funding 

situation; and also, to what extent could we take some surgical 

procedures from the larger centres out to the rural areas. 

 

And I think I’ve said in the House before that I was quite 

impressed when I was out at Tisdale a few weeks ago meeting 

with the local health board. And I was in the hospital in Tisdale 

and I ran into a surgeon from Saskatoon. And I was quite 

surprised to see him there and I asked him what he was doing 

and he explained that he did itinerant surgery, i.e., he went out 

from Saskatoon to Tisdale and he did some surgery there. And 

there were other surgeons that went through the Tisdale hospital 

because the local doctor there has done a fairly good job in 

arranging that. And they explained it’s better for the people; 

good in terms of getting operating room time. Apparently some  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

of the same at Nipawin. And I was surprised too to learn that 

they do laparoscopic surgery at Tisdale and Nipawin because I 

didn’t know that. 

 

But my point is, I came back and I said to the Department of 

Health, we should do a review of the surgeries and services that 

are being done throughout the province in rural areas, using the 

operating rooms in some of the smaller centres, and whether we 

can work with the doctors to get them going out to the smaller 

centres on a regular basis to do some surgeries. Now we know 

that there is some things you’re not going to do in Moosomin or 

elsewhere, like the neurosurgery and so on, but there are other 

things that you could do. 

 

So notwithstanding the fact the member and I have 

disagreements over who’s better at balancing the books and so 

on and so on, I do agree with the member that this is something 

that we should seriously look at and actually I want to look at it. 

I’d like to work with the district health boards, the physicians 

and surgeons, and anybody else who has an interest, to see how 

indeed we might come up with a slightly different plan that 

would change the way people are migrating for services. And I 

think we should pay some attention to that and if we did, it 

would go part of the way to relieving the feeling that the 

member says some of the people in his area have. Because it is 

not the intent of myself or the government that people have that 

feeling. It would be our desire that if we can enhance services 

in the rural areas, that we do so. 

 

I would just like to end by saying that in fact if you examined 

the range of services available to people in all districts in the 

province, including the rural districts, you would see that in fact 

there has been an expansion in many areas of services available 

to people such as home care services, respite-care services, and 

many other health care services. 

 

Where there has been a contraction has been in the area of acute 

care services, i.e., hospital beds. That’s the point the member’s 

making. That has gone down in some areas. It’s also gone down 

in the cities because the way we do hospital care has changed. 

As the member says, people are in hospitals for shorter periods 

of time. But many other services have in fact been enhanced in 

the rural areas in a very worthwhile way. 

 

I want to say that for rural residents, the proportion of day 

surgeries increased from 40 per cent of all surgeries to 50 per 

cent over the last number of years. So the people are being 

served by the hospital system. I think the number of surgeries 

has certainly not gone down. It is a different system. In many 

ways I think it’s a better system. 

 

But the member certainly has some legitimate concerns, and I 

say, well let’s try to work on those concerns, and maybe we can 

actually change some of this migration and if we can, we should 

try to do that. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I don’t disagree with you at all, 

what you’ve just said, because I know that even out in my area 

that there, a while back, there were some surgeons coming and 

providing surgery. I know that the Kipling Hospital has actually 

expanded. The obstetrical services, and birthings, in that  

hospital have certainly increased. 

 

And I firmly believe as well that there are methods and ways. 

And I don’t think just the Tisdale’s, or the Moose Jaw’s, or the 

North Battleford’s, but I think places like Kipling have the 

opportunities, if given, and working relationship with the 

specialists in our centres here. And I’m not talking of major, 

major surgeries. I think we agree on that. 

 

I do know that the couple of surgeries that we did have that 

came across my desk recently, had they been done locally, the 

individuals may have spent that extra day or so in the hospital 

under a little better constant observation  may not have ended 

up with a major staph infection and tying up a hospital bed for a 

month or so trying to recover from that. 

 

And in one case an individual was close to having a limb 

amputated. And that made the local doctor somewhat irate at 

what happened, Mr. Minister. And those are some of the things 

that I think we need to work on. I agree with you. 

 

I would suggest that one thing we should maybe get a 

commitment from, and I’m not sure if it’s the House Leader or 

the cabinet planning committee, but I believe cabinet meets on 

Tuesdays. And if I could be of any assistance in getting the 

regulations, giving you the opportunity to be able to present 

your regulations tomorrow, I would ask the House Leader or 

any minister sitting in the Assembly tonight, to make sure that 

that is on the agenda so that it gives you the ability to present 

those regulations to the province a little more forthcoming. And 

I would just take note of that. 

 

And one other question before  if you don’t have it tonight 

. . . I would like to know what the actual expenditures for the 

year ’95-96 were. If they’re not available tonight, maybe you 

can bring them next time we’re here in estimates, Health 

estimates. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  As is, I think, normal practice, the exact 

figure spending for ’95-96 is not available. It normally, I think, 

is available 90 days after the end of the fiscal year. So I don’t 

have that figure and nor would I have it tomorrow. But certainly 

I would undertake to give that to the member as soon as it is 

available. 

 

And just one other observation. I do appreciate the member’s 

offer of assistance to advocate in cabinet with respect to the 

regulations but I’m going to decline the member’s kind offer 

unless the member agrees to cross the floor and the Premier 

appoints the member to Executive Council. And I do hope that 

the member will seriously consider that because after this last 

exchange, I think the member and I could work quite effectively 

together, and I look forward to the member joining our party 

over here, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I would have 

to decline on that. I’m not sure if that’s a form of blackmail or 

not; or if that’s the same threat the district health boards are 

living under. I don’t really know, Mr. Minister. 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

But, Mr. Minister, one further question. I believe we sent your 

department a global set of questions and I’m wondering if I 

could just remind you of that, if you could have that for us the 

next time that Health estimates meet, or even prior to so we can 

review them before we get into the ongoing, day-to-day debate 

regarding health expenditures in the province. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that the staff is 

working virtually full time trying to come up with the answers, 

that some of the answers to some of the questions are fairly 

complicated, but they will prepare the answers of course for the 

member just as soon as possible. And of course I don’t know if 

those answers will be available the next time we’re in estimates, 

but certainly they have to be made available to the member just 

as soon as we possibly can and we’ll endeavour to do so and 

have been endeavouring to do so. 

 

Mr. Chair, I’d just like to thank the officials from the 

Department of Health for their assistance tonight. Thank you. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d also like to 

thank the officials and look forward to having them back on 

several occasions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Economic Development 

Vote 45 

 

The Chair:  Mr. Minister, will you please introduce your 

staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to 

introduce my staff. First of all, Clare Kirkland, who is the new 

deputy minister of Economic Development. And this is his first 

go in the House as deputy of Economic Development, but 

certainly not as deputy. As well, Bob Perrin, who’s sitting 

behind me and to my right. Directly behind me, Peter Phillips. 

Tom Douglas to my left. And sitting somewhere behind us is 

Neil Brotheridge and Donna Johnson. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  I welcome the minister and the officials. 

Thank you very much for being here this evening. 

 

Last time we discussed Economic Development in estimates we 

spoke mostly on the Partnership for Growth. And tonight I’d 

like to get into the Department of Economic Development and 

ask some specific questions on the department. 

 

And to begin this evening, I’d like to ask you about the budget 

from last year. There was actually an overexpenditure of about 

$2 million. Is there a specific area where the overspending was 

mainly done? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairperson, I think I’m clear 

on the question that you’re asking: on the total budget last year, 

how much was over and above what we had budgeted? Is that 

the question? It was $2 million. And I’ll get you a breakdown  

here in a minute, if you wanted to ask another question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When the Minister 

of Finance was here the other day, she was advising us that 

when there was an overexpenditure you had to go to cabinet to 

get approval for it. With this overexpenditure, did you have to 

do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The process of course is, to the 

member opposite, that when extra monies are needed usually 

there’s a Treasury Board submission, and then an order in 

council or a special warrant would be issued for that amount of 

money. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. I notice the staff complement will 

actually be down by 15 this year. Can you tell me what areas or 

where you’ll see cut-backs . . . or we will? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  To the member opposite, I 

mentioned 2 million. It’s a number that’s more than that. But 

I’ll get you the list here just as soon as we can put it together. 

 

Ms. Draude:  We had sent over a list of questions for each 

department. I’m wondering if those questions have been 

answered for your department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  We’re just working on that, and 

again, I will get that to you. But on the issue of the number of 

positions, there were eight fewer in the area of policy, support 

staff in the area of business and co-ops; there was one fewer in 

policy and coordination; 14 fewer in diversification; and nine 

more in northern affairs. And the number I have here is a net 

reduction of 13.5 positions. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister. I’d appreciate 

it if you would table the list. 

 

Mr. Minister, maybe we could discuss REDAs (regional 

economic development authority) for a few minutes. It’s one of 

the initiatives that I appreciate in rural Saskatchewan and I’m 

sure that you are in agreement with that. Can you tell me how 

many are established as of today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the member will know that 

we’ve been announcing formation of REDAs now for some 

period of time. And there are 15 up and operating, 2 that are 

ready to be announced, like the opening dates have been set, 

and then 9 others that are at some stage of formation that we 

expect to be completed sometime during this calendar year. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So that’s a total of . . . I guess I missed some 

of it. It’s about 24 then, 26? Okay. What is the total dollar 

amount spent so far to set up these REDAs and get them 

running? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the formula for funding is a 

$25,000 initial start-up grant. So while they’re working their 

way through the process of starting up a regional economic 

development authority, we allow for $25,000 grant. Once  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

they’ve reached the end of their first full year of operation, then 

they’re eligible for $60,000 per year. But this is a matched grant 

 the local REDA raising a maximum of 60 matched by the 

provincial government, 60. So some of these aren’t at the 

maximum in their first year. 

 

So this is how the formula works. And I’ll get you the actual 

amounts spent last year, if I can get it out of the document here, 

that will tell you how much we had last year and what we’re 

planning to spend this year. But these are rough numbers 

because they’re based on anticipated numbers of REDAs 

coming on stream during the year. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Have any of the REDAs overspent? Are they 

allowed more funding than the original 25 or $60,000 dollars? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The position of all the REDAs at 

the current time is that they have no debt and so they manage 

within the grant that they get from the provincial government 

and money that they raise locally. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is the vision or the mission statement of each 

of the REDAs somewhat similar? Is there a basic ground rule, 

sort of principles, that they have to start with? And in different 

areas do they have different goals set for accomplishing their 

needs in their area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member raises an interesting 

point, because while all the general philosophy of economic 

development at the regional level is very similar, and that is that 

. . . I think all REDAs believe that the concept of economic 

development really has to start at the local level. And the idea 

that was prevalent during the 1980s and before that, that 

somehow governments in Regina or Ottawa were planning an 

economic development strategy for their area, I think there’s 

now a great realization that that isn’t the way to do economic 

development, and that if economic development is going to be 

done, it has to start at home; the people have to sit around and 

develop their own strategy and their own vision. 

 

So there is a common thrust or intent to that end, but that’s 

really where it ends. Then you have the overlaying with what 

are the natural strengths in each of the regions. And you might 

have a lot of similarities, but you’d also have disparities, 

depending on whether you’re in northern Saskatchewan or the 

South, the amount of tourism that you might have in your area, 

the strength and ability of the local people to do processing and 

manufacturing, whether you have a large centre in your REDA, 

such as Saskatoon would be considerably a different REDA 

than a Rosetown, given the fact that you have a major city with 

a major airport in one and not in the other. 

 

So while the vision, I think I would say, is very common to all 

of them, that is, that the economic development planning 

should happen at the local level, there’s a lot of room for 

imagination and change resulting from the local needs and 

ideas. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do any of the 

REDAs contain representatives from the tourism authorities in 

their area? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, I think your question, to the 

member opposite is, are there actual people who sit on both 

boards, the tourism authority boards and the regional economic 

development authorities. I can’t say for sure. I can find out for 

you. It would surprise me a little bit if there wasn’t some 

overlap of membership, and they certainly aren’t exclusive 

where people are excluded from sitting on both. 

 

But what I can tell you is that tourism is one of the major 

strengths on each of the REDA boards. That is, if you were to 

look at the structure of the board, you would find that in almost 

all cases, if not in all cases, you would have individuals who 

were very much involved in delivery and building of the 

tourism industry in their area. 

 

I think it’s fair to say that tourism, when you look out into the 

future, in fact for all of Canada but for Saskatchewan as well, 

when it comes to job creation, is one of the fastest areas of job 

creation. And when you look at the graphing that has been done 

by people who do this kind of planning, actually tourism is a 

curve that continues to grow in numbers of people working in it 

to an extent that is much greater percentage of numbers than 

any other industry in Canada. So when we look at job creation 

 and the predictions are by some that it will grow by 10 per 

cent between now and the year 2000. We have about 42,000 

people working in the industry at the present time. If you 

believe these projections of a 10 per cent increase, then you’re 

looking at something in excess of 4,000 people, 4,000 new jobs 

in that one segment of the economy. So I think all of the 

REDAs are looking at that as one of the engines of growth but 

to different extents. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I definitely agree that 

tourism has one of the greatest potentials and I’m wondering if 

there should be some initiative put forward so that the tourism 

authorities are represented fully on REDA boards. And I’m also 

wondering if there’s been any chance or any opportunity to 

have the same boundary lines between tourism authorities as 

REDAs because of their similar needs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The number of tourism regions in 

the province is nine and this is a number that has been arrived at 

after a number of years of discussion. And at the present time 

we’re having a very difficult time trying to carve out a 

minimum of 25 REDAs. So you may see a vision some day of 

them moving to coterminous boundaries, but at the present time 

the REDAs believe that they need a smaller area in order to 

have more involvement in the communities that are represented 

than the tourism regions do. 

 

And so I think I was in some ways of the same opinion as the 

member opposite when I started out in this. I thought it might 

be a great idea to have coterminous boundaries between 

regional economic development authorities and tourism 

authorities. But at this point, and at least until we get them up 

and operating, and I would assume for the foreseeable future, 

you will have involvement between tourism authorities and 

REDAs but at an integrated, partnership level as opposed to an 

integrated program. 

 

Now if at some point in time, after some years of working  



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

together, they come to the conclusion that it’s in their best 

interest to amalgamate or join together, we certainly wouldn’t 

stand in their way. But I think at this point in time it’s important 

that they would make that decision. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Is there any federal money put into 

the set-up of REDAs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the federal government’s 

program, as you know, is community futures, and they have 

regional structures. Not all the province . . . I don’t think all the 

province is covered by community futures. But where they do, 

there’s quite a good working relationship between the REDAs 

at the provincial level and the community futures program. 

 

But as far as funding for the operation of REDAs, there’s no 

federal dollars that go into the administration or the 

management of REDAs. But where you may see some overlap 

or actual partnering is on projects that exist in a community that 

the REDA may sponsor. At that level, the federal government 

could come in and joint venture on a project. 

 

And of course the PARD (Partnership Agreement on Rural 

Development) and PAWBED (Partnership Agreement on Water 

Based Economic Development) are an example of project 

dollars that may go into a project that’s managed by a REDA 

where there would be federal and provincial dollars in. But into 

the management of REDAs, there is no federal money. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to pose a 

question to the Minister of Economic Development. In speaking 

of PAWBED, it is my understanding from the papers that you 

have sent forward to inform us of the money spent on 

PAWBED, that Cargill in fact has obtained a loan. 

 

Now my understanding of the qualifications to receive that 

money from PAWBED is that it is for rural communities and 

small business. And I’m wondering exactly how Cargill falls 

into that category. And why in fact they were funded through 

this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member may know that there’s 

a joint management board for PAWBED made up of federal 

people from, I believe PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 

Administration) and Sask Water, and projects that are proposed 

are reviewed by this joint board, and decisions made. 

 

In the case of Cargill, there was no application from Cargill or 

grants made to Cargill. But the RM (rural municipality) of 

Blucher, in which the project is located, has and had made an 

application for a water project for industrial development in 

their area. And so this project is constructed in such a way that 

it is not limited to . . . In fact others, I’m not sure if they are, but 

certainly will be using this water project when it comes into 

place. 

 

So it was a proposal put forward by the municipality to the 

jointly managed board of PAWBED and then a decision made. 

And so Cargill wasn’t a direct recipient of it and met the criteria 

to use the system now that . . . once it’s in place and operating. 

 

Ms. Julé:  My understanding, Mr. Minister, was that Cargill 

in fact got the loan, a 20-year loan, that they would pay back 

eventually? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The reason it’s taking me a little 

longer than I would normally is because this really is a Sask 

Water project and we don’t manage Sask Water, but I’ll try to 

explain it as best I can. 

 

There’s really two parts to the project. There’s the water source 

coming into the plant and the effluent management leaving the 

plant, both of which are water projects that PAWBED was 

involved in. And so you have a joint agreement between the 

federal and provincial government through PAWBED and then 

you have also involvement from Sask Water in the project. 

 

But what my officials tell me  and I would urge you, the 

member from Humboldt, to follow this up with the minister in 

charge of Sask Water if I’m missing any detail  but the 

project is being done so that Cargill is not being subsidized in 

this process and Sask Water is breaking even on the project. So 

there’s no loan as such for any length of time and it might be 

the agreement, it might be a 20-year agreement, that you’re 

talking about with Sask Water to provide the water system. But 

I’d really urge you to follow this up with Sask Water when they 

appear before the committee. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In fact I have followed it 

up a little and I’m just going to pass the questioning over to my 

colleague while I run and get the paper so that we can clarify 

that here tonight because I do have questions about that from 

some of my constituents. Thank you. Thank you very much. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At one time we 

discussed the small business loans association and the 

possibility that they could be handled under REDAs. Is it still 

something that is in the consideration stage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, we are actively considering the 

review of the program to see whether or not there is a 

willingness by the REDAs to administer the small business 

loans program. So I can’t announce anything tonight but I can 

tell you it’s under very active consideration. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hope that when 

you’re considering it, you also consider raising the limit from 

$5,000 to perhaps 10 because it would be . . . would make it a 

lot more attractive to some of the small businesses. 

 

I’m also wondering if the interest that’s earned from the small 

business loans program, given to the towns, can that money be 

used by the town towards purchasing their membership or 

towards being part of the REDA? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  This is a little hypothetical but the 

SBLAs (small business loans association) of course have access 

to that interest that you speak of. And if the SBLA were a town 

of the same administration, they would be eligible to use that  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

money to support their membership in a REDA. But remember 

in most cases, the SBLA is not a town and therefore that 

connection doesn’t logically follow. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In our previous 

discussions we’ve talked about the Partnership For Growth 

document and the vision that was a part of that document. I’m 

wondering if this is the overall vision that I’m seeing in the 

Department of Economic Development. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, and I’ll just try to capsulize 

what I think the question was. But basically whether or not 

Partnership For Growth is the sort of complete vision of 

Economic Development. 

 

I just want to go back to the start of the process in 1992 when 

we developed Partnership for Renewal  and I’ve mentioned 

this in the House several times  that this was really a 

blueprint that was developed by a large number of people. And 

certainly was not a political document because there were many 

people from business who had absolutely no ties to the NDP — 

in fact quite the opposite — were involved in other political 

parties. There were people like Paul Hill, and Jim Yuel from 

Saskatoon, and Harold MacKay, and many people with varied 

backgrounds. Don Ching was involved in it with a very strong 

view that supported public involvement in the economy. 

 

And the initial meetings we had were quite interesting, as you 

might imagine, because you had all of these flow of thoughts 

coming forward, all the way from getting rid of totally of 

government involvement in the economy, that was strongly felt 

by some members who were discussing economic development, 

and others who thought we should have more involvement. 

 

And sometimes in that first weekend when we were discussing 

economic development, it wasn’t clear that we were going to 

ever come to a consensus. But what developed out of that was a 

belief and a mission statement that said Saskatchewan, basically 

by the year 2000, that working together in cooperation, we 

could build a province that was a good, solid, safe place for 

people to work and live. 

 

And from that mission statement flowed the 31 initiatives that 

dealt with trade and biotechnology and all of the concepts that 

have been put into place, including the regional economic 

development authorities. This is where we’re at on the 

conclusion of the election in 1995. 

 

But in the document Partnership for Renewal we had talked 

about it being a living document, that we wouldn’t wait till the 

year 2000 to update it, that it would be updated on a regular 

basis; reports given on progress. And after the election in 1995, 

we believed it was an opportune time to get back together with 

the same stakeholders and devise a continuation of that plan, is 

how I like to see it. 

 

So I think there’s a continuum here. And I would really like to 

think that if we were not around after the next election — I 

really believe this — that this document that has been 

developed, not by partisans in some political party but by a 

broad-based coalition of economic developers across the  

province, would actually form the initial basis for a new 

administration to pick it up and say to themselves that there is 

plenty of threads here that we can continue this stream on. 

 

Of course we’ll bring in new ideas that we believe in, but I’d 

like to think that there needs to be in a province, just as there is 

in a corporation, a main stream of thought that meets the 

general needs of all the public and not just of certain political 

interests. 

 

So this is the theory of Partnership for Renewal, Partnership 

for Growth. That this is a living document that was developed 

by the community, not a political party, that could be used in a 

general way by any political party that came to power. That they 

would feel comfortable picking it up, modifying it, but using it 

as a major document as opposed to throwing it out and starting 

from scratch. That’s basically what we believe in the 

department and I certainly believe as a minister. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d just like to pick 

up on a statement that you made. And when you mentioned 

there is members that wanted to get rid of some government 

involvement or your initial group of people that you got 

together, what members would this be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I really don’t want to get into 

names of who believes what because I think that wouldn’t be 

proper, but I can tell you there were people of that point of 

view, who held them strongly, that there’s too much 

government involvement in the economy. 

 

And I think if you listen carefully now that we are doing the 

Crown review, and that public meetings are being planned for 

the province, if you are to come to those meetings you’ll hear 

all of these views being put. And some very strongly held views 

that we should privatize all the Crowns, use the money to pay 

down the debt, and as a result of less interest being paid, then 

cut taxes. 

 

And that’s an option obviously that some support and some 

believe is the way to go. Others say no, what you should with 

the Crown corporations is keep them, nurture them, maybe do 

joint ventures with other companies, and build the Crowns to be 

twice or three times the asset value in the number of employees 

that work in them. 

 

And I think this is the beauty of politics and beauty of economic 

development, is that the system in Canada, and in Saskatchewan 

certainly, is open enough to allow all those points of view to 

come to the front and to the fore. And the interesting thing 

about being in government is trying to balance all of these 

interests that are reasonably held. 

 

I’m not making an argument that there is an economic 

development right and wrong. Only time ever proves whether 

you’re right and wrong at that given time. And I believe that 

even more than that, that certain beliefs work in one era and 

wouldn’t work in another. I think those who believe they have 

the perfect idea for economic development, I think all that tells 

you about them is that they’ve probably never been in a position 

to exercise that authority because economic  



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

development is very much a matter of grey areas as opposed to 

black and white in my mind. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I’d 

like to welcome the minister and his officials. And my basic 

questions, Mr. Minister, will be in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Just a few points before I begin to question. Obviously there 

has to be a different strategy in northern Saskatchewan. There 

are so many different things that face northern people. We’re 

talking about the distances involved; we’re talking about the 

different economies that could be developed; we’re talking 

about the traditional versus the modern economies when you 

talk about mining versus fishing, for example. 

 

So in reference to some of these points, I want to point out that 

in northern Saskatchewan we have roughly a population of 

25,000 people. And of course you have the North divided into 

four . . . or three specific regions  the far northern region, the 

east-side region, and the west-side region. And the big thing 

here again, going back to the point of having 25,000 people, 

let’s assume for now that of the 25,000 people in the North, 

8,000 possibly could be employed, 8,000 could be young 

people that aren’t ready for employment yet, and the other 

8,000 could be unemployed. 

 

The first question I have for you when it comes to northern 

Saskatchewan, again taking into account the small population 

base, the fact that it has half of the land mass of Saskatchewan, 

what specific job targets do you have in terms of numbers and 

industries that you want to support? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, as you know, we 

have a minister in charge of northern Saskatchewan and I’m 

going to let him respond to the questions. 

 

But I would ask the member opposite, if we could indicate in 

terms of the working of the committee, are you going to be 

asking the balance of questions for tonight or are we going to 

be going back and forth? Okay, we’ll just both stay here and try 

to keep up with it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Yes, in relation to the questions on 

employment, I’ll first deal with probably the major one in 

regards to employment and that’s in the area of mining. And I’ll 

take a broad, historical overview. 

 

Initially when mining development took place in the North in 

the 1920s, you know, on to the ’50s, most of the development, 

you know, occurred in such a way that northern people’s 

involvement was through the developmental construction 

phase, you know, of the mining industry. It also occurred in that 

sense with major projects in hydro, etc. Our employment rates 

were around 5 per cent, you know, sometimes higher. And as 

development went into operational phases, then we were 

excluded from the development. As things went on in the ’60s, 

it remained much the same when the Thatcher government 

came in. And then in the ’70s with the Blakeney government, 

we started doing the affirmative action strategy and came up  

with the affirmative action lease agreements in mining. 

 

And I would say that during that period, during the debates in 

the mid-’70s, we had evolved from the 5 to 10 per cent level of 

employment to now it was hovering, by the end of the NDP 

Blakeney era, about 40 to 50 per cent of the employment in the 

mines were Northerners. And a lot of them of course, being 

Indian and Metis background, were Indian and Metis people 

from northern Saskatchewan as well. 

 

During the next period of time, during the Devine government 

years, for the nine-year period the employment levels, 

interestingly enough, on one of the mines, in regards to Cluff 

Lake, was not bad. It hovered relatively around 40 to 50 per 

cent. But in that one other mine where there were some changes 

taking place at the leadership level, I noticed that the mine 

employment had dropped from around 40 or 50 per cent down 

to about 15 per cent. And it hovered that way for some time. 

And I remember my friend who was a former MLA of 

Athabasca at that time, Lawrence Yew, was bringing this 

question up in the House, you know, quite often. And I 

remember that the employment rates went up to about the 20 

per cent figure by the end of that point. 

 

When we came into government, one of our major goals was to 

move into that area and re-examine our partnership with the 

mining community as well as the input of northern people and 

northern communities. So we set up an agenda. And I must say 

the idea has been fairly successful. I would think that in 

international terms it must rank as one of the major success 

stories, because this year we now have reached 50 per cent this 

past month, the 50 per cent amount in regards to employment at 

the mines. 

 

And even in the area of training at the mines, with the 

multi-party training program that makes the linkage between 

education and employment, we now have about 400 people that 

have been trained through that program. And most of the people 

were trained to get your basic upgrading so that they get into the 

apprenticeship trades, and also to get into the apprenticeship 

trades themselves. 

 

It used to be that, in the early parts, we were very good in the 

area of the labourers, the mill operators, and the heavy 

equipment operators. And we were hovering around 40, 50 per 

cent in that area. But in the apprenticeable trades we were down 

at 15, 10 per cent. What we have done is that we have moved 

these areas in the apprenticeable trades now to about 25, 30 per 

cent. And we’ve now moved about 50 per cent on average, 

which means that in some of the areas like the heavy equipment 

operators and the labourers, we’re at about 60 per cent. Our 

new target in this area is 60 per cent employment, and we 

should be reaching that in the next few years. 

 

But I think that this is an example of tremendous partnership 

and cooperation with the mining companies as well as the 

community people. I know that you yourself used to raise 

questions through the committee, the liaison committee, that 

was there in regards to the key issues relating to employment, in 

relation to how much went to the . . . how much contracts went 

to the northern contractors. Also you used to raise  



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

questions about environmental and workers’ health and safety. 

 

And through this process of community involvement, that has 

also been a success story because a lot of those questions that 

local community people have raised were the same things that 

the partnership between industry and government has really 

managed to come to the fore in the past few years. 

 

So I think overall we’re doing relatively well in the mining 

industry. I think it’s . . . the multi-party training package has 

won a national award, you know, in regards to training, 

linkages. And so we’re highly successful there and we’re now 

moving into the apprenticeable trades, moving into the area of 

supervision. 

 

In forestry I would say that an initial success story is in relation 

to the west side in regards to the treaty Indian population and 

the hiring also of a certain degree of Metis people. But in the 

main it was ownership of Indian in the industry. So they 

partook and along with worker ownership and through that 

process along with industry there was a partnership and a lot of 

the new ideas of co-management were born in regards to that 

experience in forestry. 

 

We learned that during initial phases, that you can make 

mistakes in the process of development and you can build on 

the success stories and you move on with it. Because I know 

when I met with the mayors they were saying that it was a lot 

more successful, you know, with a certain group of people and 

not with another. And it was . . . that issue was raised with me 

when I met with the mayors last month. 

 

So I think what we did do was come out, and I suggested to 

them it was to make use of the new programs like the northern 

development fund, the $4 million fund that is there. All together 

$2.6 million was available for use by northern businesses and I 

reminded them, I said, look in mining when we first come into 

government, there was about $12 million worth of contracts for 

northern contractors. This year alone we had $47 million worth 

of contracts. 

 

So what we were trying to do was move the same type of 

principles and same types of practices in the forestry area. So 

we’re dealing with that on the west side and I’m trying to do 

developmental concerns that were raised by the municipalities 

as well trying to move in on the east side with the evolution of 

the forest management agreement that is done in coordination 

with Hudson Bay, you know, moving into Cumberland, Carrot 

River, and as well as Shoal Lake, Red Earth, and the areas. And 

also the people north of there in regards to Creighton and 

Pelican Narrows and also Deschambault area. 

 

So we’re trying to get that same model of making sure that the 

benefits are there for people in regards to the training aspect, in 

regards to the aspect of making sure that we have the people in 

the workforce and also at the business end, while at the same 

time we work under the principle of sustainable development in 

both forestry and in mining. 

 

We’ve also done wild rice development. We’ve put in about, 

approximately 4 to $5 million worth of help since 1979 to the  

industry in regards to wild rice. This past while, even on the 

west side, we did two projects recently with one at Buffalo 

Narrows and another one at Beauval on harvesting of wild rice, 

because a lot of the people wanted to see the evolution and the 

development of the industry on the machinery that they were 

using. And they wanted skill training in those areas and as such 

we have done that type of development in regards to the whole 

area of wild rice development. 

 

So you’re seeing the wild rice people now moving 

internationally and trying to sell, you know, a lot of their 

products in that sense. When I was there I had a meeting with 

the wild rice people just recently and while there’s still room to 

try and develop markets, etc., it’s been a tremendous change. 

It’s about 60 times, you know, the production of what it was in 

1979 to what it is today. So there’s been a tremendous 

production capacity in regards to wild rice in northern 

Saskatchewan. And I think that in that sense therefore we’re 

trying to move on in the different areas of tourism as well and 

our partnership in that area. 

 

So I’ll maybe take my seat and see what the other question is. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. And I go back to the earlier point 

made by the Minister of Economic Development, saying that 

it’s important that we take this type of process out of the 

government’s hand  or out of government hands  because 

the stats you mentioned under the Tory rule in the ‘80s, when it 

comes to Key Lake and other areas where we’ve seen the 

employment rate drop and plummet down to practically nothing 

under the Tory rule, that’s the reason why northern 

Saskatchewan can never really forget about that. 

 

But the point of the matter is, is that of course as a Liberal 

member from the Athabasca area, I support fully every effort to 

employ people. But the key thing here is we have to look at the 

people themselves developing that capacity. And you talk about 

25,000 people in northern Saskatchewan. You look at the $4 

million price tag you talk about in northern development. That 

works out to be roughly, what, $60 per capita. And really I 

think there is some question as to whether the $4 million is 

enough. 

 

And the second point, with the CREDOs (community regional 

economic development organization), do you feel that CREDOs 

will be ineffective with the insufficient funding, plus as well the 

fact that they don’t have any influence over land? They’re not 

the owners of the industry operating in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And I say this again from a personal perspective. We’ve tried a 

number of areas in northern Saskatchewan to try and stimulate 

the economy  myself as a former mayor and also as a member 

of the Ile-a-la-Crosse Economic Development Board. Out of the 

10 projects we had, maybe we had 2 or 3 successful ones. But 

really the whole issue was developing capacity. There was some 

distinct problems there in terms of how do we go about 

identifying projects; how do we go about identifying sources of 

funding for these projects. 

 

So really the whole situation goes back to the earlier questions I 

talk about, is the specific job targets that you have for northern  



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Saskatchewan as a government. What things are you going to 

do to assist communities in developing their capacity to 

properly manage and assess businesses? The $4 million I feel is 

not enough money to develop an economy. And you look at the 

whole emphasis of being on mining. I think we have to turn the 

. . . shift the tables around. Start looking at community 

development. 

 

So all these questions come up, Mr. Minister. And I would ask: 

when are we going to take the next level when it comes to 

economic development, look at all the scenarios  community 

based, renewable resource industries, as well as a large, 

multi-national development of our non-renewable resource 

sector. 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  First of all I would like to say that in 

regards to development in northern Saskatchewan, and 

development in the province as a whole, I knew that during the 

Tory times a lot of money was put into the area of economic 

development. I think there was about, at the height, about $300 

million. We looked at the amount that we spent in the province 

as a whole on economic development in this province and the 3 

to $400 million that the Tories used to spend. We were now 

spending about $36 million for the whole province in last year’s 

budget. And when you look at $36 million, we spent $4 million 

in northern Saskatchewan, one-tenth, you know, of the budget, 

for 3 per cent of the population. 

 

And I think it was an important factor in regards to, you know, 

looking at the North and trying to put some money in that area. 

We knew that we couldn’t do it the same way that the Tories 

did. Maybe the Liberals want to do exactly the same as the 

Tories did and throw in $300 million here and $400 million 

there. Our position was, we simply didn’t have the money to be 

able to do it; that economic development, according to the 

Tories themselves, was supposed to be done by the private 

sector. And according to the Liberals it was supposed to be 

done by the private sector. And in many cases, you know, the 

reality was that wasn’t how the Tories operated. You know, 

they kept, you know, pouring all kinds of money, the GigaText 

schemes of the world, etc., and that type of thing  Supercart 

and all those types of projects. 

 

And we decided to take an approach where we would, you 

know, limit and try and generate, you know, a certain type of 

positive psychology and support for the private sector as well as 

the co-ops and as well as the public sector. And I think that we 

have been fairly successful, you know, in that situation. And we 

know that we had the lowest unemployment rates. Although 

they’re still relatively high in the North, the fact is that we have 

put, you know, more money percentage-wise per capita into 

northern Saskatchewan in economic development than we did 

in the province as a whole. 

 

And the other fact is this, that indeed in regards to the North we 

had to look at the total amount of money that we take out from 

the North and how much we put back in. And if you look at the 

total amount and the total figures this past year, we put in $156 

million in regards to the North, in education, health, social  

services, in regards to economic development. You’ve got to 

remember that economic development doesn’t only include the 

northern development fund. There is also on the west side, in 

Beauval in your own constituency, the Sask enterprise fund is 

managed and operated from there, and that’s also about a 

million dollars a year. And that is also under northern control in 

regards to the dissemination of the dollars as the same way that 

the Northern Review Board is made up of Northerners  half, 

you know, from the west side and half from the east side. And 

in that sense therefore we’re seeing, you know, some changes 

and developments. 

 

Definitely your point is well taken on the renewable resource 

sector, and that’s why I mentioned the forestry sector at the 

beginning. I thought that in this regard we needed to get at the, 

you know, forest management agreements and make sure that 

those ideas that we’ve learned from mining, wherein 

sustainable development has to be a principle as well as a 

practice . . . And also to try and make sure that the communities 

benefited, you know, from their . . . in regards to training, 

employment, and contracts. 

 

Those are the same principles we’ll operate on there. And we’re 

moving the same way. I mentioned wild rice, and I think the 

same thing has to happen in tourism. And I definitely agree 

with you that it’s the people from northern Saskatchewan who 

have to take the initiative and move forward with a certain 

degree of support, you know, from government. 

 

But I think that, in the main, that it’s a community-based 

approach through CREDOs that is going to work. And I think 

that we can never forget also that there is individual 

entrepreneurs in northern Saskatchewan that continue to do 

things without government support and do an excellent job in 

regards to providing services and businesses at the community 

level. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. A couple of other 

points, you know, that I wish to raise. That for every failure in 

northern Saskatchewan, there is always a success story. And 

northern Saskatchewan people, as you’re probably aware, do 

have a lot of spirit and they do want to have the same kind of 

opportunity and services as the rest of the world and the rest of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I take it . . . I appreciate some of the comments that you’re 

making. And I go back to the point again of the land mass 

situation. Again I go back to . . . Just before that, I go back to 

the point when I sat as an economic development person. The 

difficult part that we had, Mr. Minister, was really accessing 

dollars for local economic development strategies. 

 

The point that the Minister of Economic Development made 

was key  is the communities themselves have the answers. 

They have the solutions. And for many years we talked about 

accessing some of the royalties; revenue sharing for 

communities. And as you and I know, I certainly don’t have all 

the answers for northern Saskatchewan and neither does any 

member of this House. The people of the North have the 

answers. 

 



May 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

So going back to my point. In our community, we tried an idea, 

a project if you will. At that first year that we come into office 

as mayor, we found out that there was no new revenues that we 

could use for economic or social development. We tried to 

access the money from various sources. There was no money 

from various sources. We looked far and wide, both provincial 

and federal governments, and also some Metis and Indian 

governments as well, but there was none available. 

 

So what we decided to embark on at that time was kind of an 

ambitious plan. We decided that as a community all we had to 

do was create a target for a number of jobs that we wanted to 

create locally. And we also wanted to create X amount of 

profits each year from this corporation and again going after all 

kinds of planning from different sources. 

 

And the plan that we had is, if we could create $3.6 million of 

economic activity based on a 10 per cent, you know, return on 

investment, we’d become a self-sufficient community and at the 

same time we’d create jobs, all the development happening in 

the North. 

 

It was a fairly ambitious project, Mr. Minister, and we wanted 

to do it because it was our community, it was our effort, and we 

wanted to make sure that, you know, we controlled the process. 

Every single community in northern Saskatchewan had the 

same aspiration, but in order for us to begin that work, Mr. 

Minister, we had to fund-raise through the means of bingo 

because there was no direct funding for our local economic 

development association. 

 

So as a result, after a couple of years of hard work and planning 

 and I owe a lot of support to the people that were there  

we eventually got involved with a motel. We eventually got 

involved with the NRT (Northern Resource Trucking) deal. We 

eventually landed a security and custodial contract at Cluff 

Lake, and of course all that certainly had a, you know, positive 

impact on our community. 

 

But the point there is we still looked at the fact that these 

communities have to generate more wealth, and the only way 

that they’re able to generate more wealth is they become 

economically developed. And again the plan there again was to 

get as much as we can so we can start sinking that into social 

development, start coming up with our own solutions. 

 

And all this thinking and talking and brainstorming really, 

really had a challenging task in front of us. But I was surprised 

and amazed at the amount of resilience and the amount of 

commitment people had. So the point that I raise is, I am aware 

of some of the grants that the government awards to northern 

businesses, large northern businesses. 

 

And I just want to ask the opinion of the Minister of Northern 

Affairs here, if he feels that there is any possibility of two 

things happening. Number one, we start using revenues from 

the northern resource sector to direct-finance local economic 

development corporations so they can work hand in hand with 

what they want to do. And the second thing is if there’s any 

grand strategy for northern Saskatchewan communities. And 

I’m talking the communities of Beauval. I’m talking the  

communities of Pinehouse, Descharme Lake, Deschambault 

Lake, Creighton, and so on and so forth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  In regards to the question on revenue 

sharing throughout northern Saskatchewan, I will make the 

point again. If we took all the mining dollars that we’re getting 

 it fluctuates in between 25 and $40 million, depending on 

the level of production  and if we put that back into northern 

Saskatchewan, it wouldn’t even pay for the amount of money 

we spend on education, and education is key in linkage to 

employment in the long run. We need to spend money there so 

that our children are able to then move into the employment 

field in the future. 

 

So what I’m saying is that just in . . . if we took that money 

from the mines and we said let’s use them, it wouldn’t even pay 

for the education system as a whole. And when you look at the 

health . . . I’m not even talking about health costs or social 

services costs. What I’m saying is that we spent $156 million in 

northern Saskatchewan last year  $156 million in all areas. 

What we took out, not only from the mines, but in forestry, in 

leases  in everything  we took out about $90 million. In 

other words, in regards to northern Saskatchewan, there was a 

$66 million-plus for the North in regards to what we take out to 

what we put in. 

 

So we put in $66 million more than we took out in regards to 

resources. So the resources never pay for the total costs of the 

help people get into health, education, social services, and 

economic development and the whole thing. So I think that in 

that sense, you know, our government is on good, solid ground 

in regards to benefits, you know, to the North. 

 

On some key ideas that you mention at the community-based 

approach, I definitely agree with you that it has to evolve from 

the community. One of the key things that was raised with me 

by the mayors this past while was this whole issue of housing. 

And they knew that the federal government was getting out of 

housing, social housing, and we looked at the historical record 

of housing and the developments, even in your own community, 

on the companies and they’re hooking into the mines, etc. 

 

And the carpentry skills and the business skills that evolved 

from Ile-a-la-Crosse alone, and many other northern 

communities, is that in many cases the housing dollars are 

going to be leaving us on the social housing side. And the 

federal government and its different policy on, for example, on 

treaty Indians living off reserve; they don’t pay for that any 

more. The costs increase therefore for the province. In that 

sense even on social services, when they offloaded on that term, 

it was $40 million a year in regards to costs for the province. 

 

So what I’m saying is that if indeed we could form a 

partnership like we did in the ‘70s with the federal government 

in regards to doubling the dollars in economic development, on 

housing, and other areas, we would definitely form a core basis 

for the communities to be able to even double that which is 

already produced. And I think I would agree with you that it 

indeed takes a community approach. 

 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 1996 

Also too I like the initiative of people when they get together 

and work at the community whether it’s to do a raffle, whether 

it’s to do a bingo, whether it’s to raise money in the many 

different forms. My experience has been that people, when they 

do that, when they take the initiative, have a tremendous sense 

of ownership when something is actually done. They feel good 

about it. And I just had that experience in many of the 

communities as I go around, when I see that happen. 

 

Even in this hospital, the province puts in over $9 million and 

the federal government puts in $3 million. But I’ll tell you, the 

$1.4 million that the community raised through bingos, through 

all kinds of fund-raising activities, that felt really strong for the 

people. They felt a lot of pride in seeing their health centre 

grow, etc. 

 

And they’re suggesting the same idea in regards to housing. 

And that’s the point that you make, that indeed this is the way 

to go in regards to the future. 

 

And some of the things that you mentioned that were very good 

— NRT, which is in the majority owned by Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band, did form a partnership with the communities, 

including Ile-a-la-Crosse and others in regards to, you know, 

the sharing of the ownership of the largest uranium mining 

trucking company in the world. 

 

And that indeed this is the type of activity where a local 

community go into something not only as managers or as 

workers but as owners, as part owners of the system. And I was 

very glad to see that you yourself was a leader in that capacity 

in regards to the evolution of development in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think your points were well taken. I’m going to give a little 

point on your trying to raise dollars for a hotel. Recently on our 

northern fund we have provided a loan on development of a 

motel in Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

(2215) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just a final comment, Mr. Minister. I think 

the point that I wish to make tonight to yourself and to the 

Minister of Economic Development and his officials is that in 

northern Saskatchewan the evolution of thinking in terms of 

community development, in terms of social development, and 

economic development, kind of demands that we get in sync 

with what they want, what their aspirations are. The traditional 

approach is no longer going to work. 

 

I think these comments that we make is that I urge you all to 

consider these points that I’m raising, to talk to the people in 

these various communities, on the west side, in the far North, as 

to how we can stimulate the local economy. And I’m prepared 

to work with yourself, with the Minister of Economic 

Development, with every member of this House, if it means true 

economic development that will sustain jobs and people at the 

local level for now and until time ends. So thank you very 

much. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:17 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Health  Vote 32 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1397 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1397 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1398 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1401 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1403 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1404 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Economic Development  Vote 45 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1412 

  Draude ...........................................................................................................................................................................1412, 1414 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1414 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1416 

  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1416 

 

 


