
























































May 28, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1903 
 May 28, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens of Saskatchewan who have some concerns about the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on the petition are from Pilot Butte, from 
Lumsden, from Regina, from Vibank, from Foam Lake, 
Saskatchewan; and from Indian Head, Cupar. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities of the people that have signed the petition are 
from Langenburg, Churchbridge, Marchwell, and Gerald, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions of names of people from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Wilcox, Pilot Butte, Indian Head, and Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from people in Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Weyburn, 
Lemburg, Pense, and the majority are from Regina. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition are mostly from the city of Regina, 
but I notice also Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and other centres in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today to 
present petition of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Foam Lake, Fishing Lake, Sheho, and Wadena, and other 
concerned citizens. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today as 
well to present a petition of names from concerned citizens 
throughout southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by many concerned citizens 
from the constituency of Arm River in the communities of 
Aylesbury, Holdfast, Craik, and I so present. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people regarding the Plains 
Health Centre, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
a number of communities in Saskatchewan including 
communities such as Weyburn, Estevan, Swift Current, 
Yorkton, Grand Coulee, Lipton, Indian Head, as well as Regina 
and Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again we rise 
to protect health care and present petitions of names from 
throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
from Regina here. They’re also from Nokomis and from Silton 
and Kannata Valley and from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr.  



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

Speaker. And I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Communication 
 
Deputy Clerk:  Mr. Speaker, as Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Communication, presents the first report of the 
said committee which is as follows: 

 
Your committee has considered the recommendations of 
the Public Documents Committee, under The Archives 
Act, contained in retention and disposal schedules 
comprising sessional paper no. 167 including schedule no. 
329, departments of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
commissions, boards, bureaux, and other branches of the 
public service of Saskatchewan; schedule no. 330, 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance; schedule no. 331, 
Environment and Resource Management; schedule no. 
332, Department of Justice, sheriff’s office; schedule no. 
333, Department of Agriculture and Food, Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation; schedule no. 334, Department 
of Finance, Public Employees Benefits Agency, tabled this 
first session of the twenty-third legislature and referred to 
the committee by the Assembly on May 23, 1996. 
 
Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 
schedules 329 through to 334 be accepted. 
 
Your committee also reviewed the report of the Legislative 
Library for the period ending March 31, 1992. 
 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Communication be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 65 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance, with regards to revenue 
generated by the northern mining sector: (1) what has been 
the total revenue generated to the province as a result of 
the mining activity in Saskatchewan in 1995; (2) what are 
the anticipated revenues for the province for 1996 in light  

of new mines that are being proposed; (3) what portion of 
these revenues will go to support infrastructure needs to 
support the mining sector in the North, i.e., road and 
airport construction; (4) what concessions have been made 
to attract mining companies into northern Saskatchewan; 
and (5) what amount of revenues do you anticipate for 
1996 with regards to natural gas exploration and activity in 
the North? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 
this opportunity to introduce to you and to my colleagues here 
in the Assembly, some very nice people that are visiting the 
province of Saskatchewan from Calgary. They’re here with a 
group of people on a tour. And I wanted to reaffirm the warm, 
friendly hospitality that not only our province but us in this 
legislature show to all our guests to our province. 
 
Please welcome Doug and Frances Ferguson, and Gerald and 
Sally Longeways, from Calgary; and the people that they’re 
travelling with are with them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, through 
you and to the other members of the Legislative Assembly, it 
gives me great pleasure today to introduce 34 grade 5 students 
seated in the west gallery, from the Wesley M. School at 
Lestock, Saskatchewan; their teachers, Ms. Wolfe, Mr. Squirrel; 
and their chaperons, Mr. Windigo, and Mr. Wolfe. 
 
I want to ask all members to make them welcome here today, 
and hope they enjoy the proceedings and their tour of the 
legislative buildings after and their day off of school. So I 
would ask the rest of the members to help me welcome them 
here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of the Assembly, grade 
3 and 4 classes from Imperial School at Imperial, who are as 
well playing hooky today. However, they did bring some 
teachers with them, in that of Mrs. Barb Tittemore  I’ll maybe 
have you ladies stand when I call your names, so we can see 
who it is  Mrs. Barb Tittemore is a teacher; as well as Mrs. 
Lois Lewis, a teacher. As well as some chaperons with them; 
we have Mrs. Janet Klenk. We also have Mrs. Shirley 
Crittenden. We also have Mrs. Loretta Lamont; as well as Mrs. 
Carol Baade, who is a chaperon today but is also a teacher at 
times at the school. 
 
I’m looking forward to having a short visit with them later on, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to give 
them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the House, 65 grade 8 
students who have come today from Westmount School in 
Moose Jaw. They’re here to watch the proceedings in the House 
and I look forward to meeting them after question period. 
We’re going to gather for a photo. 
 
With them today, Mr. Speaker, are their teachers, Kerry 
Kirkpatrick, Shameem Razvi, and Mike Warms, and I would 
want all members to welcome this large group of students from 
Westmount School in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased and very proud to have a group of students from my 
constituency in the gallery this afternoon, seated in the east 
gallery in fact. I’d like to introduce 16 grade 8 students from the 
Lake Lenore School. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Wade Weseen;  if you 
would stand, please  teacher associates, Trina Buttinger, and 
also just behind the bar, teacher associate Dawn Buckle; and a 
chaperon with them, Tommy Forster. 
 
I would like all members to join me in welcoming the students 
to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Business Enters Partnership with JobStart/Future Skills 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In March the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy gave a member’s statement 
about a couple in Lang, in my constituency. Dean Smith and 
Kimberley Besler are turning good old Saskatchewan rocks into 
new and innovative building products, and in the process, 
helping to make their small Saskatchewan town a viable 
economic centre. 
 
The building products business is called Written in Stone. They 
have another related business connected to Dean’s academic 
training in geology. Geo-Ark Petrographic Ltd. collects rock 
core samples and puts them on microscopic slides for analysis. 
Mr. Speaker, this service is in demand all over North America. 
 
And just as Written in Stone has the potential of providing up 
to 50 new jobs in the next three years, Geo-Ark has entered into 
a partnership with JobStart/Future Skills to take four trainees 
and train them on the job. The four will receive credit from 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) as well as employment. 
 
As a result of its expanding market, Geo-Ark is looking to hire 
two more trainees. Mr. Speaker, this is another example of 
Saskatchewan people expressing confidence in Saskatchewan 
people by training and hiring them to work in Saskatchewan. As 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy said in March, I too am 
happy to live just a stone’s throw away from Dean Smith  

and Kimberly Besler, and I congratulate them on their success. 
Thank you. 
 

Cumberland House Accomplishments 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
recognize the positive developments that have been 
accomplished recently by the people of Cumberland House. 
 
Of course everyone that has worked . . . everyone in the 
community has worked extremely hard to get a new bridge at 
Cumberland House. The $6 million bridge was funded in equal 
parts by the Cumberland House people, the province, and the 
federal government. 
 
Mayor Leonard Morin lobbied particularly hard for this project. 
As part of his campaign he walked from Cumberland House to 
Regina, and through many years his association with SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), also lobbied 
that particular group. 
 
Mayor Morin and past mayors and councillor members also 
tirelessly pursued the SaskPower settlement. Many felt the offer 
by government, and accepted by the community, was a very 
generous settlement because they knew the money was 
desperately needed to stimulate economic activity in the area. 
They used some of the money to build a sportsplex and to 
operate the community farm. It was also used to start other 
social and economic development projects. 
 
Cumberland House continues to aim for other ambitious 
projects, all the while considering the diverse interests of the 
Indian bands, the community, and the special interest groups of 
the hunters and trappers. 
 
I support the initiatives shown by the people of Cumberland 
House and the construction of the bridge. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government House Old-fashioned Picnic 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was my pleasure to bring greetings on Sunday from the 
Government of Saskatchewan at an old-fashioned family picnic 
at Government House sponsored by the Government House 
Historical Society. 
 
With the change in weather Sunday, Mr. Speaker, many 
hundreds of people and their families came out to enjoy the day. 
Sunday’s old-fashioned family picnic was an example of 
heritage programing that re-created both the traditional 
experiences of our past and the spirit of community that made 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The old-fashioned family picnic is a re-creation of the Sunday 
school picnics that were held on the grounds of Government 
House over a hundred years ago. At the time the property 
extended over 53 acres and its colourful gardens and lush lawns 
made it one of the best parks in all of western Canada. 
 



1906 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

Sunday’s event is just one of many activities sponsored by the 
Government House Historical Society. This society is 
committed to ensuring that the heritage of the province remains 
vibrant and accessible to all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I wish to congratulate the Government House 
Historical Society and all its volunteers for a successful sixth 
annual picnic, and hope that you’ll all join me in thanking them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Access Awareness Week Innovation Award 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to extend my congratulations to the entire teaching 
staff at the Pre-Cam Elementary School in La Ronge. They are 
being honoured by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation with 
this year’s presentation of the National Access Awareness 
Week Innovation Award. 
 
Ten years ago the school’s 25 teachers, with support from 
parents and the rest of the community, launched a program to 
better suit the educational needs of special needs children. 
 
In 1986, the Pre-Cam teachers worked to fully integrate a young 
boy with spastic quadriplegia and total blindness into a 
kindergarten class. Through a teamwork approach, the child 
was viewed as a student first, and as a student with special 
needs second. That youngster is now doing well with his peers 
in a grade 7 class at Pre-Cam. The inclusive program now 
accommodates more students with multiple disabilities. 
 
Remarking on their accomplishments, STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation) president, Dwain Drew, said this great 
initiative in La Ronge shows how teachers, with cooperation 
and support, can provide a first-class education to all students. 
 
I ask all member of this Assembly to join me in congratulating 
the Pre-Cam staff for demonstrating such tremendous creativity 
and the willingness to improve the educational environment for 
students in La Ronge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, as it was mentioned 
yesterday, this week is Access Awareness Week. 
 
I am pleased to report today that the staff of a school in my 
constituency is being honoured for an initiative that began 10 
years ago. This initiative was to develop an inclusive program 
that fully integrates students with disabilities into the regular 
school classes. 
 
The Pre-Cam Elementary School in La Ronge will receive the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 1996 Access Awareness 
Week Innovation Award. In 1986 the school’s 25 teachers 
launched a comprehensive effort to change the previous system 
where special needs children were either placed in an institution 
or were only partly integrated into school classes. They did this  

with the support of tutors, consultants, administration, parents, 
the school board, and other agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this program was implemented, the Pre-Cam 
teachers worked to fully integrate a boy with spastic 
quadriplegia and total blindness into a kindergarten class. Staff 
report that the program and the philosophy succeeded; and the 
youngster is now doing well with his peers in a grade 7 class in 
Pre-Cam. 
 
This inclusive program at the school has now carried on to 
accommodate more students with multiple disabilities. This is 
an excellent example of how the integration of Saskatchewan 
special needs students can and should be done. 
 
I would like to extend congratulations to the teachers and staff 
at Pre-Cam School for their hard work in this program; and the 
parents, administration, school board, and everyone who 
supported this initiative that is benefiting many students. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Brad Hornung Receives Award of Merit 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
commend a young Regina man’s pursuit of education despite 
some extraordinary circumstances. During Campion College’s 
convocation ceremony last week, 27-year-old Brad Hornung 
was presented with the college’s Award of Merit. 
 
Brad was tragically injured as a centre of the Regina Pats in 
1987. The accident left him a paraplegic but it did not quash his 
ambition. During the award ceremony, Campion College 
officials explained that Brad was being honoured for his 
extraordinary accomplishments. They said his determination, 
spiritual courage, and endurance, helped propel him to success. 
Campion chaplain, Marcia McGovern, said, and I quote: 
 

Hornung has provided those around him with a model of 
what the human spirit can achieve when the spirit is 
willing. 

 
I would ask all the members of this Assembly to join me in 
extending much deserved congratulations to the courageous 
Brad Hornung. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Last Mountain Times Wins Award 
 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
member from Watrous, and for myself, I want to congratulate 
the Last Mountain Times in Nokomis. Nokomis was in the 
constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood before 
redistribution, and is now in Watrous. But its far-flung 
readership extends into both constituencies and beyond, so I’m 
happy to make the first dual private members’ statement in this 
Assembly. 
 
The Last Mountain Times recently received the prestigious 
Royal Canadian Legion National Media Award. The award was  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1907 

presented to the editors, Lyle and Shirley Emmons, by 
representatives from the Nokomis, Govan, and Semans 
branches of the Royal Canadian Legion  the three branches 
that nominated the Times for the award. 
 
The commendation accompanying the award is worth reading: 
 

The Legion Media Award is presented to newspapers, 
radio, and television stations that have performed valuable 
service to the Royal Canadian Legion branches in support 
of their work in the community. 

 
In short, Mr. Speaker, this is an award of appreciation for 
community work and community involvement, presented, I 
should add, to a paper published and operated by community 
members. With recent events concerning our province’s daily 
papers in mind, I think an award such as this deserves wider 
recognition and general support. 
 
My congratulations to the Emmonses. The member from 
Watrous and I wish them many more years of community 
service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battleford Royal Canadian Legion Memorial Dedication 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Freedom and 
democracy are things we should never take for granted. The 
courage of our veterans paved the way for the peaceful 
communities, provinces, in Canada that we enjoy today. Each 
and every year the Saskatchewan legislature pays tribute to all 
of the people who have served in the military and are currently 
involved. 
 
Last year on May 8, as part of the 50th anniversary of the VE 
(Victory in Europe) Day, there was a sod turning ceremony held 
for a First World War memorial which graces the grounds of 
the legislature building  a long overdue tribute to the 
Saskatchewan men and women who lost their lives in the 1914 
to 1918 war. 
 
On Sunday May 26, 1996, branch no. 9, Battleford Royal 
Canadian Legion, and the ladies auxiliary, held a memorial 
dedication and unveiling of a plaque in memory of the gallant 
men of Battleford and district who gave their lives in two world 
wars. 
 
I wish to extend my congratulations to branch no. 9 for such an 
important contribution to the community and its history, and to 
the many people and organizations for their generous donations 
of time and money. This beautiful plaque will be a reminder to 
all. We will remember them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Long-term Care 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With each passing day  

this government demonstrates its lack of compassion and 
commitments to the seniors of this province, and nowhere is 
this more evident than in the number of long-term care facilities 
that have been closed or drastically cut by the NDP (New 
Democratic Party). 
 
In Swift Current this government has forced the closure of a 
70-bed care centre. Irene Hunter is one of 31 residents who 
does not know where she will be relocated when the doors are 
shut on this facility. 
 
Yesterday I received a letter from her daughter, Noreen 
Klassen, who indicates her mother cannot survive a move, 
adding, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

My sister and I had better get ready for a funeral because 
this will kill her. If you think I’m being melodramatic, I’m 
not. This will be a fact. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health explain why his 
government is prepared to put seniors through such 
life-threatening turmoil? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I certainly recognize, as I 
think any reasonable person would, that for elderly people the 
prospect of moving into another facility is stressful. There’s no 
question about that. 
 
But I’m confident, Mr. Speaker, that the long-term care needs 
of residents of the Swift Current care home will be met 
continuously and properly by the Swift Current Health District. 
And I’m confident that no senior in that care facility will be left 
without good and decent housing. And in fact I go further, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’d say that no senior in this province living in a 
nursing home is going to be left without good, decent, and 
adequate housing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, there are serious concerns about 
the closures of long-term beds  70 in Swift Current; 10 in 
Rose Valley; 22 eliminated in Regina; 20 slashed in Estevan; 
and 30 more beds cuts in Melfort. 
 
The letter from Noreen Klassen states that the Minister of 
Health and the Premier have never had to go through what her 
family is going through; otherwise they would have fought to 
keep this and other nursing homes open. She goes on to say, 
and I quote again: 
 

What are we becoming? What is happening to this 
province when something else is taking precedence over 
taking care of our own? 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is someone who has stated that 
Saskatchewan’s health care system is the envy of the world. 
How then can he sit by and allow economics to take precedence 
over the care of our elderly? Will the Premier put himself in the 
shoes of Noreen Klassen? Can he honestly tell this House that if 
it was his mother who was being kicked out of a care home, he 
would sit idly by and allow this to happen without a fight? 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, there are two competing 
visions here. One vision says that you never change the system 
to make it sustainable; you simply pour more money into it. 
That is the vision of the Liberal Party which is saying we should 
spend more, notwithstanding the fact that they’re taking $50 
million out of our health care system. 
 
The other vision, Mr. Speaker, is one that says we should spend 
smarter within our means, and that’s what we’re trying to do, 
Mr. Speaker. Our vision is to spend smarter within our means, 
to have a sustainable system. It is not, as the Liberals propose, 
to impose large premiums on families in Saskatchewan, to put 
money into the health care system and not to try to modernize it. 
 
And I don’t often quote from the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone, but when she was leader of the Liberal Party, she 
said . . . And I’m quoting from the Star-Phoenix of September 
26, 1991, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

But Haverstock said seniors have their dignity preserved 
when they remain in their own homes and are treated under 
the home care system. 
 

We need both, Mr. Speaker  good nursing home care and 
good community care in the home as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Service Districts Act 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister in charge of Municipal Government was questioned in 
this House yesterday about the fact that they are breaking yet 
another promise. 
 
The minister indicated to rural administrators on May 13 that 
The Service Districts Act would be put on the back burner until 
proper consultation took place. Now she says her government 
intends to push this legislation through but, and I quote, “not 
proclaim it at this particular time until the need for it becomes 
apparent.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SUMA have lost any faith and trust that 
they had in this government because of its hypocritical actions. 
The minister had been using common sense before she was 
apparently overruled by the Premier or cabinet. 
 
Will the minister explain who really is calling the shots, and if it 
is not her, is she prepared to tender her resignation as the 
Minister of Municipal Government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer the question 
on behalf of the government and say to the hon. member 
opposite much along the lines of some of the answer given by 
the Minister of Health to the previous question. 

This government, in consultation with the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, is preparing the province of 
Saskatchewan for the 21st century. The infrastructure of rural 
Saskatchewan was built at a time, 75, 80 years ago, which while 
having served the province very, very well, has undergone and 
is undergoing extreme change and stress from change. One 
example is the abandonment of the Crow rate by the federal 
Liberal government in Ottawa. 
 
Our intention is, and we’re convinced it’s the intention of 
SARM and SUMA as well, is to build the most efficient, most 
responsive, most modern, up-to-date infrastructure system for 
urban and rural municipal governments that we can afford in 
the province of Saskatchewan as part of preparing for the 21st 
century. 
 
All that The Service Districts Bill does is provide a voluntary 
mechanism and an additional tool for local governments to be 
partners with us in that venture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Premier. You just proved 
my point  these decisions are being made from someone 
other than from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister stated in this House yesterday, and 
again I quote, “Participating in The Service Districts Act is 
voluntary.” She has stated that there is no top-down plan and 
yet she has threatened to tighten the purse-strings on local 
governments who do not wish to amalgamate. And now she is 
moving to push The Service Districts Act. 
 
It is little wonder that municipal governments feel that this 
government is preparing to use legislation and funding as a 
means of forcing them to amalgamate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this minister is grasping so much, she indicated to 
the media that this Act may be needed to establish a 
provincial-wide 911 system. This is ridiculous. Current 
legislation would not hinder this issue one bit and the new 
legislation would not help it one bit. 
 
If the minister is truly in control of her portfolio and there’s no 
plans to force amalgamation, will she make a commitment 
today to honour her previous commitment, and will she drop 
The Service Districts Act and give local governments a chance 
to show there is no need for this legislation, and for once, stand 
behind her word? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again, answering on 
behalf of the government with respect to this question, may I 
say that the hon. member’s interpretation of the legislation I 
disagree with and I don’t think that he’s read it carefully 
enough. 
 
But let me repeat again that the purpose of the legislation is to 
provide a voluntary mechanism  a voluntary mechanism  
for rural municipal governments, urban municipal governments,  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

if they wish, to form into a new association in order to eliminate 
overlap and duplication and to provide infrastructure service 
more efficiently. That’s all. That is to say if the Bill is even 
proclaimed. We have undertaken a policy of consultation and 
communication with SARM and SUMA. 
 
We don’t have all the answers, that’s for sure. I’m sure they 
don’t either. But jointly we can work toward preparing the 
province of Saskatchewan for the 21st century. 
 
And with all due respect to the hon. member, I think I’ll take 
the words of SARM and SUMA than I will his words about the 
preparedness of the local governments to work with us. 
 
They are, and we’re going to find our way through to a proper 
and satisfactory solution which will make Saskatchewan and 
rural Saskatchewan stronger than ever before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rental Property Damage Deposits 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is a 
Saskatchewan housing crisis on the horizon. Saskatchewan 
landlords have been asking this government to review its 
damage deposit policy for months. 
 
They met with government officials months ago to present their 
case but they are still waiting for action on this issue. They are 
extremely frustrated by being stonewalled by the government on 
the damage deposit issue. 
 
Now Saskatchewan landlords are threatening to hike rental 
prices drastically to recover costs. Mr. Speaker, does the 
minister have any intent to deal with the landlords’ dispute or is 
it his intention to push the issue off until the end of session 
when it can no longer be debated in this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, once again I wish to 
answer this question on behalf of the government, if I may, in 
order to make it absolutely clear. The position of the landlords 
is under active consideration by the Minister of Justice and the 
appropriate ministries that are involved, because the issue is not 
as simple and one-sided as the Liberal Party would represent 
speaking on behalf of the landlords, as they purportedly do. 
 
There is another very important sector of the population which 
has an interest in this and that is the tenants  tenants who are 
very often at the very lowest end of the social ladder, 
economic-scale ladder. And the landlords’ position has been a 
position which advocates their interests, and you are advocating 
their interests, and you’re ignoring the interests of the hundreds 
and hundreds and hundreds of people who are dependent upon 
accommodation and have another side of the equation. 
 
It’s not an easy circle to square, if I may say so bluntly. And if it 
takes us more time to come up with the right and fair and 
equitable solution, we intend to take the time rather than 
rushing to one side of this debate only, as the Liberal Party  

prepares to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just mention to 
the Premier that they will take the time. Well now is the time. 
This is the time. At least talk to these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice had promised some type of 
resolution to the damage deposit issue by April 1. It’s now May 
28. Saskatchewan landlords believe this is just another in a long 
line of broken promises by this government. The minister 
knows full well and so does the Premier what the consequences 
of his inaction will be. The Saskatchewan Landlords 
Association say, if the government does not review the damage 
deposit issue, they will simply hike their rental prices. 
 
Now many of the people living in rental properties are on social 
assistance, and so I want to know if the minister is prepared to 
tell the taxpayers of this province that if the landlords increase 
their rental rates, the taxpayers will ultimately be responsible to 
pay more, every month of every year, instead of a one-time 
security deposit increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again I rise because I 
took the first question on behalf of the government; I may as 
well follow up on the second one. I can only repeat what I said 
in response to the first question. 
 
All aspects of this very important issue are being considered. In 
fact, as I am told, there is a consideration taken by the tenants 
association which involves an insurance scheme, an alternative 
scheme, or perhaps a more accurate word to use would be a 
complementary scheme, as part of solving this particular 
situation. 
 
We’re going to take the time to consider it. But this requires 
more than simply a question of the damage deposit, as the 
landlords would want and as the Liberals are advocating. I think 
one of the other solutions is what is being demanded by the 
Women’s March On Poverty. I have here in front of me, as one 
of my colleagues has passed to me, part of their literature which 
demands that the federal government create 14,000 units of 
social housing a year. 
 
Now would the hon. member of the Liberal Party get up and tell 
me that she will say publicly, urge publicly, that her colleagues 
in Ottawa should get on with the task of building 14,000 social 
housing units because that is going to help those at the lower 
end of the spectrum a heck of a lot more, a heck of lot more, 
than the question of damage deposits as she is advocating, 
solely and exclusively, only on behalf of the landlords, which is 
what the Liberal Party stands for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Method of Payment for Doctors 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the  



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan Medical 
Association president, Dr. Allan Miller, is very concerned about 
your plan to change the method of payment for doctors. He says 
that many Saskatchewan doctors are afraid that you plan to 
impose a new method of payment on doctors without the 
SMA’s (Saskatchewan Medical Association) consent, and he 
says if that happens, many doctors will leave this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, our health care system is already in crisis, thanks 
to your government. The last thing we need is more doctors 
bailing out of the province. Mr. Minister, will you give the 
commitment today that you will not impose a new fee schedule 
on doctors without the consent of the SMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t agree with the 
member when he says the health care system is in crisis. I think 
if one looked at Conservative Alberta where health care 
spending has been cut by 15 per cent, and per capita health care 
spending is $200 less per person per year than in Saskatchewan, 
that might be a crisis, Mr. Speaker. If you look at Manitoba 
where health care spending was cut $37 million this year 
because they’re not back-filling for the Liberals, that might be a 
crisis. 
 
But I want to say to the member that what we will do, as all 
governments in Canada are doing as part of a national round 
table process, is consult with the physicians, with the public, 
with stakeholders. And, Mr. Speaker, we will consider whether 
there should be some changes in the health care system and we 
will do that in due course. 
 
Is there a plan at the present time to impose some new system? 
No, there is not, Mr. Speaker. And if there is a new system, it 
will be arrived at in consultation with the physicians and all 
other interested people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is for the Minister of Economic Development. 
Mr. Minister, it looks like your shell game over at 
Intercontinental Packers with regards to jobs is continuing. 
 
In April you were talking about all the new jobs that had been 
created and were going to be created at Intercon as a result of 
your $5 million pre-election hand-out. Now Intercon has 
announced the closure of its beef packing department in 
Saskatoon which will mean a loss of 65 to 70 jobs. 
 
Mr. Minister, where were all the new jobs that Intercontinental 
Packers was going to create? Where are they and when are they 
going to come? And why are there jobs being lost at 
Intercontinental Packers in Saskatoon when your government 
promised exactly the opposite? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting. We’ve 
got lots of rain out there and the sun’s shining and farmers are 
out seeding and good news all over the place. And 
Intercontinental Packers, Western Canadian Beef, is expanding  

their beef operation in Moose Jaw, and Intercontinental Packers 
is expanding their hog operation in Saskatoon, and all the 
members opposite can do is whine and groan and pretend the 
sky is falling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite need to pay a little more 
attention to the facts and acknowledge that the plan is 
proceeding as it was intended to proceed  that the 
construction of this facility is moving on target with the plans 
and that we’re well positioned to take advantage of the 
international market for our beef and pork products by this 
expansion of this operation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Service Districts Act 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question this 
afternoon is for the Premier. It’s good to see that he’s been 
getting involved in the discussion today and taking some 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Premier, in the last couple of days we’ve seen your 
Minister of Municipal Government being totally unwilling to 
listen to municipalities, what they are telling her in regards to 
service districts Acts. Municipalities do not want this 
legislation, and it’s time for you to show some leadership. 
 
Mr. Premier, I understand that you will be meeting with the 
presidents of SUMA and SARM later today to discuss this 
legislation. What position will you be taking at that meeting, 
and are you willing to pull this legislation if that’s what these 
municipal leaders ask you to do as they move into the 21st 
century? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again I can only say 
what I have said before. This province is on the bridge, on the 
cusp, of getting ready for a very exciting and very prosperous 
and a quality of life which is unparalleled in Canada for the 
21st century. 
 
I believe that economically and fiscally our house is getting into 
order, and all aspects of change affect all people in the province 
of Saskatchewan including local governments, the urbans and 
the rural municipalities. 
 
I repeat again, the legislation which is before the House is 
voluntary and voluntary only. Nobody can deny that  nobody 
can deny that. That is the actual black and white of the words. 
 
We’re asking the local governments to join us. We’re asking the 
Conservative Party, we’re asking the Liberal Party  although 
I’ve given up on both of them  to look forward to the 21st 
century and making sure that we provide the best possible 
infrastructure, the best possible infrastructure that the people of 
Saskatchewan can afford. 
 
That’s how we built this great province. We have adjusted and 
we have looked forward and we’ve been positive, and I’m sure 
that the municipal and rural leaders understand the necessity of 
doing that as well. 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Taxation 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Madam Minister, it’s been several months now since you first 
announced that you were negotiating the issue of native 
taxation. Those negotiations appear to be going nowhere. In 
fact the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) 
recently threatened to take you to court to get out of collecting 
the PST (provincial sales tax) on reserve. 
 
Madam Minister, what is the current status of these negotiations 
and when do you intend to start charging the PST to status 
Indians on purchases made off reserve? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, to the member 
opposite, I welcome that question. Our commitment is to a tax 
system that is fair — fair to first nations or Indian people but 
also fair to all Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
And we have said consistently that any change in the tax system 
has to meet that criteria. 
 
As far as the discussions with the FSIN go, I do not want to go 
into greater detail because, as you would know from the press, 
there’s a possibility of a court case. All that we have said is that 
a court case is not our first choice as a way to resolve this issue, 
but if a court case does proceed, we obviously reserve the right 
to take to the courts the whole Indian taxation regime. But we 
will ensure that the people of this province end up with a fair 
tax system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, our 
caucus believes in seeing the first nations people become full 
partners in the economy. But with equal rights comes equal 
responsibilities, and that includes paying taxes. Status Indians 
use the education system, the health care system, the highways 
 all of the systems of government, all of which face huge 
funding shortfalls. So it’s only fair to expect the status Indians 
to pay their fair share. 
 
Madam Minister, right after question period the Conservative 
House Leader will be introducing a private member’s Bill 
requiring status Indians to pay the PST off reserve. Will you 
support this legislation? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, I would say to the member opposite that I don’t think 
he’s being exactly fair to the Saskatchewan taxpayers in what 
he’s saying. He’s leading the people of this province to believe 
that they can have it both ways. 
 
We have said to the first nations people that if they want to 
move to a different system such as exists in Manitoba, that’s a 
possibility, because first nations people off reserve in Manitoba 
do pay the E&H (education and health) tax. But what the  

member opposite isn’t pointing out is that in Manitoba there 
also are exemptions available to first nations people that don’t 
exist here. 
 
So please, Mr. Member, stop playing politics with this. We will 
resolve this, first of all, by trying to negotiate; secondly, by 
other means, if necessary. 
 
But I would challenge the members here who are being silent. 
You have at least stated your position. Where do the Liberals 
stand on this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Corporations Review 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
recently announced the date and location of . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. I’ll ask for the cooperation from 
members on both sides of the House to allow the hon. member 
for Thunder Creek to put his question. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, this government recently 
announced the date and location of a number of public meetings 
as part of its review of Saskatchewan’s family of Crown 
corporations. An ad appeared in the province’s major daily 
newspapers last weekend, indicating that this extensive review 
will include SaskTel, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance), SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company). 
 
Mr. Speaker, most people would agree that these Crowns 
should be reviewed but so too should a number of Crown 
investments, some of which have been a drain on Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. 
 
Will the minister tell this House if investments into projects 
such as the Bi-Provincial upgrader will be included under the 
Crown review process. And if so, why is this aspect of the 
Crown review not addressed in the newspaper ads? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, for the information of the 
members opposite, I’ve not seen the advertisements, but it’s 
part of the Crown review that the investment portfolio is also 
under review. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Customer Relations Personnel 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, in the past year, SaskPower has 
closed district offices in rural communities, eliminated the RUD 
(rural underground distribution) program, and increased our 
power bills by as much as 14 per cent to make the Crown 
corporation more efficient; all the while we have heard how 
administrative and management positions have been reduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of this House  



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

a pair of organizational charts which appear in the October ’95 
and December ’95 editions of the HiLines, SaskPower’s 
monthly newsletter, and I’d like to send copies of these over to 
the government members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these charts show that the number of community 
services and community relations personnel more than doubled. 
Does the minister have an explanation? Is it because you need 
more people to address complaints? Or is it because you have to 
justify raises to Jack Messer and Carole Bryant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me 
say to the member opposite that he is right. The corporation has 
gone through a major, internal restructuring with respect to the 
management to try and gain management efficiencies and 
operational efficiencies. And that is a process that I think is 
only a responsible approach in the new, emerging market-place 
where deregulation is taking place. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that the number of 
management people has been considerably down-sized. I want 
to also say to him with respect to customer relations, we will 
put in place the appropriate people to be able to communicate 
with over 430,000 customers in this province. And I want to say 
to the member opposite as well that I think that this government 
has taken a very responsible approach in positioning SaskPower 
to compete in this deregulated market-place. And I want say on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan that the management 
team over at SaskPower should be commended for their vision 
and for their foresight and their decision to act on what could be 
a very serious situation if nothing was done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan’s Credit Rating 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, today all 
Saskatchewan people can take pride in an achievement built 
upon their hard work, dedication, and unfailing optimism. 
Earlier today, Standard and Poor’s, one of the oldest, largest, 
and most influential credit rating agencies in the world, 
upgraded Saskatchewan’s credit rating from BBB plus to A 
minus. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This is the first time in 20 years  
two entire decades  that the province’s credit rating has 
improved so dramatically. 
 
Moving up a bracket in the credit rating system is an unusual 
and significant event. It is international recognition from an 
independent agency of what Saskatchewan people have 
accomplished together. Standard and Poor’s has confirmed why 
Saskatchewan people are feeling more hope and more 
optimism. It is because they see how far we’ve come and they  

know how far we can still go. 
 
It wasn’t that long ago that Saskatchewan faced a fiscal crisis, a 
crisis that cast a dark shadow on our economy, our social 
programs, and our province. When I became Finance minister 
in 1993, our fiscal situation was so bleak that it was practically 
impossible to borrow money in Canada. 
 
The turnaround led by the people of Saskatchewan has been 
remarkable. Today, Standard and Poor spoke about, and I quote, 
“the impressive performance of the Saskatchewan economy, the 
sharp decline in tax supported debt, and the government’s 
commitment to maintain fiscal balance.” 
 
Today our fiscal outlook is dramatically different and better. 
Investors from all over the world now view Saskatchewan as a 
good place to invest. That means our interest bill will go down. 
In the short term, savings on interest costs will amount to $1.75 
million this year alone. But in the longer term it will mean that 
Saskatchewan people will reap the rewards of their past 
challenges and choices. 
 
We can look forward to a future of lower public debt, lower 
interest payments, and all the possibilities that financial 
freedom brings. We can feel more secure about the future of 
our health, education, and social programs. We can feel more 
confident about our commitment to improve the quality of life 
for all of our citizens and leave a better world for our children 
and our grandchildren. Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, can 
embrace the future with a sense of confidence and security. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives us a great 
deal of pleasure to view the members opposite and their 
reaction to the performance that the people of this province 
have put in over the past five years in achieving what is a 
milestone here this afternoon in the announcement of the credit 
upgrade. 
 
Some might say it has been a long time coming. Perhaps some 
might say that S&P (Standard and Poor) was in fact a little bit 
too harsh with this province in terms of its credit grade. I know 
that the members opposite too, although they seem somewhat 
surprised by it this afternoon, when we were in interim supply 
debate not that long ago, it was mentioned by the minister that 
we were going to be looking forward to some good news from 
Standard and Poor. 
 
So we are very appreciative of the efforts made by the people of 
this province in this regard. And the minister suggests that we 
have something like $1.7 million in immediate interest savings 
this year in the province as a result of this. And I would suggest 
and I would mention it to the Minister of Health again, that this 
is something that perhaps you could talk to your Minister of 
Finance about, because again that would be enough money to 
operate a unit such as the geriatric assessment and rehabilitation 
unit in the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
So as I say, on behalf of the official opposition, we do 
congratulate the people of this province for a remarkable  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

achievement. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
indeed good news for the people of Saskatchewan, the province 
of Saskatchewan. Congratulations are certainly in order  
congratulations to the hard-pressed taxpayers of this province 
for all that they’ve had to contribute in the last few years. 
 
We see that Standard and Poor said it is due to the performance 
of the economy. And certainly that is the case, Mr. Speaker. 
Grain prices are up. Interest rates are down. Oil and gas is 
certainly moving along. Those areas of the economy are firing 
on all cylinders, Mr. Speaker. We are finally back to the levels 
of credit of the spring of 1991, and it’s good to see a return. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but the question that I’m sure all the taxpayers of 
this province is wondering, now that we are seeing a rebound in 
the economy of this province, when will we see some tax relief 
in this province to go along with it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 116  An Act to amend The Education 
and Health Tax Act respecting the taxation of 

Saskatchewan Indians off-reserve 
 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to 
amend The Education and Health Tax Act respecting the 
taxation of Saskatchewan Indians off-reserve. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 2:29 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video 

Classification Act 
Bill No. 57  An Act to repeal The Police Pension 

(Saskatoon) Funding Act 
Bill No. 24  An Act respecting The Prescription of 

Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 
Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 
Bill No. 36  An Act to amend or repeal Miscellaneous 

Statutes concerning Municipal Government 
Bill No. 01  An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey 

Nuns) of Saskatoon, being An Act to Amend 
and Consolidate An Act to incorporate St. 
Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon 

Bill No. 02  An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity (Grey 
Nuns) of Saskatchewan, being An Act to 
Amend and Consolidate An Act to incorporate 
the Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of 
Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 03  An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities Act 

Bill No. 04  An Act to Amend An Act incorporating Luther 
College, Regina 

Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 
Bill No.   8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation Act 
Bill No. 73  An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 1983 
Bill No. 74  An Act to amend The Government 

Organization Act and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts 

Bill No. 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act 
Bill No.   3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology 
Bill No. 48  An Act to amend The Animal Identification 

Act 
Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 
Bill No. 90  An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation 

Board Act 
Bill No. 83  An Act to amend The Limitation of Actions 

Act 
Bill No. 93  An Act respecting the Public Disclosure of 

Information related to Individuals who Pose a 
Significant Risk of Serious Harm to Other 
Persons 

Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to 
make a consequential amendment 

Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts respecting 
Highways and Vehicles 

 
His Honour:  In Her Majesty’s name I assent to these Bills. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:33 p.m. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m pleased to provide the answer to 
question 108. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 108 is provided. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Support for Small Business 
 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today I want to focus 
on the fantastic initiative, ambition, and flexibility of 
Saskatchewan’s vibrant small-business sector. At the 
conclusion of my remarks, I will be moving the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly support the important work being done 
by small business in the province to create jobs and 
improve the economy, particularly such as tourism, value 
added processing, and manufacturing. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a recent article by the sometimes thoughtful 
columnist, Dale Eisler, compared Saskatchewan and Alberta. 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

He made the point that a great many people flock to Alberta 
from our province. He seemed to imply that there is something 
inherently wrong with our traditions of governance, rather than 
fully focusing on the Alberta advantage of oil resources 
developed at a time of world shortages and demand. Totally 
ignoring the jest of fate we’ve been handed by choosing to 
settle and survive on the sparse Great Plains of North America, 
he extolled the virtues of no sales tax, ignored the oil royalty 
income of Alberta, and made it seem as if Saskatchewan people 
have no ambition other than to move westwards. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today I want to challenge those notions and 
to indicate to this Assembly the great advances our 
Saskatchewan people are making, taking advantage of our 
proud heritage of social democratic cooperation and collective 
building of a strong social safety net; our history of appropriate 
and constantly evolving state interventionism in the form of 
Crown corporations that give us home office presence and clout 
while simultaneously providing services and job opportunities; 
and our tradition, Mr. Speaker, of just getting on with it and 
getting the job done. 
 
It’s a cute saying, but it’s true, Mr. Speaker  in Saskatchewan 
when you buy a plaid shirt, it comes with the sleeves already 
rolled up. All over the world, wherever Saskatchewanians have 
migrated, we have the reputation for hard work, initiative, 
flexibility, and drive. Now we can at last apply those qualities 
to our own home-grown economy. 
 
It hasn’t been easy carving out a province in the hole of the 
doughnut of this continent, Mr. Speaker. The plains Cree knew 
that this place wasn’t 100 per cent compatible for human 
habitation. They kept moving around but always coming back 
to the lure of the Prairies. The Scottish, English, and Ukrainian 
immigrants who answered the siren call of misleading 
advertisements for land knew this wasn’t an easy place to live. 
Yet they all persevered, stuck with it, stayed together, and built 
strong institutions and services that serve now as the humane 
infrastructure to allow Saskatchewan people to finally pull 
ahead and prosper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje:  The last 50 years may have been great for 
Alberta, but the next 50 or 100 will be Saskatchewan’s time. 
We built a sustainable sense of self-reliance and mutual 
interdependency that will permit us to create jobs and improve 
the economy and make Saskatchewan number one in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Now I’m probably going to say some pretty 
unfashionable things here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, but they 
are things that need to be said. 
 
First, while I know that everyone on this side of the House joins 
me in lamenting the loss of the Crow benefit, I have to say that 
we will survive. It isn’t the end of the world. 
 
Secondly, while I share the concerns the members opposite 
have about the changes they see in rural Saskatchewan, I have  

to say that the unique agrarian lifestyle we built up here over the 
years will not be saved by governments throwing money at the 
problem. That approach was tried in the ’80s and simply 
resulted in a horrendous debt and taxpayer fatigue. 
 
The jobs that rural Saskatchewan needs are not 
government-funded health care jobs. The health care 
infrastructure all over Saskatchewan is changing, in some cases 
because of under-utilization, in some cases because of the 
advances in medical technology, in some cases because of 
changes necessary and appropriate to health care delivery. 
Regardless of the reasons, it is changing. Jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan will come from local people and will be built 
from the ground up. They will not come from government 
tinkering and centralist funding. 
 
Finally, as a social democrat who believes very strongly in the 
important role of government for collective services, I also want 
to emphasize that for governments of all stripes, but particularly 
for ours, given the fiscal, economic, and demographic factors 
we face, the role of government is not to create jobs. Our 
government can help shape attitudes and opportunities, but it is 
local people, local communities, local entrepreneurs, that are 
creating the jobs that will drive us forward, strong and proud, 
into the next century. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje:  In a recent television program, I heard the 
comment: there are two kinds of people  those who wait for 
the bus and those who walk to town. 
 
Well in Saskatchewan we work together collectively to smooth 
out the bumps in the road to town, and now Saskatchewan 
people are demonstrating that they’re the sort of folk who will 
not sit back passively. They’re taking their own destiny in their 
hands. Metaphorically speaking, they’re walking to town 
instead of waiting for the bus. And they’re getting results. 
 
Saskatchewan’s small and medium-sized businesses are taking 
off and prospering. The initiative, ingenuity, and tradition of 
caring for each other and building on our strengths, is yielding 
results. We’ve stopped waiting for the bus. 
 
Indeed, the pivotal moment we stopped was likely the massive 
farm rally in Saskatoon a few years ago where thousands and 
thousands of farmers gathered to demand the status quo, and 
left with the growing realization that they could take their own 
destiny into their own hands. They could stop worshipping 
King Wheat and they could add value themselves to their own 
produce. That rally  one of the key, defining moments in this 
province  was a watershed in attitudinal change. 
 
Local communities are now raising their own investment capital 
and developing their own equity for jobs and opportunities in 
their own communities. They are no longer waiting for the big, 
sexy megaprojects to come from afar, use Saskatchewan 
resources, and then leave town. There is significant value added 
economic activity occurring these days in Saskatchewan, and it 
will only get better. 
 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

Let me move beyond the easy rhetoric now, Mr. Speaker, and 
give you a few examples from all across the province. Out in 
the constituency of Rosetown-Biggar, three small towns are 
taking off and proving they can improve their local economy. 
Beechy, Birsay, and Lucky Lake don’t seem to be natural 
candidates for economic expansion but they’re proving the 
pundits wrong. 
 
They planted 800 acres of Idaho seed potatoes and they’ve 
produced almost 23,000 10-pound sacks of potatoes. The arena, 
which wasn’t getting much use anyway, has been taken over for 
a potato packing plant and 88 people have jobs. That’s one job 
for each 10 acres of planting compared with the traditional, 
conventional agriculture approach of one job for each 3,000 
acres. 
 
Not only have they created jobs, Mr. Speaker, they created 
economic and investment opportunities for themselves and 
others. They’re growing beans, raising pork, and farming fish. 
The local economy is truly fish and chips, pork and beans. 
 
The local airstrip is active. And wonder of wonders, the 
community has just opened up a new motel, so those air 
travellers will stay awhile, sample Saskatchewan tourism sights, 
and spend some money locally. That motel is community 
owned. The local people raised their own equity, and they are 
proving that value added, community economic development 
really does create jobs and economic activity. They’ve moved 
from a situation where they were featured on national television 
on a W5 program as communities that were dying  and were 
desperately trying to keep their local hospital open as a job 
source  to strong, vibrant, and booming towns. 
 
There are other examples. Around Outlook, there’s a farmer 
who diversified in a very creative way. Tired of waiting for the 
price of wheat to bounce up or for governments to invent yet 
another support program, he seeded mint. Now he’s harvesting 
mint oil for peppermints all around the world. 
 
(1445) 
 
In Aberdeen, a couple of local farmers with a great idea went to 
Cargill and convinced them to take a minority equity position in 
a seed-handling plant. In Canora, they got tired of burning the 
flax straw, so now they’ve developed a local community 
venture that may one day result in linen dresses. Around 
Tisdale, the German tourists are paying four times the cabin 
rental rate that anyone in the province would, all for the 
privilege of enjoying the fantastic ecotourism opportunities 
Saskatchewan has. 
 
And in Saskatoon, we have Wanuskewin Park, an aboriginal 
economic development and tourism venture that has exceeded 
anyone’s wildest dreams. That’s on the north-east side of the 
city. Over on the west side, the traffic is very heavy along 
Valley Road. Ventures such as Dr. Dolittle’s Petting Farm, 
Coronation Garden, Floral Acres, Robertson Valley Farms, the 
Strawberry Ranch and the Berry Barn, are proving that farmers 
can roll with the times and change their psychology and their 
output. I dare say that the number of visitors there rivals even 
Wanuskewin. These people have taken agriculture and turned it  

into tourism. The Berry Barn employs 80 people working 40 
acres. That’s a job every half acre. And the freight rate problem 
is minuscule, since people drive away the product themselves. 
 
One more quick example, Mr. Speaker, of how the psychology 
in this province has changed and how the small-business sector 
is expanding and prospering. I commented recently during the 
private members’ statements about the SABEX (Saskatoon 
Achievement in Business Excellence) awards for local ventures. 
One of those I mentioned was a Saskatoon-based company 
called Bioriginal Food and Science Corporation. This is a prime 
example of Saskatchewan people working together, finding 
unique and cooperative business relationships that build on our 
strengths and our traditions, and then carrying them one or two 
steps further. 
 
Bioriginal is a joint venture of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool  
Saskatchewan’s largest corporate entity; Nuvotech, the 
commercialization arm of the POS Plant; Crown Investments 
Corporation, which of course is the commercialization arm of 
the Government of Saskatchewan; Organico, a company owned 
by organic farmers; and finally PGE Canada, the leading 
gamma linolenic acid producer in the world. 
 
Bioriginal took a non-conventional approach to economic 
partnerships, took non-conventional Saskatchewan products, 
used the strength and conviction of organic farmers, and pulled 
together all our Saskatchewan economic horsepower to create 
products that are being marketed around the world. 
 
Bioriginal is a global player, and they are from here and they’re 
staying here, because that’s where their strength and success is. 
Their products, — health and nutrition, cosmetic and skin care, 
pet and vet, as well as pharmaceuticals and mass-market foods 
— are a great example of the economic and job activity that 
Saskatchewan can and will create. 
 
Alberta may have oil, but we have people who are creative, full 
of ingenuity, willing to cooperate in unique ways, and able to 
build upon our social democratic strengths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Regina 
Sherwood: 
 

That this Assembly support the important work being done 
by small business in the province to create jobs and 
improve the economy, particularly such as tourism, value 
added processing, and manufacturing. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to rise this afternoon and second the motion by my 
colleague, the hon. member for Saskatoon Southeast. Mr. 
Speaker, the importance of small business to the Saskatchewan 
economy cannot be over-emphasized and I would like to begin 
my remarks this afternoon by pointing out a few facts in support 
of this statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about small business in 
Saskatchewan, we generally talk about businesses that employ  



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

less than 50 employees and have sales less than 5 million. And 
the impact of small business in Saskatchewan is considerable. 
In the last year for which complete statistics were available, that 
is 1993, the following information came out about our 
small-business sector. 
 
In total, Mr. Speaker, there are 28,042 employer firms with less 
than 50 employees, excluding firms in the primary industrial 
sector of the economy; 92.2 per cent of all firms were small, 
with 66 per cent of them having less than five employees. 
 
Small firms generated 121,500 full years of employment  that 
is 40 per cent of the province’s total employment, Mr. Speaker. 
Small firms also had a payroll of two and a third billion dollars 
 one-third of the provincial payroll, including the private 
sector, in our economy. 
 
Small firms, in addition, created 6,300 or 72 per cent of all new 
jobs in employing businesses; 94 per cent of all new businesses 
created were small businesses. The service sector, Mr. Speaker, 
was the largest sector within the small-business community, 
comprising 41 per cent of all firms, 35 per cent of payroll, and 
43 per cent of the small-business employment; 72 per cent of 
the province’s manufacturing firms were also small concerns, 
comprising 27 per cent of that sector of our economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
From this information it’s apparent that the role of small 
businesses within Saskatchewan’s manufacturing sector is very 
important. And it is increasingly so. Between 1979 and 1993 
the total number of small manufacturing firms rose from 64.3 to 
72.4 per cent and accounted for larger shares of the total 
employment and payroll in our small-business sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Partnership For Growth strategy, recently 
announced by the provincial government earlier this year, also 
takes into account the importance of our small-business sector. 
It was clear in the consultations during Partnership For Growth 
that the people of Saskatchewan want the private and 
cooperative sectors to cooperate and to work together to 
promote economic activity and create jobs. They want their 
government to lay the groundwork for economic development. 
 
They advise that the government could best do that by sticking 
to three key goals  these being to cultivate a positive 
environment for economic growth . . . Government policies 
should therefore encourage rather than hinder people who wish 
to take risks and invest their time and resources in the future of 
the province and in small-business activity. 
 
Secondly, the action plan of the Partnership For Growth 
recommends building upon the existing strengths to realize our 
growth opportunities. Government must nurture the six key 
economic sectors that have been our best opportunities for 
growth, these being agri-value, forestry, mining, energy, 
tourism and culture, and information technology. Finally, the 
Partnership for Growth outlines an action plan to develop 
partnerships and programs to seek full employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my next remarks I’d like to concentrate on the 
tourism sector of our small-business sector. Next week as being  

Tourism Awareness Week in Saskatchewan, I think it only 
appropriate that we focus in and perhaps discuss, take a little 
time to talk about, the importance of tourism, the tourism sector 
of our small-business economy. 
 
And I’d like to put out to you a number of facts about our 
tourism sector that came about here in 1995. Mr. Speaker, 
visitors to and within Saskatchewan spend $1.1 billion 
annually. This money is spent across the province and in a 
variety of businesses. 
 
For example, 130 million is spent in the east-central part of the 
province, that is, east of Saskatoon from Prince Albert National 
Park south to Fort Qu’Appelle, in the following sectors: 41 
million in transportation, including gasoline; 36 million on 
retail items and other miscellaneous expenditures; 20 million in 
restaurants and bars; 15 million in accommodations; 8 million 
in recreation activities and entertainment; and 7 million in food 
and beverages from stores; and finally, 3 million in prepaid 
packages. 
 
Tourism, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan’s fourth largest export 
industry with 273.3 million in receipts from out-of-province 
visitors. Tourism provided an estimated 40,500 tourism-related, 
full- and part-time jobs in Saskatchewan in 1994, employing 
one in every twelve of Saskatchewan people. Almost half of the 
jobs are in the food and beverage business, 20 per cent in 
commercial accommodations, 4 per cent in adventure and 
outdoor recreation, and sixteen and a half per cent in 
transportation; and finally 8.1 per cent in tourism attractions. 
 
These jobs, Mr. Speaker, are expected to grow an average of 3 
per cent per year, three times the rate of employment growth in 
other industries, to more than 56,000 jobs by the year 2005. 
Approximately 900 individuals are currently involved in the 
Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council, or as we call it here, 
STEC; 900 people are involved in STEC’s certification process 
in 18 key tourism occupations, a level of participation second 
only to Alberta among Canadian provinces and territories. 
 
Overall, more than 10 million trips are made in Saskatchewan 
every year. In 1995, 104,000 U.S. (United States) residents 
entered Saskatchewan directly to spend one or more nights, Mr. 
Speaker, the highest number in the last five years and an 
increase of 6.8 per cent over 1994. Our total U.S. visitors 
number about 270,000, and they spend a total of 640,000 
tourism nights in the province. According to Price 
Waterhouse’s survey of hotel vacancy rates, Regina and 
Saskatoon reached 69 per cent occupancy in 1995  one of the 
highest rates among major Canadian cities and well above the 
national average, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Inquiries to Tourism Saskatchewan from 
potential tourists reached a record 203,060 last year  a 1 per 
cent increase over 1994, and a 93.9 increase since 1991. U.S. 
residents account for 68.2 per cent of all inquiries. 
 
In 1995, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s provincial parks 
recorded 2.3 million visits  their best season in over five  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

years. Based on attendance, Saskatchewan’s top 10, 1995 
events were Mosaic in Regina, which starts again this weekend, 
Saskatoon Folkfest, Buffalo Days, the Saskatoon exhibition, 
Canadian Western Agribition, the Saskatchewan Air Show, the 
Great Northern River War Championship Series, the 
Saskatchewan Jazz Festival, the Prince Albert exhibition, and 
the Western Canada Farm Progress Show. 
 
Saskatchewan’s top 10 attractions, based on 1995 attendance 
levels, were the Saskatchewan Science Centre, the Western 
Development Museums, the Mendel Art Gallery, the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum, Manitou Springs Resort, the 
MacKenzie Art Gallery, Wanuskewin Park, the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) Museum, the Allen Sapp Gallery, 
and the Ukrainian Museum of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And, I’m 
told, Twenty Fifth Street Theatre of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those facts certainly demonstrate the importance 
of tourism in our sector, in the small-business sector of our 
economy. I’d like to, in concluding my remarks this afternoon, 
I’d like to point out that there has been some important 
developments in the tourism sector. 
 
This spring the major players in Saskatchewan tourism have all 
amalgamated under the authority of the Saskatchewan Tourism 
Authority. This spring the tourism ministry association, that is 
TISASK (Tourism Industry Association of Saskatchewan), 
joined in or merged with the Tourism Authority on May 1. 
 
The Saskatchewan Tourism Education Council, which I talked 
about a little earlier, STEC, merged on May 1, and the tourism 
development branch of Saskatchewan Economic Development 
 all merged into the Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Authority. 
 
And from a recent newsletter — sorry — of the Saskatchewan 
tourism agency, I’d like to quote Mr. Randy Williams, who’s 
the CEO and general manager of the Tourism Authority, on this 
merger, who had to say that: “All this re-organization is 
exhilarating . . . ” and of great potential and promise for tourism 
in the years to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next week is Tourism Awareness Week. I think 
we can take this opportunity to congratulate them on that and 
with that I’d like to conclude my remarks by seconding the 
motion that . . . 
 
The Speaker:  The member’s time has expired to be able to 
continue. Debate will continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1500) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a small-business 
owner, I am just delighted to join in on the debate moved by the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast. The motion put forward is 
one of extreme importance, and I must say I am very glad and a 
little shocked to see that the members opposite finally realize 
just how much importance and significance the small-business 
sector in Saskatchewan truly has. It has taken them a long time  

to realize this but it is encouraging to see that the light has 
finally started to come on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that I support the motion, but I 
sincerely believe that there is a great deal more that needs to be 
said. I want to say to the members opposite that it is no where 
near good enough to simply put forward a motion and stand up 
and give a speech saying how great things are in the 
small-business sector. This NDP government is famous for 
paying lip-service to the critical components that make our 
economy in Saskatchewan what it is. 
 
Our business people are amongst the best in the world. They are 
hard working, innovative, and dedicated. They want to see their 
businesses and ultimately our province grow and get stronger as 
we move into the next century. 
 
The businessmen and women of our province never cease to 
amaze me. Many of their businesses have continued to play a 
key role in our economy in spite of the environment created by 
this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite repeatedly claim that all I 
ever do is preach doom and gloom. Well I want to say to them it 
is not preaching doom and gloom, it is telling the cold, hard 
truth that they’ve chose to ignore. 
 
Our business sector is faced with so many obstacles that it’s no 
wonder I receive phone calls every day from business 
communities concerned about what this NDP government has 
done to the business environment in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are taxed to death. Their utility rates 
have sky-rocketed. They are burdened with restrictive labour 
legislation and over-regulation. Yet our business people have 
restructured and streamlined their own operations in order to 
survive. I commend them for that, but I can’t help but wonder 
where they would be if it weren’t for the roadblocks that were 
set up by this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I honestly believe that the men and women who 
make up our business community would be leaps and bounds 
ahead of where they are right now if this government would 
allow it. I cannot for the life of me figure out why the 
government is so determined to derail Saskatchewan’s business 
sector. It seems like they have made a promise to make it as 
difficult as possible for businesses to survive in this province. 
Mr. Speaker, I hope this follows suit with all the other broken 
promises of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of examples of businesses that 
feel they do not have much of a future if this government 
continues on its current path. McCutcheon Pharmacies in Foam 
Lake says, and I quote: 
 

The provincial economy is being smothered in high taxes, 
high utility rates, and consumer pessimism. I don’t believe 
this community has a viable future beyond 10-15 years if 
deterioration continues at the current rate. Government 
can’t help but (we) must do all it can to get out of the way. 
 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

I think this statement holds true for many small-business 
owners in this province. There is so much that these people can 
take . . . only so much they can take, and this NDP government 
is pushing them to the brink of destruction. The members 
opposite can call it doom and gloom but unfortunately it’s 
reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the owner of the two Lorne drug stores in Regina 
says, and I quote: 
 

I am concerned with the provincial government’s stand on 
reimbursement for pharmacy services. The government 
does not want to look at any increases while pharmacists 
are looking at ways that will increase pharmacy services 
and decrease the overall cost of administrating and paying 
for the Saskatchewan Drug Plan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that small-business owners all over 
Saskatchewan are feeling the effects of this government’s 
arrogance. Businesses both big and small are facing many 
difficult challenges. The business development director from 
DCLS told me, and again I quote: 
 

It goes without saying that our clients expect quality 
products and services. Only now they want them twice as 
fast and at half the cost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if business is doing all it can to adapt and compete 
in an ever-changing market-place, this government has done 
nothing but knock them down every time they take a step 
forward, whether it be workmen compensation rate increases, 
utility rate hikes, new occupational health and safety 
regulations, and the list goes on. As a small-business owner in 
Saskatchewan, I fully understand the frustration that the 
business community is feeling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all we need to do is take a look at the number of 
businesses that have gone bankrupt in the last few years. In 
1993 there were 400 business bankruptcies in Saskatchewan, 
and in Manitoba there were 266. In 1994 Saskatchewan saw 
411 business bankruptcies and Manitoba saw 260. In 1995 
Saskatchewan had 365 business bankruptcies and Manitoba had 
210. When you add this all up, Saskatchewan experienced 
1,176 business bankruptcies in the past three years compared to 
701 in Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t look like 1996 is going to be any better. 
In the first two months of this year, 73 businesses have already 
gone bankrupt compared to 48 in Manitoba. The number of 
employees in 1995 in Saskatchewan declined by 1.8 per cent  
the largest decline in five years. I think these numbers speak for 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite need to realize that 
everyone suffers when the economy suffers and everyone 
benefits when the economy grows. It seems like such a simple 
concept to understand, but apparently they just don’t get it. If 
they did, they would understand that they would be the one that 
would take action rather than paying lip-service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at what is hindering economic  

growth in Saskatchewan, it comes to five major problems. 
There are tax burdens, labour laws, limited growth opportunity, 
debt and instability of taxes, and a lack of financing. 
 
All of these problems are due in large part to this NDP 
government. They are the ones who increased nearly every tax 
possible. Saskatchewan citizens have hit the tax wall. They 
have imposed restrictive labour laws and have impeded 
businesses from growing. When it comes to the provincial debt, 
the finger must be pointed at the previous Tory administration, 
and now the third party in Saskatchewan. A lack of financing is 
only a problem for those businesses that the Minister of 
Economic Development decides not to help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the result of these problems or issues is 
devastating. According to CFIB (Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business), 16 per cent of businesses surveyed are 
considering leaving Saskatchewan; 12 per cent are planning to 
move; and 6 per cent may move some of their operations out of 
the province; 18 per cent of the small businesses are competing 
with government in Saskatchewan. 
 
I can’t say enough to the members opposite. Everyone will be 
made to suffer if they continue on their current path. Mr. 
Speaker, in closing, I am asking the members opposite to please 
take a good, hard look at what is really happening in the 
business community. It’s one thing for the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast to put forward a motion and then attempt 
to tell this Assembly how wonderful everything is, but that’s 
nothing more than lip-service. 
 
You are in the position to go to your cabinet colleagues, go to 
the Minister of Economic Development, go the Premier, and 
don’t be afraid to tell him about your concerns. It is your job to 
represent your constituents. I know that you receive the same 
sort of phone calls and letters that I do from people worried 
about how their business is going to survive if action isn’t 
taken. 
 
There are some very serious business concerns in the 
community and they need to be addressed. Mr. Speaker, there’s 
no doubt that I support the work being done by small businesses 
in this province. Small business is a very significant employer. I 
know full well the importance of every small business in the 
province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to put forward an amendment to the 
motion by the member from Saskatoon Southeast: 
 

That this Assembly support the important work being done 
by small businesses in this province to create jobs and 
improve the economy by all small businesses. 
 
And further, that this Assembly encourage the government 
to remove the roadblocks facing small businesses in 
Saskatchewan, such as stifling taxation; restrictive labour 
legislation; over-regulation; and unfair tendering policy, 
such as CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement), which are hindering the business growth and 
economic development of this province. 
 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  This motion is seconded by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
The Speaker:  I’ve not had advance notice of the 
amendment. I’d just like to take a moment to reflect on whether 
it’s in order. 
 
I will recognize the hon. member for Kelvington-Wadena who 
may wish to rephrase her amendment. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make an 
amendment saying: 
 

That this Assembly support the important work done by 
small businesses in the province creating jobs and 
improving the economy 
 
and deleting the rest of the sentence, and adding in the 
following: 
 
by all small businesses; and further, that this Assembly 
encourage the government to remove the roadblocks facing 
small businesses in Saskatchewan, such as stifling 
taxation; restrictive labour legislation; over-regulation; and 
unfair tendering policies, such as CCTA, which are 
hindering business growth and economic development in 
the province. 

 
Seconded by the member from Melfort Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
very pleased to be able to join in the debate this afternoon 
because it is a very important question in front the people of 
this province and of this legislature. 
 
I also have to say that I was very pleased to listen to the 
comments made by the member from Saskatoon Southeast in 
their initial remarks in moving the motion. And I have to say 
that in almost in its entirety I’m in agreement with the 
statements that were made by the member. 
 
I also have to say that the member from Regina Sherwood and I 
are also very much in agreement in terms of pointing out all the 
very unique and creative features of this province’s mosaic that 
are important to our economic development. 
 
And I think that it is really important that I acknowledge the 
fact that I’m very much in agreement, and it doesn’t mean so 
much that I have changed, but I have to acknowledge how 
much the members opposite have changed. Because when I 
trace back the history and I look back at where we’ve come 
from in the history of this province, it’s a very different type of 
party that’s sitting opposite today than what there was 25 years 
ago when the catchword was to nationalize and socialize and 
come out with government and the family of Crown 
corporations, and all the wonderful slogans that this party and 
the government that they represent used to think was what was 
needed in this province. 
 

And unfortunately, the opportunities that we now have before 
us in this province are not something that are just new to the 
1990s. These opportunities were always here, and unfortunately 
the people that embraced the opportunities of the importance of 
small business in this country were generally living to the west 
of us, and to some extent to the east of us, and in Ontario, and 
you saw the benefits from Saskatchewan of what a province and 
a government of a province that embraced the principles of 
small business . . . how much they could move ahead into the 
future when they had realized that fundamental fact. 
 
(1515) 
 
And so I’m very pleased to hear the kind of comments that the 
two members opposite made in this debate. Because it would 
seem to me at least, with a great deal of hope, that you’re 
beginning to understand that the real engines of growth and 
development, of job creation and prosperity, of self-satisfaction 
and pride and self-worth, are not government activities but are 
the activities generated by individual people in small 
businesses, in farms, in the way they approach their individual 
jobs . . . are all the fundamentals that I’m very pleased to see 
you suddenly, maybe gradually but certainly, have come to 
realize. 
 
Unfortunately, you still carry a little bit of baggage around, 
because I also see when I look at the atmosphere of 
Saskatchewan, that there are things that certainly are still 
impediments and are hold-backs to your past lives before 
you’ve sort of seen the new light. 
 
And they are the kinds of things that have been raised by my 
colleague from Kelvington-Wadena in her amendment which 
says that although there has been a great deal done and that a 
great deal of progress has happened in regard to the atmosphere 
about small business, there is still much to be done and much 
that this government has to recognize that is standing in the way 
of small-business development. 
 
You know, very often we’ve come with the mentality in our 
baggage that first of all, the only business that does business is 
large business, and that we have to gear all the labour 
legislation and all these kinds of things towards large business 
 the atmosphere that happened perhaps out of the Industrial 
Revolution where there were these large corporations that took 
advantage of their workers. 
 
In Saskatchewan and in small business, I don’t think we realize 
often enough how close the relationship is between employer 
and employee, how much that that relationship is built on 
mutual trust and respect, on caring for each other and our 
families. Because I think in Saskatchewan in small business, 
both employer and employees realize in almost all instances 
that they’re in it together. They both have interests in making 
that business succeed and that it isn’t an atmosphere of 
confrontation and conflict, but one of mutual respect and 
working together to see to their interests. 
 
And quite often what we’ve done when we’ve put together 
labour legislation and some of these practices . . . are still 
throw-backs to the days when the unions saw themselves as the 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

adversaries and the sole protectors of the individual worker 
against the large and evil business person. And that’s just 
simply no longer true in most instances and I think that we have 
to recognize that fact. 
 
And so we end up with situations that are throw-backs to that 
kind of an attitude. And I point in particular to things that we've 
raised over time that are still impediments to the progress of 
small business into this province. I can point to things like the 
CCTA, that has been documented as a policy and legislation 
that has indeed increased cost to the taxpayers in Saskatchewan 
for those projects that fall underneath its mantle by 30 per cent. 
That’s a fact. It’s been acknowledged as such. 
 
We can sit and argue about what that amounts to in terms of 
total numbers. We can take the Minister of Economic 
Development’s figures of $30 million; we can take the $15 
million that was tabled; we can take the $630 million of capital 
project in the Finance minister’s budget. That’s not the point. 
 
The point is that we have a policy that favours union preference 
over the non-union contractors and businesses in this province. 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is an impediment to the small-business 
environment. There’s no other way of explaining it. 
 
We can say, and the argument has been made, that it was 
necessary to make labour peace. Well it’s real easy to make 
peace when you give one segment everything they ask for. I 
guess you’ve got peace. They’ve got everything they want. And 
that’s not the way you make peace. You make peace by 
recognizing what’s the real engine of your economy  it’s 
small business. 
 
We can look at the changes in labour legislation and some of 
the other factors there that have created unfair impediments, 
again based on the past belief that somehow employers were 
out to exploit workers. And that’s simply not true. 
 
We’ve put changes into place and now we look at regulations 
and we have to have studies done as the impact of regulations 
to things like occupational health and safety. And no one in this 
province . . . there is no one, employer or employee, that wants 
to have any kind of an unsafe workplace. 
 
As a small-business person myself, the worst thing that I can 
have happen is that an employee is injured. It affects my 
business, it affects the workplace, it affects their family, it 
affects my needs in terms of training other people. It is 
absolutely, if for nothing else, motivated by business 
self-interest to make sure the workplace is absolutely as safe as 
humanly possible. That is a truth in every aspect of business. 
 
And we know that accidents will happen. And we just simply 
cannot legislate for every conceivable eventuality, because 
we’re just absolutely going to stifle any initiatives that are being 
done. So we have to take a new atmosphere in this regard. 
 
You know, we have other areas that create an un-level 
playing-field that is very, very difficult. The government said 
that they wanted to take some real major efforts in order to  

reduce and remove a lot of the red tape that’s in government. 
And that’s particularly important for small businesses. 
 
Small businesses are not those kinds of businesses that have 
large staffs, that have accountants and financial experts and 
controllers, and all kinds of people available to do all the 
paperwork, to meet all the requirements for filing and entering 
kinds of data for government statistics and information. They’re 
the ma and pa operations that spend most of their time 
hands-on, dealing with what the business is all about. And most 
of them find that doing all of this extra paperwork for 
regulational requirements is really something that does not 
contribute a lot to their desire to do business in this province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I really believe that it is important that we 
recognize that the real engines of growth in this province are 
not the megaprojects. I think that’s an important thing to state 
and important to recognize. 
 
They’re the kind of businesses that are in every community, 
urban and rural, that believe in what they’re doing as a service 
to their neighbours and potential customers, who use the 
innovation of this province. And it maybe is the kind of thing 
that was born out of the difficulties of climate or whatever over 
the years that has made a breed of people that are really special, 
that can succeed if we give them the opportunity. And I really 
encourage this government to do everything that it can to use 
the common sense approach that realizes that business and 
employers are not adversaries — they’re partners in the 
economic development of this province — and that small 
business is the heart and soul of what’s going to bring this 
province to prosperity. 
 
And so I strongly encourage you to vote in favour of the 
amendment. And I also support the general thrust of the motion. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m particularly 
pleased to follow the two Liberal members who have recently 
spoken on this motion because I think it’s important that we put 
this issue back in perspective. 
 
And I hate to bring the facts into any argument because they 
tend to cloud what the Liberals attempt to draw into the debate, 
but I think we need to go back to some of the basic premisses 
that the members opposite have presented because they’re 
factually incorrect. Now this isn’t unusual for our Liberal 
friends. 
 
But what we need to look at is not a case of the glass being half 
empty. Rather this glass is half full in this province. It has been 
refilled because of the good work of this NDP administration. 
And it’s about time that the members opposite recognized that. 
 
Now they say that . . . I take a look, and they say, well the jobs 
that are being created have nothing to do with the government. 
And yet it’s interesting because they stand up constantly in this 
House and talk about what the government is doing on job 
creation. Take a look at the April job stats. And it’s interesting 
to note that one in every eight jobs created in this country  
one in every eight jobs created in this country  was created 
here in Saskatchewan, here in Saskatchewan under an NDP  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

administration. 
 
I find it interesting that the member for Kelvington says 
business bankruptcies are up; business bankruptcies are causing 
us problems. And yet Dale Botting doesn’t agree with her. In 
fact according to Dale Botting, that we are one of only two 
provinces to continue to experience a decline in bankruptcies 
this year. Bankruptcies are down, Madam Member. 
Bankruptcies have dropped every year we have been in office 
since 1991. I don’t understand why they refuse to recognize the 
facts. 
 
We’ve got the member from Melfort talking ad nauseam again 
about the CCTA. Now we debated this last week, and last week 
we called them on their facts again. Now the member is slowing 
drifting his number down from $110 million in inflated cost; 
I’m not sure where it’s drifted down to yet. If this session lasts 
maybe another 100 days, we’ll get close to where the facts are. 
It has not increased the costs. This is not a pro-union policy. 
This is about labour fairness. The only reason we’ve had to 
rebalance the scales, I say to the members opposite, is because 
of the right-wing rhetoric that their party continues to 
perpetuate throughout this province. 
 
What we need is a balance, and that’s what this government has 
been establishing. It hasn’t been a pro-union government. It 
hasn’t necessarily been a pro-business government. It has been 
a government that has been balanced in everything, from its 
budgets to its priorities. And it’s time the members opposite 
recognized that, absolutely time they recognized that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one point that we do all agree on is that small 
business is extremely important to the growth and prosperity of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. There’s no doubt about that. In fact 
we have seen remarkable growth over the past five years, by 
and largely, what has happened in the small-business sector. 
 
It was only  hard to believe  it was only 1991, a mere five 
years ago, that we saw retail sales actually slump. We saw 
negative growth in retail sales. I’d remind the members 
opposite that one of the reasons for that was the oppressive tax 
policy of the Conservative Party when they were in office. You 
might remember that being the harmonized PST-GST (goods 
and services tax) regime that they had introduced. That caused a 
7 per cent slump in retail sales. 
 
The first act of this government in 1991 was to repeal the 
harmonization  was to repeal the harmonization  and the 
results continue to pour in. We have seen three consecutive 
years of substantial growth in retail sales, and in fact this is the 
fifth consecutive year of growth in excess of inflation in the 
province of Saskatchewan’s retail sales. And yet is there a 
single word from the members opposite about the importance of 
that? No. 
 
And I would venture to say that if anything, they are defenders 
of the federal Liberal policy that will turn back the clock, that 
will harmonize those two taxes again. What does that do to the 
business climate? What does that do to the small-business 
people? What does that do to the people whose jobs depend on 
it? I’ll tell you what it does. It threatens them. 

So while it’s fine to listen to the right-wing rhetoric from the 
members opposite, I think that it’s time that they started to take 
a look at what’s really happening here. We have a government 
which is listening to business. We have a government that is 
dealing with the taxes by putting them back into a sensible 
regime that is fair. 
 
We are also dealing with things in terms of the construction 
industry, and I want to relay a very brief story. I had the 
pleasure recently of representing the Premier at the 
Saskatchewan architects’ association annual meeting here in 
Regina and saying a few words to them. It was interesting 
touring through the trade show and talking to various people as 
they were telling us about how their businesses had come back 
over the last several years, and how much more confident they 
were about Saskatchewan’s prospects and Saskatchewan’s 
economy. 
 
And it reminds me of talking to a couple of employees from a 
small firm that builds playground equipment. It was interesting 
that they were speaking in quite glowing terms about the 
positive things that the Government of Saskatchewan have been 
done. Now I know that the member from Kelvington-Wadena is 
well aware of the importance of this because in fact it was her 
firm that was talking about the benefits of this government’s 
regime in terms of promoting a positive, stable business 
environment. 
 
Now it’s interesting that she talks one way when she sits here in 
the House, and yet when she goes home and profits from the 
benefits of the improved business climate, she doesn’t 
complain. I mean this is just another example of the duplicity of 
the members’ opposite, playing petty, cheap politics. And I 
think it’s time that they come clean in this Assembly and it’s 
time that they come clean with the Saskatchewan people and 
recognize that government, business, labour, are working in 
partnership. 
 
That’s what this is about. We are not putting in roadblocks. We 
are not creating impediments. We are removing them. And the 
sooner the members opposite recognize it the better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen many positive things happen in this 
province since this government took office, and particularly in 
the second term. It’s interesting to note that we have had the 
third highest annual provincial growth in our GDP (gross 
domestic product), the third highest in the country. I think that’s 
something to be quite proud of. 
 
I think it’s interesting that even when we start to look at it at the 
local level  I mean apart from the fact that we know 
provincially bankruptcies are down, we know that employment 
is up, we know that the business environment is better, we 
know the tax regime is stabilized  we’re still working with 
businesses at the local level to help them achieve what their 
objectives are. 
 
(1530) 
 
And that’s really what the Partnership for Growth is all about. 
We’re doing it through the tourism sector, we’re meeting with  



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

the hoteliers’ association, we’re dealing with the retail food and 
beverage sector. Mr. Speaker, there’s not a part of this business 
community we’re not dealing with. 
 
And it marks a very different approach from what the Liberal 
members opposite are . . . When business asks the members 
opposite to meet, they decline. They run; they hide. The 
member for Thunder Creek is notorious for it. He is the only 
member of this Assembly to have been openly criticized for 
driving away business in this province. I think that’s something 
that the Liberal members should hang their head in shame 
about. 
 
They talk about how we’re too caught up on the Crown 
corporations, yet it’s interesting that three of the most 
successful companies in this province originally started as 
Crown corporations. You hear no mention of the fact that 
Cameco used to be a Crown corporation; no mention of the fact 
Wascana Energy was once a Crown corporation. No mention of 
the fact, of course, that Crown Life has been enabled largely 
because of its investments from the province. 
 
And the members opposite continue to neglect these facts 
because they are ideologically hidebound. Ideology is a 
dangerous, dangerous thing, and the members opposite practice 
it in such a . . . I’m not even sure what the word is, Mr. 
Speaker; it is just such a negative approach to the business 
environment rather than recognizing that we can build 
partnerships, which is what this government has done from 
1991 on. We have worked with business. I would encourage the 
members opposite  vote against your amendment. Drop the 
amendment and recognize that government and business and 
labour are working together to create jobs in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be voting against the amendment. I encourage 
all members to vote against the amendment and go back to 
supporting the original motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m just 
noticing the motion. I was following the . . . I’ve been 
following the debate and I’ve been following it with some 
interest. And I find it interesting that the member from 
Saskatoon would be bringing forward such a motion. But I 
think it’s an indication that there are some members on that side 
of the Assembly who do recognize the role that the 
small-business community plays in this province and the fact 
that they happen to be one of the major economic engine 
generators in this province. 
 
But listening to the member from Regina South, one would 
really have to wonder if businesses could survive without an 
NDP government. The way the member was talking, the way 
the member was bringing . . . his comments were coming 
forward, Mr. Speaker, you’d think that the only reason small 
business survived in this province was due to the government. 
 
Well I would like to remind the member that the growth in this 
province is not due to the policies of this government. Growth 
has happened in spite of the negative policies of this  

government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  I remember reading an article by the noted 
columnist in this province, Mr. Eisler  I think it’s about a 
month ago, Mr. Speaker  talking about the economy. And I’m 
not sure if the member from Regina South goes downtown 
Regina, whether he goes down Scarth Street or whether he goes 
down Hamilton Street or whether he just takes Saskatchewan 
Drive direct to the casino. Because if you go down Hamilton 
Street or Scarth Street, it’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, the 
number of empty businesses sitting in downtown Regina or 
even around the city of Regina. And it’s not just Regina, Mr. 
Speaker; it’s all across this province. 
 
So while we talk about small businesses being the economic 
generator, what has happened in the last few years, despite a bit 
of a turnaround in the economy of this province, small 
businesses are facing the difficulties, facing some very difficult 
times. And while retail sales have increased in certain venues or 
certain businesses, for many small businesses they haven’t 
increased substantially to offset the costs of operating a small 
business — and in many cases the costs that have been 
implemented and imposed on small businesses by this 
government. 
 
So I say, despite these policies, there are businesses that are 
surviving and doing well, and we’re certainly grateful in the 
province for these businesses. Mr. Speaker, when I talk about 
small businesses, I talk about businesses in the communities of 
the Moosomin constituency. And I certainly run into people 
every day in communities like the Whitewoods and the 
Moosomins and the Grenfells and the Kiplings of this world. 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, when you go around this province, 
you find that there are communities that seem to be very vibrant 
and their small-business sector is doing very well. There are 
other communities where that small-business sector is doing 
very poorly, and businessmen and women will tell you that they 
become very discouraged. 
 
The member from Regina South in particular talked about the 
harmonization and talked about what the federal Liberals are 
doing to harmonization today. Well I kid you not, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that in many cases harmonization would simplify the 
tax process. And if the member says it wouldn’t have done 
anything for the small-business community, what the GST has 
done, the small-business communities across this province, 
across this country, do get a credit for the expenses incurred in 
operating that business. And if the tax was harmonized, they 
would get it as well on the provincial side not just the federal 
side. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it’s fair to just totally criticize 
harmonization because harmonization would have done, as I 
said, two things: it would have simplified tax collection; it 
would have also given the business community the ability to 
create, generate, and get that return of the provincial sales tax 
on the expense side — the expense side which has grown, such 
as their telephone rates, power, and energy rates; they would 
have had that benefit. They don’t have it today. 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

But, Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting. What I really like to 
think about as when I think of small businesses in our province, 
is the fact that they have, many if not all, have built their 
businesses based on a firm desire on their part to establish a 
business, provide a service, and work hard. And through their 
hard work ethic and through their long hours and the way they 
have provided a service to the community, many small 
businesses have done very well. And they certainly have been a 
real strength in our constituencies and certainly in this province. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve talked to many of the small 
businesses, and certainly I look at the different routes that go 
through this province and many outside of the major highways, 
No. 1 and the Yellowhead Route, a number of businesses in 
different areas such as the Red Coat Trail that runs from 
Redvers through Carlyle, through Weyburn and Assiniboia, 
many of these businesses along those small communities, as the 
motion talks about, talks about tourism . . . businesses have got 
together to promote their aspect and their areas of the province 
and suggest that people should look at when they come to the 
province of Saskatchewan, don’t just get on No. 1 and drive 
through or don’t just get on the Yellowhead and drive through, 
but come and see what we have in other areas of the province. 
 
I think of the Qu’Appelle Valley just to the north of us. And I 
think of what the communities along . . . in the constituency 
that I represent, what they are doing to even get people as 
they’re driving through on the No. 1 to take a swing, swing 
north and drive through the scenic Qu’Appelle Valley and just 
see what Saskatchewan has to offer. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to entrepreneurship 
in business, we have it. When it comes to tourism, we have it. 
We certainly have opportunities and we certainly have a lot 
more for people to see. 
 
However, there is one sad note in all of this, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s just a week or so ago where the tourism association said 
that they will put in place a 1-800 number so that prospective 
tourists can call the 1-800 number and find out which highways 
are passable and which highways they should maybe make . . . 
follow to reach their destination. And I think that’s very 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. Because if there’s anything going to 
discourage tourism in this province, it’s the type . . . and the 
road conditions that this province has to offer today. 
 
And I feel for the Minister of Highways. I’m sure that the 
Minister of Highways, coming from a rural area, certainly wants 
to promote his area. But he has seen . . . for one thing, Mr. 
Speaker, while the Minister of Health hasn’t reduced spending, 
the Minister of Highways has had to take almost a two-thirds of 
a cut in his department. And no wonder it’s very difficult to 
provide the services and to maintain the road infrastructure in 
this province so that we can promote the small-business 
communities and help our small businesses, help tourism and 
encourage tourism in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that while I can support the 
motion in general, I would trust that the members and the 
government and even the Premier pay a little more attention to 
what the motion says, and that the Premier and this government  

pay more of an attention to what’s happening to the 
small-business community and work with and encourage our 
small-business community to continue to develop the business 
. . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. The first 65 minutes of the 
seventy-five minute debate has expired and we will now move 
to questions and comments. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to ask the hon. member from 
Kelvington-Wadena a question. 
 
I have before me  and I’ll send her a copy of this this is . . . 
the source is StatsCanada and it’s entitled, “Provincial Growth: 
Annual percentage change in provincial GDP, 1986 dollars.” It 
looks at the years 1993, 1994, and 1995 and the total growth of 
the provinces over those three years, assuming that the 
trajectory is sort of a pretty good indication of how the 
economy is growing. 
 
And Saskatchewan is at 9.6, which is the third highest of any 
province in Canada. For example, New Brunswick, a Liberal 
province, is 3 per cent lower; Manitoba, a Tory province, is four 
points lower. And I’d like to ask the member a question, and 
that is this. 
 
If we are doing so poorly as a government by creating the 
environment that you say is not conducive to small business 
expanding, how come over the last three years the 
Saskatchewan growth is the third highest, only behind B.C. 
(British Columbia), which is first, New Democratic . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The member has been very 
lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena to respond if she wishes. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I think that the 
information that we received lately said that we really still are 
. . . we’re third lowest in the number of job creations, we’re 
third lowest in the number of the growth of the province, and I 
guess I’m not understanding where you’re from coming when 
you think that the businesses are doing so great. 
 
We still have the highest . . . we have high bankruptcies. We 
have businesses that are moving out all the time. The number of 
bankruptcies is declining, but it doesn’t mean it’s low. We still 
have too many bankruptcies in this province and they’re 
problems that are created by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now I want to remind all members 
again, as is sometimes the case in private members’ debate, to 
direct debate through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I just have a question for the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast, speaking about small business and 
small-business development. Some of the problems of course in 
Saskatchewan . . . When you look at the land mass, 
Saskatchewan is a fairly impressive province. Certain regions  



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

of course do have their challenges. And I was going to ask you: 
how are you going to address these challenges, particularly 
northern Saskatchewan, the high cost of doing business in 
northern Saskatchewan, particularly some of the areas along the 
Alberta border where taxation is really hurting small business? 
 
So you talk about small business in general; what concessions 
have you got to deal with some of these issues? 
 
The Speaker:  Now again, before I recognize the hon. 
member for Saskatoon Southeast, I want to remind all members 
that both the questions and the responses, I would ask they be 
directed through the Speaker. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was very difficult to 
hear the member, probably because he was addressing the 
question to me not from his proper chair. 
 
As I heard it though, he was asking what kinds of concessions 
would this government give to promote various regions in this 
province. I would have to say that those days of giving grants, 
giving concessions, are long gone. What we have to do is 
ensure that everyone, regardless where they live in this 
province, uses their own initiative, builds on the strengths of the 
good infrastructure that we have in this province, rolls up their 
own shirtsleeves, and gets on with it and does it on their own. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  I was pleased to see the member from 
Kelvington stand on her feet, and I certainly have a question for 
her. My question to her is: what is her position? Does she 
support the federal Liberal proposal to harmonize the GST and 
PST at 15 per cent? 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m really glad to hear that you want my advice 
on some of these very important aspects and I should maybe ask 
your advice on some of these things as well. You’ve been 
telling me about being an employer. I’d like to ask you a 
question. I’d like to ask you how many employees you’ve 
actually had. I’ve heard you spout for days now about how 
employers are supposed to do such a thing. And you’ve only 
ever been an employee you whole life, so what have you done 
about employers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now once again the Speaker 
appreciates the enthusiasm of the debate, but I do want to 
remind all members to direct it through the Chair. Next 
question or comment. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Well my question is still to the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena who is busily skirting the issue. The 
question is this. Does she support the federal Liberal’s proposal 
to harmonize the GST and PST? 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, that’s a very interesting question 
he asked me, and I’d be delighted to answer him as soon as he 
answers my question. Through you, I would like to address to  

that member, how many jobs has he actually created and what 
does he know about being an employer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, one of the items . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order! Now I will ask all members to 
come to order, including the hon. member for 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood’s own colleagues. I’m having difficulty 
being able to hear him. 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, one of the issues of the debate 
referred to the level of taxation and direct taxation in sales. And 
the question that I would like to put to the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena is quite straightforward and simple. Would 
she be supporting a single tax in the province of Saskatchewan 
under the GST, which would of course then mean that 
restaurants and a whole number of services in the province of 
Saskatchewan which are basically small business would be 
having to collect a tax. Would she be supporting a 15 or a 16 or 
a 17 per cent . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I’m going to rule the question 
out of order. That question has been asked . . . Order! That 
question has twice already been asked and it is becoming 
redundant, and I will go to the next question or comment. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask a 
question to the member from Saskatoon Southeast. I’ve heard 
her state that their government is not in favour of hand-outs, 
that they think they shouldn’t be helping the big businesses. 
And yet I’ve been listening for the last couple of years and 
seeing the government handing money to Intercon and to 
Cargill and to CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce), 
and for job creation. I think this is an interesting story from you. 
And at the same time, I see that you say that there’s 3,500 jobs 
created. 
 
Do you think these about a thousand jobs that your government 
has bought, do you think that you should have to take them off 
the 3,500 jobs that you say you’ve created? 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Once again now, I’m going to remind 
members, in directing questions and comments in private 
members’ debate — I want to be firm — is asking members to 
direct them through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you. And through the Chair, Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to say that obviously what we have to do as a 
government is create a positive climate for economic 
development. 
 
I believe that we have created that climate through very solid 
measures, such as cutting the corporate income tax rate by 20 
per cent; such as cutting the taxes for manufacturing and 
processing companies, so that the total tax they now pay is the 
lowest in all of Canada; such as cutting the aviation fuel tax; 
such as we will be doing next January — changing the tax 
regime for truckers so that they can become more competitive 
in this province; and such as taking the E&H tax off 1-800  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

numbers. 
 
Those kinds of solid tax measures, combined with our approach 
to strengthen local community economic development through 
regional economic development authorities, are the way that 
Saskatchewan will thrive and prosper in the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to address my question to the member from Melfort. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve had the pleasure of being elected now for eight 
years. And every spring I do a business survey, a small-business 
survey, and I would be quite happy to share the results with the 
hon. members. I do that every year. 
 
And the biggest issue that comes up every single time is the 
issue of the GST. And I would like to know  and I don’t think 
they should laugh this off  I would like to know from the 
hon. member, who is a small-business person, if that party 
supports, the Liberal official opposition supports, the 
harmonization of the GST. Yes or no? 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I think I was asked this same 
question the last time we did the seventy-five minute debate. 
And I said that I would be particularly pleased to stand up for 
the federal government when I’m elected a Member of 
Parliament or the prime minister. 
 
But in the meantime, I think what I am is a small business who 
did collect PST on restaurant items, up until 1992, at the same 
time that I was collecting GST on behalf of the federal 
government. And I’ll tell you, I did. And then in 1992, I believe 
it was, the provincial government repealed the PST on 
restaurant things. So I did. I was a tax collector for awhile. I am 
a tax collector. I don’t know of any small business that really 
appreciates being a tax collector; all of us would like to work 
for ourselves, rather than the provincial or federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  The seventy-five minute debate has expired. 
Before proceeding, I would like to make a comment about 
procedure to hon. members. I would ask that members would 
take their seats when the Speaker is on his feet, please. I do 
want to recognize that in the debate here I’ve risen several times 
to ask members to direct their debate through the Chair. And I 
appreciate that on occasion, in the previous 10 minutes, that 
members have found that somewhat frustrating. But I do want 
to remind members of rule no. 28 of our rules of debate which 
reads: 
 

Every Member desiring to speak is to rise in his place, 
uncovered, and address himself to the Speaker. 

 
And that is not intended to be a source of frustration to 
members but to acknowledge that when all members come here, 
they come with the authority of having been elected in their 
own constituencies, and when we address one another in this 
Assembly, we address one another not as individuals but as 
representatives of our constituencies. And therefore even 
though it may be tempting in private members’ debate to begin 
to address one another personally, respecting the democratic  

process and the authority by which all members come to this 
Assembly, it’s appropriate to refer to one another in the third 
person and therefore to direct the debate through the Chair. 
 
And I simply want to remind all members of the rule which I 
think exists for good reason and is intended to promote that 
debate, although it can be very vigorous and very passionate, 
should always be done respectfully and respecting the 
democratic process that allowed every one of us to come to 
these chambers, and I’ll ask for all members’ cooperation to 
continue to honour that. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker:  The member may put his point of order. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  As you indicated, rule 28 of our debate says: 
 

Every member desiring to speak is to rise in his place . . . 
and address himself to the Speaker. 

 
I believe that the member for Athabasca was not in fact duly in 
his place and was recognized and allowed to participate in the 
debate, and I would ask for your ruling on that. 
 
The Speaker:  The rules of the Assembly do provide or do 
require that all members when entering into debate, other than 
in committee, must make their address to the Chair from their 
assigned seat. 
 
I’ve listened to the member for Regina South’s point of order 
and I do recognize that the Chair made an error in recognizing 
the hon. member for Athabasca. The Chair should ought not to 
have done that. However the Chair did, and when it came to the 
Chair’s attention, the event had already occurred, and therefore 
I did not intervene. 
 
I consider the hon. member for Regina South’s point of order to 
be well taken. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 13  Health Portfolio Redundancy 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will try 
to exemplify your ruling. 
 
Certainly I’m pleased to stand in this Assembly today, Mr. 
Speaker, and to discuss a very frustrating matter and a matter 
that means a lot to people across this province. A matter that is 
becoming something of a major concern to many people from 
the south-west part of the province, or the south-east, up to the 
central, and certainly even into the North. 
 
For the past several years, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have been 
attempting to implement what they call health reform, or the 
wellness model for health care in Saskatchewan. Translated, 
Mr. Speaker, NDP health reform means the closure of 52 rural 
hospitals, longer waiting-lists for surgeries, the closures of  



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

hundreds of beds in hospitals and seniors’ homes across 
Saskatchewan, the loss of hundreds of nurses and support staff, 
and more. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s only the beginning. 
 
Because according to the Provincial Auditor, health district 
boards are experiencing deficits of over 27 million, and this 
means there are many more announcements of slashes to health 
programs  closures of homes, elimination of beds, to be made 
in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are suffering from this 
government’s wellness program. And we’ve certainly seen it as 
we’ve seen public meetings beginning to take place across this 
province. And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, once the district 
health boards come out with how they’re going to address their 
shortfalls, there are more and more people going to get on the 
bandwagon and begin ask what’s going on here. Especially, Mr. 
Speaker, when we hear the Premier talking about how they’ve 
had to make these cuts to address deficits. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked to the Minister of Health. And 
one would say, well then we were on the right track if indeed 
there was a significant reduction in health care spending, which 
there isn’t. We still spend that same amount if not more today, 
than we did in 1991. 
 
Whereas the Minister of Highways can certainly stand up in this 
Assembly, and some of the other ministers, and apologize for 
the conditions of some of the responsibilities they have, such as 
roads, and they can point directly to the elimination of monies 
out of their budgets. But the Minister of Health does not have 
that ability. He continues to spend, and yet we’ve seen so much 
less. And that’s why people are beginning to ask questions and 
stand up. Communities bring their concerns forward to their 
local boards, and are told by board members that the 
government calls the shots  which they do. 
 
The opposition brings many health care concerns forward in 
this legislature, and what does the minister do? The minister 
continually tells us to go to the district boards. We’ve asked the 
Health minister why the NDP cut funding to 52 rural hospitals; 
why they de-insured things like oxygen and insulin; why they 
increased the prescription drug plan deductible from $125 a 
year to 1,750; why they are forcing health district boards to cut 
essential health services to Saskatchewan families; why are they 
cutting badly needed senior beds in rural areas when many 
seniors have nowhere to go, and seniors would love to stay at 
home and live in the communities that they worked so hard to 
build. Why the NDP aren’t allowing local people, local boards 
to make the decisions that are right for local communities is 
another question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what has the response been from the 
minister? Well let’s see. He has three or so usual answers. Most 
of the time he says it’s the fault of the big, bad federal 
government. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how long the minister can 
continue to lay the blame at the feet of the Liberal government. 
When will he begin to take responsibility for his actions? 
 
Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, he even goes back and blames the 
former provincial administration. One would have to wonder,  

Mr. Speaker, again, when will the Premier and this minister and 
this government take responsibility for their actions? They were 
taking responsibility for finally being moved up from a BBB 
credit rating today back up to the A-minus that they had when 
they took over government in 1991, and all of a sudden things 
are going great again. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what people 
are saying throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to responses and criticism and 
who the minister blames, the favourite response of the Health 
minister is to say something like, if the member opposite has a 
question, he should direct it to the local health district board 
because they are the ones who are making these decisions. 
 
And once in a while, Mr. Speaker, he throws in something like, 
this really isn’t the place to be debating specific health cases  
even though we all remember Louise Simard marching case 
after case before this Assembly. And I think even Mr. Speaker 
is quite well aware of some of those claims that were brought 
forward  claiming people wouldn’t be able to buy groceries 
because the drug plan deductible had been raised to $125 a 
year. 
 
(1600) 
 
It was interesting last night in the restaurant, Mr. Speaker, we 
ran into a couple who recognized us and began to talk to us. 
And the gentleman had me raise the concern about the drug 
plan. His wife had suffered a heart attack about three years ago. 
Mr. Speaker, five years ago, they would have had a maximum 
125 plus  I forget; what was it?  25 per cent thereafter? Mr. 
Speaker, what they’re facing today, his wife has a $500 a month 
drug bill because of this health problem, because of this heart 
attack. Mr. Speaker, and when do they get help? 
 
They have to get the first $1,700. As the couple said to us, 
they’re fortunate. He has a pretty good job. He’s a teacher, and 
he’s making a pretty good dollar. But what about the 
individuals who are on a very low income? Mr. Speaker, it 
makes one wonder how people are getting by since the NDP 
raised the deductible by over a thousand per cent. And this is 
something I hear about on a daily basis. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all of the members here 
remember the specific cases that were debated in great detail in 
the past. But it’s the present that we are all concerned about. 
Mr. Speaker, as the elected MLAs from areas across 
Saskatchewan, we bring forward questions and concerns about 
health care that we have heard from constituents, from public 
meetings we have attended, from health care providers, and 
others. It’s simply not good enough for the minister to stand 
and use district health boards as a scapegoat for his 
government’s actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that the Minister of Health has final 
say on any important decision. We all know that the Health 
minister has been orchestrating rural hospital closures and 
senior home closures for years. And, Mr. Speaker, we all know 
that the minister is trying to deflect criticism from himself and 
his colleagues by blaming local health care boards for the 
decisions being made. 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the Health minister refuses to 
acknowledge the truth. He refuses to accept responsibility for 
his actions and those of his predecessors and his government’s 
colleagues. 
 
It’s like watching, for example, Mr. Speaker, my children a few 
years back, when they were quite young. If I discovered a 
broken vase, I would ask my eldest son what happened. And 
guess what  he would promptly suggest that I ask my 
youngest son. Well when I go to talk to my youngest son, Mr. 
Speaker, he would say, well go and talk to my daughter; it was 
my sister that did it. Of course, Mr. Speaker, when I got to 
talking to my daughter, she had nothing to do with it. It was the 
dog, because she had no one else to blame. She didn’t have any 
other sisters or younger brothers. 
 
It’s obvious here, Mr. Speaker, that the dog didn’t break the 
vase, but it’s hard to get the person responsible to own up to it. 
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, my children have grown and have 
learned valuable lessons about taking responsibility for their 
own actions and always being truthful and upfront. 
 
I wish the same were true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about this 
government. It would be refreshing for the Health minister to 
stand up and accept responsibility for once in this Assembly. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would be refreshing, but given the 
performances we have seen over the past several years, it’s 
quite unlikely. 
 
In the meantime, we have seniors all across Saskatchewan 
fearing for their futures. We have families not receiving the 
health services and attention they deserve, especially in rural 
areas. We have health professionals concerned about the state 
of health care in this province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, one has to 
begin to ask themselves what the sense is in having a Health 
minister if, according to him, he doesn’t make any of the health 
care decisions. What’s the point? 
 
We don’t need to spend over $80,000 a year  well this year 
you can add an extra $4,400 MLA bonus  for a minister who 
claims he should not be held accountable for health care 
decisions in Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure there 
are health facilities in every corner in this province who would 
jump at the opportunity to have an extra 90,000 or so to spend 
on health services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there is a bottom line here. There is 
a good reason for this motion to be moved today, and that is to 
make a point. Local decision making, although talked about a 
great deal by the Health minister and his colleagues, doesn’t 
exist within health districts. We’ve seen it when the government 
forced communities into health care districts and then 
hand-picked each and every health district board member to 
carry out the NDP’s dirty work. 
 
We’ve seen it when health board members resign in frustration 
because they say the NDP government is dictating what can and 
cannot be done. We’ve experienced it when the NDP took all 
the contingency money that local hospitals and communities 
had fund-raised over the years and placed it all in trust 
accounts, refusing to allow local facilities to spend it on things  

like acute care funding. Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead local areas 
were told they could spend the money on wellness promotion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP aren’t fooling anyone any more. 
That’s not local autonomy. That’s not allowing local people to 
make local health care decisions. Instead what we have here is a 
heavy-handed NDP government dictating direction from the top 
down, pure and simple. We all know where the health care 
orders are coming from. It’s time the NDP stopped insulting the 
intelligence of Saskatchewan people and admitted it 
themselves. Then just maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would 
be getting somewhere. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move the following motion, 
seconded by my colleague, the member from Rosthern: 
 

That this Assembly acknowledge the statements made by 
the Minister of Health regarding his taking no 
responsibility for health decisions in the province of 
Saskatchewan and instead abdicating this responsibility to 
local district health boards; and, whereas the Minister of 
Finance could directly fund the district health boards and 
the Minister of Justice could directly oversee the Canada 
Health Act thus making the Health portfolio redundant, 
urge the government to eliminate the Minister of Health 
position. 
 

I so move. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to second this motion. Nothing displays the hypocrisy 
of the current government like its approach to the Department 
of Health; it’s singularly the one that does it the best. 
 
When they sat on this side of the House, they harangued the 
Minister of Health over every issue, great and small. Every 
issue they brought up was indicative, they said, of the attack on 
health care supposedly being done by the Conservative 
government. However no action or inaction by any previous 
government has done more harm to health care than the actions 
of this government. What other government in Canada can take 
credit for 52 closed hospitals in one fell swoop? 
 
If you ask the average health consumer whether he thinks health 
care is better or worse now than in the ‘80s, I’m sure the 
universal response, if they’re still alive, would be that it is far 
worse. The NDP put all their spin doctors to work on quaint 
phrases like wellness, but the public is not buying it. They know 
that they are suffering, and all the propaganda in the world is 
not going to convince them they are not. When they can’t get 
health care, when they have to have waiting lists that are six, 
eight, nine, ten, and twelve months long, they know there is no 
health care here. There is no wellness here. 
 
Clearly the NDP’s long held claim of being the defenders of 
health care has been shown to be false by the actions of this 
government, and they have done it very quickly. As bad as the 
sloppy, insensitive cuts by this government have been, what is 
more appalling is the neat way they have tried to sidestep the 
responsibility for their actions. 
 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

Week in and week out in this Assembly  and as a rookie 
person I’ve noticed this probably more than anyone else  we 
have tried to bring the minister’s attention to the horror stories 
that the NDP attack on health care have created. And he still 
has to answer one of them. And week in and week out we hear 
the same response  don’t blame me; it’s the health districts 
board’s fault. If the lights went out, as they did a little earlier 
on, he would actually expect to see a halo over his head, I’m 
sure. There’s no word for this attitude except pathetic. 
 
There was a time in this Assembly when ministers felt their 
traditional parliamentary responsibilities for areas, covered it by 
their portfolios, and at least attempt to answer the question as 
specifically as it was asked. 
 
The fact that the Minister of Health has created arm’s length 
agencies to administer some responsibilities does not detract 
from his duties as minister. They are his agencies and he must 
take the final responsibility for it. 
 
If we are to buy into the arguments of the Minister of Health, 
we should stop the Economic Development minister about the 
economy. After all, he doesn’t control the economy; it must be 
somebody else out there that’s buying a hamburger. Or perhaps 
we should stop asking the SaskPower minister questions since 
he doesn’t directly control that corporation; we should ask all 
the people who flick on the power switches because they 
control it, obviously. 
 
Our system of government depends on the ministers assuming 
responsibility for their portfolios. Clearly the Minister of Health 
refuses to do this. I suppose the easy approach to this problem 
would be to ask for the minister’s resignation. But the problem 
as we see it is a whole lot deeper than that. 
 
If this government wants to persist in its efforts to offload 
duties and financial burdens to other agencies, then it must also 
accept that those agencies deserve the power and authority to 
make their own decisions. But this government won’t take 
responsibility and won’t give the rights to make the decisions. 
 
In the succinct words of the Minister of Health, either you 
believe in local decision making or you do not. It’s too bad he 
couldn’t hear himself. Fine. If this government believes in local 
decision making, then we do not need provincial decision 
making in those same areas. 
 
All the taxpayer is getting out of the existence of the 
Department of Health is a minister’s salary, offices, and staff. 
Since he is not doing anything but passing the buck, that’s a 
rather poor investment. And I think the humour that the public 
gets from listening to his answer, even though humour does 
play a part in the wellness program, I’m sure doesn’t do 
anywhere near enough to cover the shortfalls. 
 
If all he does, and this is all he says he does, is sign the cheques 
for the funds the district health boards get, then let Finance do 
this job. I’m sure the Minister of Finance could find time to 
sign those cheques. If all he does is enforce federal regulations, 
let the Justice department or the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs handle it. He would probably say, I’m glad; thank you  

for the question and the opportunity. Either we need a hands-on 
minister who’s willing to deal with the real problems of 
Saskatchewan people or we do not need a minister at all. 
 
As extreme as this motion may sound, it comes out of the truth 
and the reality of the situation. That is the basic idea that we are 
trying to get across, and that is the message I would encourage 
members to send to the minister by supporting this Bill. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, listening to the mover and the seconder of 
this motion, it sounded like we’re fighting the 1995 election all 
over again  an election which in many ways was fought on 
health care reform as an important issue. And I might say that 
that member was reduced from official opposition to third party 
status. So, Mr. Speaker . . . and the government of 
Saskatchewan was returned with the second largest majority in 
the history of the province on the second term. So I think the 
Saskatchewan people have spoken on just how they view the 
various parties with regard to health care reform and other 
issues. Why did they land up as third-party status? It’s because 
of goofy motions like this, because they deserve it. They 
devastated the province. They’ve had their head in the sand in 
the 1980s with regard to positive change and especially in the 
area of health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he outlines some of the tough decisions we’ve made since 
1991, Mr. Speaker, and he wonders why we’ve made these 
decisions. Well that’s . . . Some of these decisions are obvious 
to everybody else in Saskatchewan but the members opposite 
and the third party. He says, well why are you still blaming us 
after five years? Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hole that the previous 
administration put this province into is a 50-year . . . it’s going 
to take 50 years to get out of it, like they did the last time they 
were in power, at least. 
 
And so he says, how is the past related to the present? Well the 
past is very much related to the present, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would say that if there’s ever a ministry that should have 
resigned, it should have been the Finance ministers of that party 
in the 1980s. We’d be a lot better off today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Pringle:  If there was ever a case for a ministry to resign, 
it was their Finance ministers in the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is my ninth year here. I have never seen a 
goofy motion like this in my nine years. And I’m sure that the 
Liberals aren’t even going to support this motion because it 
doesn’t make any sense. The motion alleges that the Minister of 
Health is taking on no responsibility for health care decisions. 
The motion alleges that the Minister of Health is abdicating his 
responsibility to district health boards. I’ll speak to these 
allegations in a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But then the 
member says that we should eliminate the ministry of Health 
portfolio. 
 



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

Now this would have been possible under their administration 
because the only time that they were concerned about health 
care was every election. They would put a new hospital or 
nursing home in the ridings that they held. You didn’t need a 
ministry of Health under the way that they operated, Mr. 
Speaker. And also they didn’t need a ministry of Health because 
they don’t believe in a publicly funded health care system that 
is accessible, that is with universal health care. They don’t 
believe in that kind of system. 
 
So under the way they think and the way they interfered in the 
health care decisions  I might say in decisions in every 
portfolio  they didn’t allow the officials to do the jobs or the 
local people to make decisions. And had they paid more 
attention to their officials and some of the advice they were 
getting, they wouldn’t have got us into some of the deals that 
created incredible financial chaos in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health and the Minister of 
Health are vital in working with the district health boards in 
Saskatchewan communities in terms of the health care renewal. 
 
So I go back for a moment to the first part of the motion, that is, 
the allegation that the Minister of Health is taking on no 
responsibility for health care decisions and that he is abdicating 
his responsibilities. Mr. Speaker, are they suggesting that every 
time a local government, whether it’s a school board or 
municipal government, makes a decision that they don’t happen 
to agree with, that the minister responsible should resign? It 
doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what that member can’t relate to, with all due 
respect, in terms of the whole health care renewal process is the 
issue of local determination of their health care priorities. He 
can’t relate to that because in 10 years they didn’t practice that 
way. He can’t relate to local planning and goal setting. He can’t 
relate to the fact that you should have confidence in the 
decision making of local people, because that’s not how they 
ran their government for 10 years. And that member can’t relate 
to the fact that you don’t interfere every time there’s a decision 
that you don’t agree with. The idea is that local people are best 
positioned to make local decisions. So the record of his 
government is interfering from Regina. That’s not the way that 
we’ve been operating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that government undermined local decision 
making on a number of fronts, including in health care. And it’s 
a phoney motion because not only does it reflect on the ministry 
of Health. I would say that this motion is a slap in the face to 
district health boards. This motion is a slap in the face to local 
communities because it assumes that they have not made good, 
sound decisions, and that is not the case. They have made 
many, many good, sound decisions, Mr. Speaker, and there’s 
been much progress. 
 
I would invite the member from Rosthern who is  I listened 
while he made his comments  I would invite him to listen for 
a moment and then to read the Provincial Auditor’s report 
which we had the pleasure of discussing this morning in Public 
Accounts, because he’s chirping from his seat that no progress 
is being made. And I think that’s a slap in the face to district  

health boards and the dedication and commitment that local 
people have put into their needs assessments, their plans, their 
goal setting. And those are now in place, as acknowledged in 
the Provincial Auditor’s reports. 
 
So a lot of good work has been done. A lot of good decisions 
have been made. A lot of creativity and innovation has been 
shown. And he’s suggesting, by the motion, that in fact good 
decisions haven’t been made. So I think this is unfair to the 
district health boards and, if I might say, is somewhat offensive 
to the citizens who’ve put their names forward and spent many 
hours working on behalf of their communities and on behalf of 
trying to move health care to a new paradigm as we prepare for 
the next century. Mr. Speaker, the member from Moosomin 
should be commending the ministry of Health, the Department 
of Health, the health care professionals, and the district health 
boards for the good work that they’ve done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite look at the Provincial 
Auditor’s report  and I invite them to do that  there are 
some 30 or 40 pages devoted to the accounting and the practice 
and the decision making with regard to the local district health 
boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any objective person . . . well in fact the 
Provincial Auditor has been saying this himself this morning, 
and his office said it two weeks ago at Public Accounts, that the 
development and the evolvement of health care renewal is in 
fact a story of progress. Health care renewal  if the member 
looks at the report  he says that health care renewal has made 
health care more accountable than at any time in the past. Now 
that’s a very important statement, that health renewal has made 
the health care system more accountable than at any time in the 
past. That’s not me saying that; that’s what the Provincial 
Auditor is saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, the Provincial Auditor goes on 
to talk about the complexity, the large undertaking of health 
care renewal, the mammoth task of moving that system from 
400 health care boards to 30, trying to integrate all of those and 
mesh all of those systems and the complex issues related to that, 
and to organize elections and to make difficult decisions, and 
just the challenges of integrating the systems  let alone the 
challenges which are very difficult  of providing service 
delivery in a holistic and integrated fashion. 
 
But the Provincial Auditor outlines the context, and even at that 
he’s very impressed, if I could say that. He’s very impressed 
about the progress that’s being made by the district health 
boards. And he relates that as well to the important work in 
cooperation with the ministry of . . . and the need for 
accountability in the ministry of Health and of course the 
Department of Health. 
 
And he outlines in the report  and has been outlined by the 
deputy minister of Health  with I think the concurrence of the 
members, that the service agreements are now in place in terms 
of not only the accounting of the health care dollars, but also 
the plans and goals and the objectives regarding service 
delivery and the enhancing of that delivery. 
 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

He also talks about the fact that the annual reports, most of it 
annual reports, and where he’s pleased with many aspects of the 
annual report. There’s some positive suggestions that can be 
made, and I think the Public Accounts Committee agrees with 
him. The Minister of Health agrees that there are some 
improvements that could be made to move us to a newer, higher 
level of standard in terms of the performance of the . . . and the 
accounting, not only of the dollars but also of the health care 
delivery which at the end of the day is what matters, Mr. 
Speaker. He also has been supportive of the financial 
management review process that has been put in place . . . again 
compliments the health boards and the Department of Health. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this motion is . . . the only word I 
can think of is goofy, but I hate to say that word. But I think it 
just is so nonsensical in the face of the overwhelming evidence 
by the auditor across Saskatchewan and by others who view 
what we’re doing in terms of health care renewal as a model, 
not only just to those in Canada, but internationally are coming 
to see what we’re doing. 
 
That isn’t to say that there can’t be some improvements. But the 
ministry of Health has been front and centre and fundamental in 
terms of the kind of leadership provided to that health care 
renewal in the past and continues to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And to somehow suggest that the Minister of Health is not 
accessible when he’s meeting non-stop, day in and day out with 
real people including consumers of health care services across 
the province and certainly health care workers across the 
province and the district health boards . . . So, Mr. Speaker, I 
would say that the motion . . . I can’t rule it out of order, but it 
doesn’t make any sense. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would commend the health boards. I would 
commend all the citizens of Saskatchewan. I would commend 
the Department of Health, and I would certainly commend the 
Minister of Health for the way in which all of those partners are 
working in partnership to try and improve the health care for 
Saskatchewan people in a cooperative way which reflects the 
Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
And I might add that the $860 million annual interest payment 
by that previous administration makes the job much more 
challenging, to put it mildly, where they’ve left future 
generations with incredible decisions that they’re going to have 
to try and make. And also, Mr. Speaker, I’m very sad that the 
official opposition somehow dismisses the $50 million that the 
federal government has taken out of health care as not relevant 
to what happens in district by district by district. 
 
And I noticed it interesting that yesterday when the women’s 
groups were here on the poverty tour  and they have front and 
centre as one of their platforms the importance of our health in 
terms of maintaining a national health program and not the 
dismantling as we see, and the importance of maintaining the 
Canada Assistance Plan in terms of the health and the housing 
for families and children  that there were no questions and no 
ability by the official opposition to somehow even join us and 
express some concern that the federal government continues to 
pull out of these national programs which makes it more 
challenging to try and build a system. 

But in spite of the federal government and their dismantling of 
the safety net and their weakening of their support to health 
care in Canada and certainly Saskatchewan, in spite of the 
interest payment which is two-thirds of the entire health budget, 
thanks to the previous administration, we’re going to continue 
to make progress in the province with all the stakeholders and 
the people of Saskatchewan. And I would say that the hon. 
member from Moosomin would be better to put his mind to 
how to deal with those challenges than to come forth with 
motions like this that just don’t make any sense. I cannot 
support it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Although we 
find the private member’s motion put forward by the Tories a 
desperate attempt for media attention, I believe we must address 
this issue of health care in this province any chance we get. And 
I believe it’s shameful when the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview blames again the federal government’s cut of $50 
million when in fact this government takes in $100 million of 
additional revenue from the hard-working taxpayers through its 
VLTs (video lottery terminal) but never acknowledges that. I 
think that’s shameful. 
 
I would like to speak to this motion today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
How many times can this government stand up in this House 
and pretend that health care here is alive and well? How many 
times can the Minister of Health slap on a phoney smile and 
extol the virtues of medicare in this province? How many times 
can the members opposite support his ridiculous claims that the 
provincial government is helpless in the face of the federal cuts, 
leftover Tory policies, and indiscriminate health boards? The 
fact is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government’s commitment to 
quality health care is non-existent. 
 
Somewhere, somehow, sometime, the NDP members went from 
being the indignant opposition to being the arrogant 
government. Who would have thought that their promises in 
1989 were nothing more than just hollow words? Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, do any of the members opposite remember when 
Louise Simard said in 1989: 
 

The opposition NDP is going to fight these health care 
cut-backs and these changes to medicare. It’s going to fight 
the erosion of the principles of medicare. I feel rather 
certain we’ll be having a change of government next time 
around, and then the public isn’t going to have to worry 
about these problems. 

 
Now isn’t that ironic. Just seven years after an NDP member 
made that comment, the public is in an uproar because the 
principles of medicare have eroded down to nothing. What did 
she mean  the public won’t have to worry about these 
problems? Did she mean that the people in communities 
throughout this province, who are watching hospital doors shut, 
shouldn’t have to worry? Did she honestly believe that even as 
the NDP government was shutting down 52 hospitals and 
slashing programs across the province that people wouldn’t 
care? Did she truly mean to say that people are not concerned 
about the quality of care for themselves, for their parents, and  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

for their children? 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that is what she meant and if 
this is what the members opposite sincerely believe, they are 
kidding themselves. 
 
(1630) 
 
How many days have we, as the official opposition, brought in 
heartbreaking examples of seniors who have been shipped off 
to communities miles from their homes? How many sad stories 
have we brought to this government’s attention about people 
who cannot receive the care they need because the cuts have 
eliminated programs and resources? How many tales of job 
losses have we pointed out  job loss  because this 
government has no commitment to either health or job security? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t make these stories up. And the 
member from Regina South who campaigned on keeping the 
Plains Health Centre open is now sitting there chirping away 
that it’s all the federal government’s fault. 
 
These are actual situations that are happening to people in our 
province. Every time we speak out and ask the Health minister 
to have some compassion, we are speaking out on behalf of 
someone who has no other way to reach this government. And 
instead of addressing these concerns with sensitivity and 
genuine concern, the Health minister immediately begins 
pointing fingers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this extent we agree with the Tories’ 
motion. The Health minister has the deflection tactics down to 
an art. When someone brings forward a very serious issue, he 
turns a deaf ear and passes off responsibility, first to the federal 
government and then to the district health boards. What he 
doesn’t do is provide any valid solution. What he doesn’t do is 
offer hope to the people who have been hurt by his 
government’s cuts. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is exactly what he should be 
doing. He should be listening. He should be looking for 
answers, and he most certainly should take the necessary steps 
to help restore an acceptable level of health care in this great 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot of long-term, highly polished 
politicians sitting on that side of the House, and they have 
political rhetoric down to an art, but that’s not good enough. 
Sooner or later Saskatchewan people are going to want to see 
this government back up their words with action. 
 
The Premier himself, when he was Leader of the Opposition in 
1988, said New Democrats would continue to fight to restore 
social programs such as medicare, the dental and drug plans to 
their former place of leadership for Saskatchewan. Is this how 
this government fights, Mr. Deputy Speaker? If so, I’m not sure 
I’d want them on my side in the war. When I was fighting for 
the principle that they profess to follow, they would be tucking 
their tail between their legs and heading for home. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m sure that’s how the people of 
Saskatchewan must be feeling right now about this government. 

For years the NDP politicians were busy trying to convince 
Saskatchewan people that they cared about health care, but with 
their actions since coming into government, how can people be 
expected to believe them? Even in their election platform called 
“The Saskatchewan Way,” it’s working, they said. Hospitals 
will always be there when they’re needed. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they’re needed, but they’re not there. As a matter of 
fact, we’re at minus 52 hospitals, and of course I just remind 
the member from Regina South, the Plains is still scheduled to 
be shut down in 1997 despite thousands of signatures protesting 
this government’s unilateral decisions. 
 
Now I know the Premier and his party are not overly concerned 
about keeping promises. We made that clear one day as we 
listed broken promise after broken promise in this House. What 
I want to know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I really want to 
know is how this government can live with their decisions 
knowing that their cuts are destroying the fabric of rural 
Saskatchewan? How can they applaud day after day every time 
the Health minister provides an arrogant answer to very serious 
questions? 
 
Where is their conscience? Don’t tell me they don’t see what’s 
happening. In the back-benches at least, they have some rural 
members, and these rural members must have had some 
constituents bringing their concerns to them about this health 
care policy. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I encourage them to speak out. 
I encourage them to take a stance on behalf of the people in 
their communities who are suffering under the severe blows to 
health care because if enough people get together to speak out, 
the government will have to stop ignoring the issue. And they 
will have to start working towards long-term solutions that are 
good for all the people in this province. 
 
Our population is getting older, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now I 
could get into the reasons why  that this government is 
driving our younger people and our working people out of our 
province with its oppressive policies  but that can be saved 
for another day. The fact is, our population is getting older and 
the need for health care is increasing. 
 
Now a responsible, compassionate government would find 
ways to maintain the quality of care. But the NDP government 
is neither responsible or compassionate. So instead, they take 
the cowardly route and create district health boards to be their 
scapegoats, and even this they carefully manipulated. 
 
Yes, they gave the appearance that these health boards would be 
elected and free to act out the will of the public. But the 
government was scared, so they made sure that they still had 
representatives on the boards who would make sure the 
government agenda continued to be followed and was silently 
executed. Meanwhile people who have a real valid commitment 
to saving our health care system were forced under government 
rule  so much for being independent. 
 
But the best part for the government is that these district health 
boards have to sit there, patiently waiting for the government to 
blame them every time the people speak out against cuts. Very, 
very clever, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have discovered a way to 
possess ultimate control while completely washing themselves,  



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

their hands, of blame. By letting the health boards become the 
bad guys, the NDP government gets to be the good guys. And 
they blame the federal government for a $50 million cut and yet 
forget to acknowledge that they take $100 million in ill-found 
money through their VLT programs. But they never 
acknowledge that or care to admit that. But at some point, this 
government will be toppled off their high horse. 
 
People are not stupid, even if this government insists on treating 
them that way. People know where the cuts are coming from 
and they know that this government is far from innocent. They 
just can’t keep washing it away. At some point they are going to 
have to stand up and admit they are causing much of the pain in 
our health care system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, unlike the Tories, we do not believe the 
portfolio of Health minister should be eliminated. Yes, there are 
a lot of portfolios that could be eliminated to cut down costs, 
and most of those portfolios would not be missed, but health 
care is not one of those. It is too important for the hundreds of 
thousands of people in this province. We believe that no matter 
who occupies that seat, he or she must take the problems of this 
province seriously, and we are not sure that this is happening. 
 
Instead of eliminating the position, we would instead encourage 
the government to re-evaluate its priorities and to look back at 
some of the promises they made when they were in opposition. 
Think back to Louise Simard, who asked the Tory 
administration of the time: why should the sick and the elderly 
carry the burden for your incompetence? Why indeed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Why have the members opposite not asked 
themselves this question as they watch their leader 
systematically destroy the health care system? Where is their 
commitment to the people in their constituencies? Where is 
their initiatives to take the first steps to finding positive 
answers? 
 
Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s health care is in a 
state of disrepair, and if the government continues on the path 
of destruction, it may suffer damage too extensive to repair. But 
if the government revamps its priorities and commits the 
necessary funds to health, it can be saved. 
 
The people of this province are proud of what they have 
accomplished. They have built a province on compassion and 
trust, but right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are scared. They 
are scared because everything they once believed in is now 
sitting on shaky ground. We owe these people more. We owe 
them security, safety, and a sense of well-being. And as their 
elected officials, we have the ability to do this. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, although we don’t fully support the 
private member’s motion introduced by the member from 
Moosomin, we cannot support the path the government has 
taken in health care. Therefore, because we feel so strongly 
about providing Saskatchewan people with quality health care 
solutions, the official opposition will abstain from voting on 
this motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do wish to enter 
this debate in opposition to this motion. 

First, I am disappointed in the quality, or should I say the lack 
of quality, by the opposition in presenting a motion such as this. 
First, the Minister of Health has never abdicated his 
responsibility on health care. But if the opposition is suggesting 
that we should not be supportive of local district health boards 
in their decision making, the local decision making is not 
appropriate in partnership with the provincial government, then 
the opposition is out of touch with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Who I’d like to suggest has abdicated their role in health care, 
is the federal Liberals in the kinds of cuts that they’re making to 
our health care system right across Canada. They’re dismantling 
not only health care but dismantling a country. 
 
The member from Melville talks about rhetoric. I heard more 
rhetoric than any truth or facts in his description here today. 
The premiss of this motion and debate would say that all 
third-party funding should not be in partnership with the 
provincial government. And so that we don’t believe that local 
boards, whether they’re education boards, local governments, 
health boards, can make decisions. And yes, sometimes those 
decisions are difficult decisions. 
 
But what is the real problem identified by this motion is that the 
opposition Liberals and Tories do not believe in 
community-based decision making. They do not believe in 
partnership; they do not believe in cooperation. The right-wing 
agenda of the opposition, the Tories, we experienced all too 
well in this province for 10 years  an agenda of overspending, 
of deficit budgets, and give-aways to their friends so that each 
and every one of us in Saskatchewan can pay with interest on 
their irresponsible governing. 
 
Saskatchewan people rejected the Tory way and are 
participating in community development in partnership with the 
provincial government to put the pieces back together. Now the 
minister from Moosomin says he talks about a vase being 
broken by his family members, and the question on who broke 
the vase. I would like to tell the member from Moosomin that 
everyone in this province  everyone in this province — 
knows who broke the province. 
 
We pay over $2 million a day on interest on a debt. This year in 
our provincial budget we have $50 million less from the federal 
government. We have 100 million from VLTs, as we did the 
last year. What is missing from our budget is not the VLT 
revenue. What is missing is the $50 million from the federal 
Liberal government. That’s more than a million dollars for 
every health care district in this province. I wonder what the 
members of those health boards would say if you had an extra 
million dollars to work through some of their decision making 
on every one of those health boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the concept of community, of cooperation and 
compassion, may be foreign to the opposition, but they are core 
values which are part of our health renewal in this province. 
 
This motion today is also very offensive. I agree with the other 
member that spoke against this motion, is that it’s offensive to 
our health boards in their decision making. They are working 
very hard in partnership with the government on health renewal  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

and they do believe in it. And they believe in community-based 
decision making. 
 
(1645) 
 
Saskatchewan has secured the future of medicare and is 
providing new services that will keep people healthy longer. 
And I am pleased and I am proud to be part of these changes, 
because I do believe that over the course of history the changes 
that we are now making will be seen to be just as significant as 
the changes that were made when medicare was first introduced 
in 1962. 
 
And as I recall, they opposed that at that time also. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Kicked down the door. 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Kicked down the door. That’s right. 
 
They oppose change; they oppose renewal. This is the second 
phase of health care renewal; the second phase of medicare; the 
revamping of health care delivery. It’s based on prevention, on 
wellness, as well as looking after those that are sick. It is 
working together with communities. And we’ve made these 
changes the Saskatchewan way, as they have suggested, the 
opposition. 
 
And you know, it’s not the same as the Liberal way, as we saw 
in the Maritimes where they imposed districts on communities. 
No, we went to our communities and we worked with them to 
form the districts. 
 
It’s not the Conservative way as in Alberta where there’s 
massive cuts, privatization of health care whereby you move to 
the front of the line for treatment if you have enough money in 
your pocket. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley:  No, we did it the Saskatchewan way. We 
didn’t reduce funding to health care; we have redistributed it. 
It’s based on community; it’s based on need; it’s based on 
partnership. The process of health renewal started in 1992 and 
has made our health system more accountable, more accessible 
and sustainable for us today and into the future for our children. 
 
We have gone beyond the traditional view of physicians and 
hospitals. The new system is based on the needs of people. 
We’re offering residents more options to receive services in 
their home or close to their home, whether they’re recovering 
from injury, illness, or coping with the effects of ageing or a 
disability. 
 
Now where were we before we started this health care reform? 
We were governed by more than 400 separate boards which 
operated a number of our services throughout the province. We 
had more hospitals than the province of Ontario. The cost of 
our system was growing at an alarming rate and it threatened 
the future of medicare. Provincial funding was based on the 
way things were always done, not on the real needs. 
 

Health services were often poorly coordinated, making it 
difficult for people with multiple health needs. What were the 
alternatives? To preserve, protect medicare our way, or allow it 
to deteriorate, leave it unchanged; go to an Americanization, 
two-tiered system — privatization of the health care system. 
 
Instead we went to the communities. We established 30 health 
districts, working through a community-based model. This 
means decisions on health services are made closer to home to 
meet the needs of local people. And we introduced elections, 
making it the first health board elections right across Canada 
were in this province, to make it more democratic, to make it so 
that people that had interests to serve their communities could 
— on our health care boards. 
 
We redirected funding from acute care to community-based 
services. We did not take money out of our health care budget. 
 
As of April 1, 1995 more than 1,400 Saskatchewan health staff 
and services, such as mental health, public health, drug and 
alcohol services, were transferred to the districts. Health 
services in communities such as home care, respite care, home 
intravenous programs, physiotherapy, have been expanded. 
Health districts carry out needs assessments to find out what 
health services their residents need. 
 
And the funding system has been changed to reflect people’s 
needs. When we did our budget this year, Mr. Speaker, we 
listened to the people of Saskatchewan. The people of 
Saskatchewan said that health care is a priority. The province 
reduced spending in other areas to make up the full amount of 
the federal cuts to health transfer payments. Saskatchewan has 
not cut health spending like other provinces. We are spending 
the same amount per person in ‘96-97 as we did in ‘90-91. 
Saskatchewan actually spends $1,536 per person on health 
services. In Alberta, spending has dropped over 15 per cent; 
they spend $1,335 per person. 
 
It’s interesting to note that what a million dollars can do in 
health care services. It can support six acute care beds. It can 
support 30 long-term care residents, or it could support 427 
home care clients. These are the kinds of things that we have to 
look at in how we are providing health care services to the 
people of Saskatchewan — the services that can often be 
provided at home or in the community at a much lower cost 
than in an institution. 
 
For instance, one family in the Gabriel Springs district was 
delighted to have home intravenous therapy for their infant 
daughter. The home services saved hours of driving to the 
hospital to visit so the family could keep up with their normal, 
everyday life. These are the kinds of changes that health care 
reform is all about. 
 
Also, in looking at just how are we doing with health care 
services, there’s a lot of doom and gloom and scare tactics 
mentioned by the opposition parties. When we look at how our 
acute care services are being provided in this province, the 
number of surgeries have been relatively stable. Actually we 
have cataract surgeries, are 25 per cent increase; hip and knee 
replacements, 12 per cent increase; coronary bypass, 9 per cent  



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 1996 

increase. The number of some procedures, shown through 
utilization research to be used at a higher rate in Saskatchewan 
than elsewhere, declined during the same period. Caesarean 
sections have reduced; tonsillectomies are reduced. 
 
Home care services have been increased by 38 per cent. 
Funding for home and community services has increased by 47 
million. While funding to acute care has been reduced, we have 
done some of these shifts, these changes. That’s in order to 
ensure that we have quality health care services when we need 
it. 
 
Changing technology and medical practices have improved 
effectiveness. Day surgery, same-day admission for surgery, 
and diagnostics and more out-patient services result in shorter 
lengths of hospital stay. New procedures and techniques are less 
invasive with less risk and discomfort  faster recovery. There 
is more and more examples of what I can say on how these 
changes are being brought about in Saskatchewan, but they are 
effective, and they are working. 
 
What I want to refer back to in this debate is the responsibility 
of the district health boards. District health boards do have a 
responsibility to their communities. They deliver a broad range 
of health services. They are holding accountability meetings 
that I have never seen in this province before that I have 
attended, where the people of their health district can ask them 
questions and they can give their answers back on how they’re 
providing those services to those communities. Certainly there 
have been mistakes made, as there is in any new initiative, but 
you learn from those, adjust to those, and you go on to meet 
those needs in better ways in the future. 
 
District health boards are a form of local government. They’re 
responsible both to their residents and to the Minister of Health. 
Saskatchewan is the only place where people can take part in 
province-wide, democratic health board elections. And through 
health district boards, local people can help make decisions 
leading to services that meet the unique needs of their 
communities. 
 
And I’d like to commend the people in this province who are 
sitting on the health district boards. Certainly they face many 
challenges in assessing the real health needs of their 
communities and being able to implement a delivery program to 
serve their needs. These changes are not often easy and have 
been contentious, but I know that they will succeed. 
 
We cannot be afraid of mistakes because those can be expected, 
but change would never occur if we were afraid of mistakes. 
We would never move ahead; we would never advance, and if 
we hadn’t changed we would’ve lost medicare. In the process, 
as we have set it up with partnerships in cooperation in health 
care, we will adjust, we will learn, and we will succeed. 
 
And while this is becoming a reality in our communities . . . and 
I just very briefly want to summarize that it’s there, as we see a 
breast cancer screening van going around to our rural 
communities. It’s there when I see the communities of Pangman 
and Ogema working together to put a health centre and a 
personal care home together to meet their needs. 

It’s there when I talk to people in their homes that are receiving 
home care-based services and said they couldn’t live in their 
home without those things. It’s there when somebody says, 
thank goodness we still have a drug plan in this province  
which most of the provinces do not have in this country  
which the federal Liberals, through their legislation, have tried 
to destroy. When it costs $25,000 for his chemotherapy per 
visit, he says, thank goodness we have a drug plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bradley:  We have across our province initiatives that 
are helping health care reform work from the community base 
in cooperation with the province, and it is successful. 
 
Our Minister of Health is moving around this province meeting 
with boards, meeting with districts, meeting with the people of 
this province, and he has not abdicated his responsibility. 
 
In conclusion, as I started my speech today, remarks today, on 
the premiss of the motion, is what you might expect from the 
Tories  a motion would suggest that community, cooperation, 
compassion, partnership, is not part of a responsible health care 
system. The people of Saskatchewan differ with this approach. 
The people of Saskatchewan see health care as a responsibility 
of government at all levels, even a responsibility of the federal 
Liberals, who are trying to abdicate from it. 
 
They believe . . . the people of Saskatchewan believe in 
partnerships, they believe in medicare; they believe health care 
is a responsibility of all citizens. They will never, ever want to 
turn that responsibility over to the right-wing Liberal-Tory 
agenda of Americanization, privatized health care. They believe 
in the Saskatchewan way, they believe in accessible, affordable 
health care for all, they believe in medicare, they believe it 
should be protected, as it will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To ask for leave to go to government 
business. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Motion No. 14  Support for the Canadian Wheat Board 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I’m going to, at the end of my remarks, move the motion: 
 

That this Assembly register its opposition to the recent 
Alberta proposal to circumvent the Canadian Wheat Board, 
and thereby undermine the single-desk marketing of 
Canadian grain to the world. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things about the Canadian Wheat  



May 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

Board that I feel should be understood, is that most of the 
discussion and argument really relates to two simple items, and 
that is, what a definition of a market really is, and the second 
one is, where this market really occurs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the Canadian Wheat Board a market is 
not when you haul it to the elevator or it’s not when it’s shipped 
by train to the coast. A market really is when the grain is 
destroyed and removed from the system. And that’s when it’s 
marketed. 
 
So what takes place in the situation for wheat and barley and 
other grains, is that you have to find a place where somebody 
consumes this particular grain. They consume it in a number of 
different ways. They may consume it as a flat bread or raisin 
bread  such as we do  or noodles or actually even as whole 
grain and in meal, etc. 
 
And that is the market. And that market consumes a product 
differently each time. And one of the things that the Canadian 
Wheat Board does in its sale of grain, working for the farmer in 
the province of Saskatchewan, is that it accesses and does the 
studies necessary in order to bring about the right grain being 
shipped to these individual markets to meet the needs and the 
wants of the people at that particular end. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, some of the studies that have been done 
indicate that that analysing of what the real market is, and the 
consumption, Mr. Speaker, indicates that the Canadian Wheat 
Board, on average, probably brings to the farmer in the 
province of Saskatchewan and western Canada approximately 
13 to $15 more a metric ton, year in and year out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you think of that amount of money in 
comparison to the actual cost  and if any of the members 
opposite would like to have done, they could have read in the 
annual report  at an actual cost, a marketing cost, the 
handling cost by the Canadian Wheat Board, of 5 cents per 
bushel or less, that return is a substantial return to the economy 
of the province of Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Manitoba. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1903 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Communication 
  Deputy Clerk ...........................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1904 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Business Enters Partnership with JobStart/Future Skills 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
 Cumberland House Accomplishments 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
 Government House Old-fashioned Picnic 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1905 
 National Access Awareness Week Innovation Award 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1906 
  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1906 
 Brad Hornung Receives Award of Merit 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1906 
 Last Mountain Times Wins Award 
  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1906 
 Battleford Royal Canadian Legion Memorial Dedication 
  Murrell .....................................................................................................................................................................................1907 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Long-term Care 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1907 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1907 
 Service Districts Act 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1908 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1908 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1910 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1910 
 Rental Property Damage Deposits 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1909 
  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1909 
 Method of Payment for Doctors 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1909 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1910 
 Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1910 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1910 
 First Nations Taxation 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1911 



 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1911 
 Crown Corporations Review 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1911 
  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1911 
 SaskPower Customer Relations Personnel 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1911 
  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1912 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan’s Credit Rating 
  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1912 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1912 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1913 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 116  An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act respecting the taxation of Saskatchewan Indians 

off-reserve 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1913 
ROYAL ASSENT ...........................................................................................................................................................................1913 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1913 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Support for Small Business 
  Lorje ...............................................................................................................................................................................1913, 1924 
  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1915 
  Draude .................................................................................................................................................................1917, 1923, 1924 
  Gantefoer .......................................................................................................................................................................1919, 1925 
  Thomson ........................................................................................................................................................................1920, 1924 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1922 
  Pringle ............................................................................................................................................................................1923, 1925 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1923 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1924 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 13  Health Portfolio Redundancy 
  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1925 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1927 
  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................1928 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1930 
  Bradley .....................................................................................................................................................................................1932 
 Motion No. 14  Support for the Canadian Wheat Board 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1934 
 


