













































May 7, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1421 

 May 7, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 

behalf of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

with respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre in 

Regina. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on the petition are from, besides being in Regina, 

Punnichy, Lestock, and many other smaller communities 

throughout Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 

present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition are from Moose Jaw, 

Kronau, Weyburn, Yorkton, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today, Mr. 

Speaker, to present petitions of names from concerned citizens 

throughout Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Carnduff, Oxbow, Alameda, and Regina. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from people in Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Pelly and Arran, two communities in my 

constituency, as well as Kamsack and a few from Regina. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 

community of Indian Head. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present petitions of names of people throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people who have signed this petition are from Regina, 

they’re from Sturgis, Weyburn, Lumsden, Waldheim, and 

Atwater. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again as well 

to present petitions from the people of southern Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents from Regina, of 

course, as well as the communities of Wolseley, Kennedy, and 

Grenfell. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 

petitions of names of people from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from, 

in my own constituency, from the community of Pense, as well 

as Balgonie, Zehner, Gray, Pilot Butte, and a number of them 

from the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We again rise today 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

from Central Butte, they’re from Broadview, they’re from 

Kisbey, they’re from Yorkton, they’re from Indian Head, 

they’re from Langenburg, Moosomin, Fort Qu’Appelle, from  



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

Regina  from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today and the citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan to present a petition on behalf of the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

mainly from Moose Jaw. I see a number from out of province 

 Brandon, Kelowna  actually several from out of province, 

Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

introduce to you today and to my colleagues in the Assembly, 

students from grade 8 attending the St. Henry’s School in 

Melville, Saskatchewan. I’m very pleased that they are here 

today sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are accompanied by teachers Mr. Garth Gleisinger and 

Mr. Kenton Hicke; and also accompanied by Jackie Boak and 

Mr. Wayne Kolenberg. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll be meeting with these students after they’ve 

been through a tour of our beautiful building, and I ask all my 

colleagues to welcome them to the Assembly here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 

afternoon to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues 

in the Assembly on behalf of our colleague, the member from 

Regina Dewdney, 26 grade 5 students seated in the west gallery, 

Mr. Speaker. They are from Henry Braun School here in 

Regina. 

 

They’re accompanied by their teacher, Sharon Schmidt, and 

their chaperons, Mr. Liberret, Mr. Osberg, Mrs. Yung, Mrs. 

Sather, Mr. Waugh, and Mrs. Godwin. 

 

They are here to spend some time watching proceedings in the 

Assembly after which they’ll have a tour of the building. And I 

certainly look forward on behalf of my colleague to meeting 

with them later on this afternoon. So please join me in 

extending to these students a warm welcome. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel:  If other members have completed their 

introductions, the Speaker would like to introduce guests from 

my own constituency who are visiting with us here today. And 

seated in the Speaker’s gallery are five students from Central 

Collegiate in Moose Jaw who are members of the Government 

Club. 

 

The Government Club are high school students from Central 

Collegiate who come together on their own time to talk about 

political issues of the day, and it’s become part of their annual 

tradition to pay a visit to us at the Legislative Assembly. 

 

They’re accompanied today by their instructor, Mr. Brian 

Swanson, and with the assistance of the Deputy Speaker as well 

as the Deputy Chair of Committees, I look forward to an 

opportunity to meet them at 2:30 for a photo and for a visit. 

And I expect the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow will be 

able to join us for that as well. 

 

Would you please extend a warm welcome to these visiting 

students. By the way, if I can just point out, one of the students 

is a Rotary exchange student from Japan, Akiko Suzuki, and 

would you extend a welcome to all of them with a special 

welcome to Ms. Suzuki. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union 

New Executive 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to acknowledge the recent election of a new executive for 

the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union. The new 

USSU president is Cory Exner; Adrienne Batra has been chosen 

as the vice-president, academic; Jeff Aikman was selected as 

the vice-president in charge of administration; Anna Vasquez is 

the new vice-president, internal; and Natasha Stinka, a student 

from the village of Buchanan in my constituency, has been 

elected as the vice-president, external. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

we know the challenges these five young men and women will 

encounter in their duties as elected officials. They represent a 

group of students facing many pressures and difficulties in 

today’s society. However, the University of Saskatchewan is a 

first-class institution which continues to turn out the best and 

brightest that Canada has to offer. I am confident that this group 

can handle the tough and demanding jobs before them. 

 

As official opposition critic for Post-Secondary Education, I 

have already met with a number of the new USSU executives, 

and I look forward to continued consultations with them in the 

future. I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

offering our heartiest congratulations and best wishes to this 

group of young men and women. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

Tourism Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many of the new 

jobs in my riding and in fact throughout the province will be 

created either directly from tourism or its spin-offs in the next 

decade. Currently tourism employs some 42,000 people in 

Saskatchewan, and by the year 2010 that number is expected to 

grow to 70 or 80,000. Tourism can be referred to as an 

emerging giant of the global economy and a new organization 

in Saskatchewan will help us tap into its vast potential. 

 

The Saskatchewan Tourism Authority, the Tourism Industry 

Association of Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan Tourism 

Education Council have joined forces to become Tourism 

Saskatchewan. This unique partnership in the tourism industry 

is the first of its kind in Canada and is part of the economic 

sector that has been identified in the Partnership for Growth 

strategy. Not only does this merger make sense, Mr. Speaker, as 

far as the strategy is concerned, but it also saves money. 

 

By joining forces, it is expected that $300,000 will be saved 

annually through this amalgamation. This new organization will 

serve as a model for other provinces, and as such I want to 

congratulate the staff and management of these three groups 

who have merged together to form Tourism Saskatchewan. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Recognition of Farm Boy’s Manufacturing 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize two Prud’homme area farmers, Wayne and 

Dale Sopotyk. The Sopotyks have invented a pre-moulded 

polyethylene carrying case to fit elevator-type moisture testers. 

 

The Harvest Helper carrying case protects the grain-testing 

equipment both in storage and in transport. Farm Boy’s 

Manufacturing’s new product provides a long-term solution to 

portability, providing farmers the opportunity to do their own 

testing on the field while drying grain or checking bins. This 

product gives farmers independence at a time when elevators 

are closing, while the need for grain testing remains a necessary 

and essential requirement. 

 

Congratulations to Wayne and Dale Sopotyk of Farm Boy’s 

Manufacturing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cargill Plant to Open in Clavet 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there are many examples of economic activity increasing in 

Saskatchewan, and my constituency is no exception. 

 

Cargill is now purchasing canola for its crushing plant at 

Clavet. The economic potential and spin-off from this $53 

million plant is enormous: 300 construction jobs have been 

created. When the plant begins operation next month, another 

50 direct operating jobs will be added to the list as well as 90  

indirect jobs. 

 

When this plant is up and running, it will process 2,000 tonnes 

of canola a day and approximately 600,000 tonnes a year. 

About 25 per cent of the total Saskatchewan canola production 

will be used by the plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this project will be employing Saskatchewan 

people, using a Saskatchewan-grown product, and creating 

economic spin-off for the people in the constituency of Watrous 

and throughout the province. 

 

Saskatchewan contractors are also benefiting from construction 

of the plant. They have won $30 million worth of contracts. 

 

There is great potential in marketing canola as the world 

demand increases. I look forward to the start-up of production 

at this plant, along with all the other people in the community. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Davidson Player Enters National Hockey League 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would today like to 

extend my congratulations to a young chap that’s grown up in 

Davidson, in the constituency of Arm River, who is breaking 

into the National Hockey League. 

 

Chad Allen from Davidson has just capped up a very successful 

four seasons with the Saskatoon Blades by signing a contract 

with the Vancouver Canucks. 

 

The solid, young defenceman has also proven himself to be an 

offensive threat from the blue line, Mr. Speaker. He scored 

eight goals and had 38 assists in 57 games with the Blades this 

season. Chad also was a two-time member of Canadian junior 

gold medal teams. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know his family and all the residents of the 

community of Davidson are proud of Chad’s accomplishments, 

and I’d like to extend my best wishes and congratulations to 

him today and ask the rest of the Assembly to join me in doing 

the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Trans-Canada Trail 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last October the 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association announced its 

intention to develop the Saskatchewan portion of the 

Trans-Canada Trail. The trail will be used for hiking, cycling, 

horseback riding, cross-country skiing, and snowmobiles, and 

will be enjoyed by Saskatchewan residents and by tourists who 

visit our province. 

 

It will be designed, built, and managed by groups and 

communities along the trail according to local wishes. The 

Paradise Hill and District Historical Society in my constituency 

has suggested that the old Carlton Trail become part of the new 

Trans-Canada Trail in Saskatchewan. The Carlton Trail was 

once the highway that connected St. Paul, Minnesota with Fort  



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

Garry, Manitoba, and crossed the Canadian plains past Yorkton, 

Batoche, Battleford, north to Fort Edmonton, and on to Fort 

Vancouver. 

 

For more than 100 years, it was the road west and was used by 

thousands of adventurers, explorers, settlers, first nations 

people, and anyone else who wanted to cross the continent. The 

Carlton Trail is alive and well in the Paradise Hill area today. 

The remains of the fort pit are nearby and visitors can check out 

a large Red River cart and enjoy the community’s Carlton Trail 

display. 

 

The Carlton Trail winds its way across our province and 

through our history. It also weaves through a rich tapestry of 

cultures and a vast, varied landscape. It has tremendous 

recreation and tourist potential as it offers an opportunity for 

residents and visitors alike to experience history and to 

appreciate the vastness of the North American continent. I’d 

like to commend Paradise Hill and District Historical Society 

for their initiative and look forward to more news about the 

development of this great Canadian trail. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Job Numbers Down From Last Year 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The most recent 

Saskatchewan labour force survey provided by Statistics 

Canada indicated the number of people working across 

Saskatchewan dropped by .5 per cent from last year. This 

represents more than just a number. It represents real suffering 

for too many Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the regional breakdown of these job losses across 

the province shows a picture not very well-known to many 

Saskatchewan people. The south-western area of the province, 

including Moose Jaw and Swift Current, is suffering the most 

job losses of any region in Saskatchewan. The number of 

people working in this region dropped by 5.8 per cent over last 

year, or some 5,000 jobs. Regina, by comparison, experienced 

job growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the frightening loss of jobs in this region, I 

urge the Minister of Social Services to reconsider his senseless 

decision to move eight community living jobs in his department 

to Regina. 

 

In a similar light, this government must take action to make up 

for job losses thanks to Health, Ag Credit, and Highway cuts to 

this region of the province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan Express 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already 

heard about the impact tourism is having in Saskatchewan. Well 

there’s a group of entertainers in Saskatchewan celebrating their 

15th anniversary and they’ve performed for local residents as 

well as people across the country and internationally. 

Saskatchewan Express is celebrating its 15th season as musical 

ambassadors for the province. Since 1980, Saskatchewan 

Express, using home-grown talent, has been committed to the 

development of Saskatchewan talent. 

 

The 15th anniversary tour, entitled “Been There  Sung That”, 

will be performed at fairs, exhibitions and celebrations in towns 

and cities across the province. Saskatchewan Express will be 

featured at the Regina Buffalo Days Exhibition, Saskatoon 

Prairieland Exhibition, and at six provincial parks during Parks 

Week July 15 to 21. 

 

Saskatchewan Express has developed a national reputation as 

an outstanding group of accomplished performers who embody 

the spirit of our province. I join with all members of the 

Assembly in congratulating these Saskatchewan singers, 

dancers, and musicians, as well as training personnel and arts 

administration personnel, who make up Saskatchewan Express. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Education Funding 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, my questions are for the 

Minister of Education. Madam Minister, since session began I 

have been trying to get a clear answer from you about whether 

or not education is a priority to your government. Instead of 

answering the concerns of students and parents, you have 

instead hidden behind jeers at the federal government. The 

people of this province are still waiting to hear the facts, and 

they are growing more and more frustrated by your smoke and 

mirrors approach to answering questions. 

 

Madam Minister, will you stand in this House today and explain 

if education is indeed a priority of your government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the 

federal government did to this province in the last budget, 

where they reduced $114 million to this province for health, 

social services, and education, our government  one of four 

provinces in Canada  announced a funding increase for K to 

12 system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at what other jurisdictions are doing in 

this country, all we have to do is look to Newfoundland and 

Labrador  Liberal government  7.1 per cent cut to K to 12; 

Nova Scotia, 1.7 per cent cut to K to 12; and of course in good 

old Tory Ontario, a 5.3 per cent cut; British Columbia and 

Saskatchewan, two New Democrat governments, increased 

funding to K to 12 in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again my question 

is for the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, you have just 

told the Assembly your government is committed to education.  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1425 

You have said that you are back-filling federal cuts. Madam 

Minister, I am curious. If this is true and you are completely 

back-filling any offloading by the federal government, why then 

are school boards being asked to contribute an additional $14 

million to keep our education system alive? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, our funding formula for 

our K to 12 system, our operating grant, a large component in 

that grant is based on enrolments. And as the member may 

know, there are certain parts of Saskatchewan that have 

received reductions in funding as a result of enrolment decline. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this morning we announced a major public 

consultation process for parents, ratepayers, school divisions, 

all across the province where we are looking at four options for 

structuring public education to take us into the next century, 

Mr. Speaker. We anticipate that we will have a major public 

consultation process over the next six months, and parents, 

ratepayers, school division trustees, teachers, and support staff, 

will have an opportunity to come to those public meetings and 

give the government direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, I don’t 

believe the Minister of Education has any idea of how much 

fear her education cuts are creating in rural Saskatchewan. 

Every member of our caucus has talked to constituents who are 

afraid that schools in their communities may be forced to close. 

I’m sure there are members on the opposite side of the floor 

who have heard similar concerns, but who either refuse or are 

being muzzled from speaking on behalf of their constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my contacts within the education system inform 

me that between 35 and 50 schools will be forced to close in the 

next few years because of this government’s continual funding 

attack on education. There remains an overriding concern that 

funding and not common sense may influence these decisions. 

Can the minister explain how many viable schools will be 

closed because of this government’s funding decisions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I wish that member would 

spend as much time talking to his federal counterparts in 

Ottawa as he does complaining in the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government is cutting $114 million to 

this province in 1996-97. We have back-filled every single 

solitary dime for health, social services, and education. Have 

we heard one word from these members opposite about those 

funding reductions? The answer is no, and next year, Mr. 

Speaker, a further 75 to $80 million will . . . 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Order. It’s highly inappropriate the  

members will be shouting across the floor while either a 

question is being asked or being answered. I will give the 

Minister of Education an opportunity to complete her remarks. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  And further, Mr. Speaker, an extra $85 

million will be taken out of this province in 1997-98. Now if 

those members would spend as much time talking to their 

federal Liberal cousins in Ottawa, maybe we wouldn’t have to 

deal with some of the issues we’re dealing with in this 

province. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, if you go back in this province’s 

history, there have been school closures year after year after 

year in this province. And as that member knows, because he is 

former president of the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association), that is up to individual school boards to decide, 

not the Department of Education and not this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Long-term Care in Melfort 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday we brought to the attention of this House, the fact that it 

had been bad-news week for the sick, the elderly, and anyone 

truly concerned about the health care of this province. 

 

Today we find that this week will be no better. The people of 

Melfort were informed today that Nirvana Pioneer Villa will be 

closed. As many as 45 jobs will be terminated, and 30 

long-term care beds have been axed. All because of this 

government’s decision not to properly fund the health care 

system. Will the minister explain to Melfort residents why their 

worst fears are being realized? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, 

funding in health has been maintained at the same level this 

year as it was last year. There have been some adjustments 

based upon migration of population as between the districts. 

But the member knows that it’s the responsibility of the local 

health district to assess its needs in terms of long-term care and 

acute care services and to decide which facilities the district 

needs to meet those needs. And I have every confidence that the 

North Central Health District will make the right decisions in 

consultation with the public. 

 

The member referred a few weeks ago to a public meeting held 

in Melfort, I believe. One of the things the district has done 

very well is to consult the public about its plan. The district is 

proceeding with its plan. And I have every confidence that the 

local people will make the appropriate decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, what this government has 

demonstrated again today is they have absolutely no 

commitment to the sick and the elderly in this province. This 

government has shut down long-term facilities and beds 

throughout the north-east. Many of these people, thrown out of  



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

their homes, look to Melfort as a community that was going to 

be able to accept them in their time of need. 

 

Melfort has always been a regional centre for long-term care. 

Now because of your funding cuts to the North Central Health 

District, you have destroyed the home that many of these people 

saw as their future. Will the minister intervene and commit to 

properly fund the needs of the regional care in Melfort? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to the member and to the 

House, Mr. Speaker, that the member and his colleagues like to 

get up day after day and imply there’s some kind of crisis in the 

health care system. 

 

But I want to say to that member and to the other members and 

to the House that it is not the case, as implied by the members 

opposite, that people are taken out of nursing homes and put 

out on the street. That does not happen, Mr. Speaker. If a 

facility is decided to be closed by the local health district, 

alternative arrangements will be made in consultation with the 

families of those individuals, and we have a commitment to 

take care of people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it seems to me that the crisis that the member is trying to 

take attention away from is not a crisis in health care. It’s a 

crisis within the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. And the member is 

trying to divert attention away from what is actually happening 

in the political scene in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  The minister hides behind a bunch of 

bureaucratic terms like needs-based assessment while they gut 

health care delivery to the very people that built this province. 

The minister doesn’t have the guts to come to Melfort to do it 

himself, his own dirty work, and tell the seniors that he is 

throwing them out of their homes, that he’s going to do it 

personally. 

 

You’ve told these people you’d look after them. Minister, 

you’ve lied to these people. You’ve . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order! Order, order. Order. Now the hon. 

member appreciates very clearly that he is not permitted, 

according to the rules of the Assembly, of accusing another 

member of the Assembly of lying. I will ask him now to 

immediately . . . Order! I will ask him now to immediately 

withdraw that remark and apologize to the House and then put 

his question. Order! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, these people . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. Order, order. Order! I 

will give the hon. member an opportunity to simply withdraw 

his remark  Order!  to apologize to the House. 

 

Order. Order, order. I will ask the Opposition House Leader to 

come to order. Now the hon. member knows what the penalty is  

for refusing to withdraw an unparliamentary remark at the 

request of the Speaker, and I will give the hon. member the 

opportunity to withdraw his unparliamentary remark and to 

apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  No, Mr. Speaker, I will not withdraw that. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order! Order. I will give the hon. 

member from Melfort one last opportunity to withdraw his 

unparliamentary remark and to apologize to the House. 

 

Order! All members will come to order when the Speaker is on 

his feet. 

 

Then pursuant to rule 28(3), Mr. Gantefoer, I hereby name you 

for disregarding the authority of the Chair. I will ask you to 

remove yourself from the Assembly. 

 

Order! Next question. 

 

Health Care Complaints Procedure 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions as well are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, 

I’ve sent over a copy of a letter I received regarding Lester 

Snustead, a senior who is being released from his local hospital 

because of lack of funding for hospital beds. 

 

Mr. Snustead has bone cancer that has spread throughout his 

body, which has deteriorated his strength and mobility a great 

deal. He is a diabetic and in need of insulin shots twice a day, 

and as well has cataracts which makes it unable for him to 

measure his own insulin each day. This gentleman has been 

informed that he will receive one meal a day through home care 

and a nurse can check on him twice a week. Mr. Minister, that’s 

not enough for this individual in this circumstance. 

 

I received many letters and phone calls from people in similar 

situations; I’m sure you do too. You have stated that we’re not 

to bring specific cases in to this House and address concerns in 

this way. Mr. Minister, what is the proper forum? Where do 

people go when they feel they have been treated improperly by 

the health care system? And who do they talk to with their 

specific complaints and concerns, and for immediate help to 

address such situations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question and also for sending me a copy of the letter. I actually 

had read the letter already, and I want to say that my 

understanding is that this individual has not been discharged 

from the hospital. And in fact the health district . . . well my 

officials have been in contact with the Midwest Health District 

and the situation is being handled at the local level. 

 

A meeting is being held later this week with the individual, his 

family, and members of the Midwest District Health Board 

management to determine the most appropriate care in the most 

appropriate setting. So the situation is far from resolved. There 

was a suggestion that this individual would be discharged. A  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

meeting is going to be held to determine what the appropriate 

care setting for this individual would be. 

 

It may not be a hospital; it may be a long-term care bed. But I’m 

confident that the people at the local level will be very 

compassionate and reasonable with respect to this man’s needs 

and that they will make the right decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Minister, I 

thank you for having had your officials look into and come up 

with what may meet a specific need at this time. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, there are many other people that face 

needs along the same lines. And I would like to offer as a 

suggestion, a forum whereby individuals who feel that they are 

not being heard at their local areas and their local districts, a 

suggestion that has been brought forward by the Touchwood 

Qu’Appelle Health District of appointing an ombudsman that 

people could turn to to address specific needs, whether at the 

district level or whether at the provincial level. 

 

However, Mr. Minister, I would think it would be more 

appropriate for the Department of Health to establish this 

ombudsman rather than asking the districts to take finances out 

of their tight budgets. And, Mr. Minister, would you indeed 

appoint or look into appointing a provincial ombudsman so that 

the costs of each individual district is not . . . or the funds from 

districts is not taken away to provide this service? Would you 

do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’ll certainly take the member’s 

suggestions under advisement, Mr. Speaker. But I want to say 

to the member that some of the districts have appointed 

client-service representatives who are in effect patient 

ombudspersons. And I know Saskatoon has one. I’m not sure 

how many other districts, but I think it’s a good suggestion, 

either at the district level or the provincial level. And I’m 

hopeful that we do move in this direction that the member’s 

talking about, because I think there should be somebody, I think 

preferably at the local level, that people can go to with this kind 

of concern so that they can be dealt with as soon as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  One further question, a short question to the 

minister. Mr. Minister, the unfortunate part, while you feel that 

it may be appropriate for the local district to appoint their, 

basically, ombudsman, who pays for that? Districts are being 

challenged on a daily basis regarding funding and the cuts that 

are coming to their districts, and if they’re supposed to provide 

an additional service, where do they find the funds? That’s why 

I think it’s appropriate that it comes from your department. 

Would you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well no, I can’t give that commitment, Mr. 

Speaker. As the member knows, what we do with the health 

care budget, which is about one and a half billion dollars, is we 

take a billion dollars and give it to the districts, because the idea  

is to deliver services to the people at the local level. 

 

So we provide the funding to the districts to meet the health 

care needs in the community. And I think that can be done in 

this area as well. There’s no reason why this has to be done out 

of the city of Regina. I think it could better be done at the local 

level, and I think the district funding takes that into account, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Restructuring 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, 

we’ve had a chance to look at your consultation process on the 

restructuring of education. My question is, why is it necessary? 

You already have a report from the SSTA on restructuring 

educational governance. They have a plan for reducing the 

number of school divisions in the province, and it’s a plan 

that’s driven from the local level. Why is it necessary for you to 

reinvent the wheel? 

 

Madam Minister, you do have that SSTA report. You know the 

direction that local school boards wish to take. Why do you 

need to go through this elaborate public relations exercise, 

especially in springtime when half the people are seeding and 

can’t attend anyways? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as members know, earlier this morning our government 

announced a major consultation process with the public 

regarding restructuring education for the 21st century. In that 

document, which has been made available to the public, we are 

examining four possible options for the future. One of those 

options, Mr. Speaker, is the status quo where school divisions 

could determine on their own whether or not they wish to 

restructure with other school divisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have not arrived at any conclusion. We want to 

go through the public consultation process that occurs in May, 

June, July, August, September, and October. And at the end of 

that process we’ll be in a better position to determine which 

direction our province should take. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, we’ve seen this particular 

movie before. The last time we saw this movie, it was called 

health reform, and it didn’t have a very happy ending. 

 

Madam Minister, the fact that you won’t accept the SSTA’s 

plan suggests to me that you want to ensure that you control the 

changes in the educational system, not the public, instead of 

letting that process be driven at the local level. 

 

Madam Minister, I believe you missed the 9 o’clock bell this 

morning. Many school divisions are already working with one 

another to save money and improve the quality of education. So  



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

why is it necessary for you to get involved? Haven’t you 

learned anything from the Minister of Municipal Government, 

who’s been forced to back off by SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities)? 

 

Madam Minister, why won’t you let the change be driven at the 

local level? Is it because you have ready a plan for forced 

amalgamation and school closures just like you did with the 

hospitals? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when the Saskatchewan school trustees underwent their 

consultation process, that consultation process, as I understand 

it, involved school trustees and local school trustees. 

 

We want to ensure that the public, including parents of children 

in school as well as ratepayers, along with other stakeholders in 

education such as teachers, support staff, trustees, directors of 

education, the business community  we want to make sure 

that everybody has the opportunity to have input into the 

process so we know at the end of the day which direction the 

public wants us to go. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Unfunded Pension Liabilities 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

morning’s meeting of the Public Accounts Committee provided 

a fine example of how members of different parties can work 

together in the best interests of Saskatchewan residents. After 

listening carefully to the presentation made by the Provincial 

Auditor’s office on the debts in the province’s pensions, the 

committee recommended that, and I quote: 

 

The government should establish a pension commission to 

study the many issues related to its pension plans. 

 

Last week, the Minister of Finance told the people of 

Saskatchewan there was no need for such a committee. Today 

her colleagues in the back benches joined with the opposition 

calling on the minister to set up such a committee. Will the 

minister admit she erred last week and quickly set up an 

independent pension committee? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker. First of all I thank the 

member opposite for the question. There is absolutely nothing 

new here, Mr. Speaker. This is an issue that goes back to the 

1960s when the then Liberal government was not properly 

funding pensions. We have said, of course we’re concerned. 

But we also have said that we want to reassure the people of 

Saskatchewan that this issue is being managed and their 

pensions are secure. 

 

We’ve also said that the key thing is that in 1978, the then NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government changed the pension 

scheme to ensure that it was fully funded and affordable. So I 

mean there must be a shortage of news today because there is  

no issue here that has not been discussed in this legislature 

before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, in the same Public Accounts 

Committee meeting, the Provincial Comptroller in the 

minister’s own department acknowledged that the cost to the 

government of meeting its annual pension obligations is already 

having a significant impact on the government’s spending 

decisions. 

 

Given this, Mr. Speaker, before the government is forced by 

large pension debts into making cuts to other programs, will the 

minister finally get her head out of the sand and admit these 

pension debts are causing a problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 

member opposite, he’s developing a bit of reputation for  as 

one major corporation in this province said  reckless 

comments, reckless comments. Now what we have said about 

the pension issue, and there’s nothing new today, is it is a 

concern. We plan to deal with it. Is a concern that becomes 

more prominent in the next century, and that we want to 

reassure the people of this province that we are in good 

financial shape and we will continue to meet our pension 

obligations. 

 

But I mean, the members opposite should understand there is no 

news here. And they should become more responsible in the 

kinds of suggestions they make. They do not need to 

unnecessarily alarm the pensioners of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Highways 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 

of Northern Affairs or to the Minister of Highways. Mr. 

Minister, the North’s only links to the outside world is through 

its highways. There were many promises made through many 

elections for improvements and the construction of a road to 

Garson Lake of 30 kilometres, improvements to the road to 

Patuanak of 80 kilometres, improvements to the road of Dillon 

of 60 kilometres, and to Turnor Lake of 30 kilometres, that have 

never been fulfilled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are only less than 200 kilometres of northern 

roads that affect 3,200 residents of northern Saskatchewan 

people. These people are often stranded due to the poor 

conditions of the roads, Mr. Speaker. This is totally 

unacceptable, especially at times in medical emergencies. Will 

the minister commit to replacing these trails called roads and 

follow through on promises made? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, we probably would be 

building many roads in northern Saskatchewan if it were not for  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

the Liberal cuts of $114 million. We had to replace absolutely 

everything in regards to the Liberal cuts, even in northern 

education, northern health, and northern social services  

absolutely no concern, you know, by the federal Liberals. 

 

When I look at the highways issue, I would say that in regards 

to the person’s own constituency, we have Athabasca road, you 

know, going into the north country. We also have the roads that 

we are fixing in regards to the area of Canoe Narrows, in 

regards to the forestry industry. We’re also doing the road 

towards Garson Lake. We started 5 kilometres of road of it and 

20 people are working. 

 

What the member should be doing is congratulating those 20 

people that are being trained in heavy equipment and road 

building who will get jobs elsewhere, etc., and building 5 

kilometres of road. And also complaining to the Liberal 

government and saying, yes, these are great people who are 

working hard to build our own roads in northern Saskatchewan 

in cooperation with the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Announcement of a Public Consultation Process on the 

Future of Public Education in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

rise in the Assembly today to address an issue of fundamental 

importance to everyone in Saskatchewan  the future of public 

education in our province. 

 

This morning, Mr. Speaker, I announced a public consultation 

process to seek input on how we can all work together to 

structure education to meet the needs of our students for the 

next century. As hon. members are aware, demographic, 

economic, and social changes are challenging school divisions, 

especially rural and northern school divisions, to continue to 

provide excellent programing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to hear what Saskatchewan people have 

to say about the future structure of our public education system. 

I invite and encourage the participation of all members of the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly in this consultation 

process. I have made copies of a discussion paper, which 

outlines four options for consideration, available to all 

members. I emphasize that any other options presented by the 

public or other education stakeholders will also be considered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public consultation process begins 

immediately and will continue throughout the fall. Our 

objective is to offer the best possible education for every 

Saskatchewan student. The key question is, what is the best way 

to structure our public education system to meet the needs of 

our students? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to get involved in this 

important public consultation process and to encourage their 

constituents to participate when public meetings take place in 

their area. There will be an opportunity to hear the views of  

everyone who wishes to be heard and to consider the issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these public consultations will help determine the 

future structure of our public education system. I welcome the 

opportunity to work with everyone to ensure quality education 

for Saskatchewan students well into the next century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Madam 

Minister, for your comments, and thank you for the early 

release of your ministerial statement. I appreciate the short time 

I’ve had to take a look at it. 

 

After reviewing the document this morning, Madam Minister, I 

look forward to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that there will be public 

consultation. It’s an expanded public consultation and I know 

the people of Saskatchewan look forward to actually having 

input. 

 

The previous groups that have already been identified in this 

House, Mr. Speaker, like the Saskatchewan School Trustees, 

which represents the boards of education . . . The government 

has its own study that was commissioned a long time ago under 

the Scharf-Langlois report, and we know that directors and 

superintendents have already contributed through a LEADS 

(League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents) study that has already been done on this topic. 

 

So there have been many issues. I know the minister has raised 

a concern around regional authorities, an expanded regional 

authority, and one of those options that are presented are listed. 

 

I would trust that the involvement that she hopes for from the 

public will be there. I know there will be input, and I would 

suggest to the minister, and of course to the department, that 

indeed they take a good hard look at it. 

 

I note that in her statement, Mr. Speaker, that the minister has 

indicated that this will continue through the fall. And I’m 

wondering whether or not fall has a certain finite period, 

whether or not it’s the end of a particular month, and what will 

be the outcome. Will the minister then be bringing together 

leaders from across the province to actually take part in a 

symposium? So those are questions. 

 

The final statement that is made in the release, and I think it is 

the key, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Education, the 

Minister of Education, myself as the opposition critic, the third 

party critic, we’re here to represent and to bring forward what is 

of greatest concern to the students of our province. 

 

The objective is to offer the best possible education for students 

in the province. And when we look at scenarios, whether or not 

they’re special interest group scenarios that are very small 

groups, or whether or not they are supported by a vast majority 

of this province, that is the key, is what is in the best interests of 

the students. And we look forward to encouraging others as 

well as my colleagues to take part in the consultation process. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

Mr. Heppner:  I too would like to thank the minister for 

their early presentation of this particular statement. And I think 

the key question that you indicated when you made your 

statement is a very valid one, that we need to look at what the 

future holds for education, what it holds for the kids in our 

communities. 

 

I do think though that we’re selling short some of the other 

groups that have already made presentations, that have looked 

at changes in education, whether it’s the STF (Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation) or the SSTA or LEADS or these sorts of 

things. I think if we look at the number of people that are 

involved in those particular bodies, we’ll find that there are 

probably more people involved in all of those bodies and that 

you will hear from in your consultation process. So I think if 

you’re looking for members, you probably already have those. 

 

The other concern I have, and it’s mentioned in your statement, 

is the demographic changes that are suppose to be addressed by 

the changes that we are going to make. And I have a concern 

that what will happen here is the same thing that’s happening 

with possibly Municipal Affairs and with Health as well, that 

when we try to address these demographic changes in new 

policies, what we in fact do, is we increase the rapidity of 

change in the demographic change. 

 

What I’m saying is essentially we very often make small 

schools in rural Saskatchewan less desirable places to be 

because of the large organizations we put in place causing that 

demographic change to accelerate. And that’s one of my 

underlying concerns of any change that we make. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Emergency Preparedness Projects 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was 

pleased to announce yesterday and to tell the House today, of 

funding approval for four emergency preparedness projects in 

Saskatchewan. These projects have been approved under the 

joint emergency preparedness program. This program enables 

the provincial, municipal, and federal governments to work 

cooperatively to ensure a reasonably uniform level of 

emergency response and preparedness. 

 

This announcement on National Emergency Preparedness Week 

is particularly timely. This is the first year a special time has 

been set aside to raise public awareness about the emergency 

planning services that exist in Canada and indeed in 

Saskatchewan. We know at the community, provincial, and 

national levels there are skilled emergency response personnel, 

career and volunteer, whose job it is to meet the needs of 

people in troubled times. As elsewhere, we in Saskatchewan 

have had to cope with numerous disasters  floods, forest 

fires, and hazardous material spills, for example, which without 

the benefit of proper planning and positive responses would 

have had far worse consequences. Municipal officials should be 

commended, Mr. Speaker, for their dedicated work in this 

regard. 

 

We have ably demonstrated that not only are we prepared to 

respond appropriately in the event of emergencies, but we are  

able to respond in a timely way as well. This does not happen 

by accident but by design. This province prides itself on 

maintaining the planning and training programs that are 

required to provide a high level of emergency preparedness to 

safeguard our people in times of disaster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is through a partnership involving the federal, 

municipal, and provincial governments that the necessary level 

of preparedness can be maintained. The three levels of 

government have committed a total of $321,512 in the current 

fiscal year for joint emergency preparedness projects and 

programs. 

 

The largest share of this amount  almost half  will be for 

enhanced training and education programs offered by 

Saskatchewan Emergency Planning to municipal and provincial 

officials. The remaining funds will be used by municipalities to 

purchase special equipment. 

 

The best protection in an emergency is to have highly trained 

personnel who can coordinate the appropriate resources to deal 

with all kinds of disasters. I would ask members of this 

Assembly and the people of the province to join with me in 

continuous support of those individuals and organizations 

dedicated to serving the well-being of our families, neighbours, 

and friends, in times of emergency. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank 

the minister for the notification given with respect to her 

ministerial statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been involved and know and appreciate 

greatly the importance of planned coordination through 

cooperation of all levels of administration. With a prepared 

plan, the volunteers and the citizens rally around to protect their 

communities in a timely fashion from unexpected disasters. 

 

I congratulate all those who are charged with and freely accept 

the responsibility for this extremely important occasion in state 

of emergencies, and I am very pleased of the fact that it is in 

fact a federal, municipal, and provincial agreement. Working 

together is what it’s all about in order to prepare for those 

things that we have no future control over. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also thank you for 

the early release of that particular statement. 

 

As a person who’s been involved in municipal government, I 

think the moves that have happened in Saskatchewan over the 

last number of years to prepare for emergencies, the kinds of 

things we’d rather not think about, but when they happen it’s 

good to have those bodies in place, I think is very valid. I think 

it gives a sense of security and well-being to every person in 

Saskatchewan. I commend you on that and also for this 

particular week. 



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

I think, as we look at all the things that need to be taken care of 

as far as emergencies and critical situations in Saskatchewan, 

we also need to keep in mind the rural revenge that’s happening 

in Saskatchewan, that that also needs to be addressed. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  With leave, to comment on the ministerial 

statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

very pleased to hear of the initiatives that have been undertaken 

by the federal, provincial, and municipal governments on this 

particular issue of being able to ensure that we are prepared for 

emergencies. 

 

And I feel strongly about this because I was one of the 

individuals who did tour, as I’m sure other members did, parts 

of our province that were devastated by a tornado when it went 

through Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that we do feel a certain sense of distance when we 

watch on the news, things happening in other parts of the world 

and other parts of our country. But we often don’t think it’s 

going to happen to us. 

 

It’s a terrific thing that has been done. I want to commend the 

minister, and hope that in fact things on other issues of joint 

importance like this can come to a conclusion in this same way, 

and hope that all of us here can do our part as well in 

facilitating such things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just to close on this, if I may, one of the most 

rewarding experiences, after observing what had transpired in 

Saskatchewan with the tornado, was the work done by people 

who came together, like the Mennonite Central Committee. I 

want to, at this point, acknowledge publicly the work that they 

did in helping in that emergency situation. 

 

So I wish to extend once again my thanks to the minister for 

including me in receiving her remarks, and congratulate the 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 84  An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Wascana Centre Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 85  An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley 

Authority Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a 

Bill to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 01  An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital 

(Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon, being An Act to Amend 

and Consolidate An Act to incorporate St. Paul’s 

Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

Clauses 1 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair:  Order. I invite hon. members, to the extent that 

you may wish to have a conversation, to please do so behind the 

bar. It is very difficult, very difficult, to conduct the business of 

the Chair with the level of noise there is right now. I thank all 

hon. members for their cooperation in this matter. 

 

Bill No. 02  An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity 

(Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan, being An Act to Amend 

and Consolidate An Act to incorporate the Sisters of 

Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

Clauses 1 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 03  An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities Act 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 04  An Act to Amend An Act 

incorporating Luther College, Regina 

 

Preamble agreed to. 

 

Clauses 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 01  An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital 

(Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon, being An Act to Amend 

and Consolidate An Act to incorporate St. Paul’s 

Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 01, An Act 

Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon, being 

An Act to Amend and Consolidate An Act to incorporate St. 

Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 02  An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity 

(Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan, being An Act to Amend 

and Consolidate An Act to incorporate the Sisters of 

Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02, An Act 

Respecting Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan, 

being An Act to Amend and Consolidate An Act to incorporate 

the Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(1445) 

 

Bill No. 03  An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities Act 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 03, An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities Act be read now a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 04  An Act to Amend An Act 

incorporating Luther College, Regina 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now move that Bill 

No. 04, An Act to Amend An Act incorporating Luther College, 

Regina be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 7  International Business Contacts 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks, I’m 

going to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly support the efforts of the  

Saskatchewan businesses who are attempting to establish 

international business contacts through many efforts, 

including that of the recent trade mission to the Pacific 

Rim, which will improve the province’s economy and 

create jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan has a very 

transparent economy. And what I mean by a transparent 

economy is one where the wealth of this province flows across 

the borders very easily. Anyone practically in the world can sell 

into this province, and from the rest of Canada they sell an 

extreme amount of goods into the province. 

 

You can start with items like automobiles, trucks, move on to 

farm equipment that comes out of the United States and comes 

here with very little opposition in the way of tariffs or trade 

deals. Household goods, Mr. Speaker, such as rugs, linoleum, 

stoves, fridges, washing machines and dryers  all of these 

items come into the province of Saskatchewan without any 

difficulty. 

 

This transparency of our economy forces us into being world 

traders, and we have been over most of the period of the 

province of Saskatchewan. We’ve traded out of this province, 

starting first of all with grain. And carrying that particular 

commodity on, we’re still trading in grain or field crops, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Later after that, we moved in to trading and selling other 

agricultural products out of the province of Saskatchewan  

meat being just one to mention. But, Mr. Speaker, the days 

when the agricultural community of the province of 

Saskatchewan have been able to maintain the economics of the 

province of Saskatchewan are gone, and we now have about 20 

per cent of the economy given to us by selling agricultural 

products and buying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the economy has expanded in a number of 

different directions. We are now into mining and manufacturing 

and the selling of some very minor items maybe on the world 

market into niche markets, what are called niche markets, in the 

sense of elk antlers and items of that nature. But all of these 

combined will make up an economy for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It is therefore, Mr. Speaker, we as a province must become 

prepared to trade with the rest of the world. And we should 

recognize the business community and those people who are 

out there to do that particular trading. Because we need to be 

able to return wealth to this province by marketing items. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the things that have affected us more 

seriously in the last few years  free trade, technology, the 

global village, the communications in the global village  are 

also, as they impacted on us negatively, we can also use all of 

those particular items to move forward and generate the positive 

events from the use of those particular things. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just comment specifically on a few 

items that have occurred in the recent trade trip that was made 

by the Minister of Agriculture and Food of this province. This  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

mission generated potentially a large amount of new . . . or 

opened a large number of new doors for businesses in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here one item which says that a Hong Kong 

company has expressed interest in setting up a plant to process 

elk antler velvet in Canada and sell it then in the Pacific Rim. 

Mr. Speaker, at the price that you can receive for processed elk 

antler, this will amount probably to a $2 million a year business 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another news release here that indicates 

somewhat of the same thing that has occurred, where one of the 

businessmen in the city of Yorkton went along and was selling 

skid-steerloaders; Leon-Ram Enterprises of Yorkton was selling 

skid-steerloaders. And these loaders have been recognized by 

the people in Korea as being very well put together and 

machines that are worth their while in purchasing to fill their 

needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is these types of business approaches to the rest 

of the world that will generate and maintain a good economy in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to also point out that we have some things that have 

been around for a long period of time which are also beneficial 

to us in trade. The officials from the Japanese Food Agency 

made it clear that they believed that the current threat to the 

Canadian Wheat Board’s monopoly for wheat and barley could 

endanger their long-standing relationship with Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agency board members say that they place a 

high value on the Canadian Wheat Board’s quality assurance 

program and the board’s ability to guarantee a reliable supply of 

grain. And when you move products of this particular nature 

throughout the world, this is one of the things that gives you a 

sale time and time again, is that when people can feel that they 

can get the product and the product will be what you said it was 

when you sold it to them to ship it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this particular motion will be 

accepted by all members of this House. And I say that because 

of some of the remarks that members opposite have given in the 

past few weeks. I have here a copy of the remarks of April 4, 

where the member from . . . I believe it’s . . . let me just look 

here, and I’ll check it out, so we’ll get it correct. The member 

from Melfort-Tisdale said that: 

 

I would like to wish both ministers and Mr. Thomson 

(that’s the Mr. Thomson of Thomson Meats) all the best in 

their international trade mission. It’s this kind of 

cooperation and partnership that can help turn (the 

Saskatchewan economy around). 

 

So I expect that this particular motion, Mr. Speaker, will receive 

the support of all members of this House, unless the opposition 

have changed their mind over the last few days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that, I would like to move . . . Mr. Speaker, 

with those words, I would like to move, seconded by the 

member from Swift Current: 

That this Assembly support the efforts of the 

Saskatchewan businesses who are attempting to establish 

international business contacts through many efforts, 

including that of the recent trade mission to the Pacific 

Rim, which will improve the province’s economy and 

create jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the indulgence of 

the Chair and the members in this House, I would like to talk a 

little bit about the economic development and then take a look 

at the way that it relates to the Pacific Rim countries. 

 

I appreciate this opportunity to make a few comments with 

regard to economic development and the growth in this great 

province. Our policy, as outlined in Partnership for Growth, 

makes a great deal of sense. 

 

The word “partnership” appears quite often these days. And 

frankly it only makes common sense to include all sectors and 

facets of society plus the various nations with which we do a lot 

of trade. And with partnership will result in decision-making 

process and by working together we will build on the strengths 

of the citizens in Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s how we will create economic activity, new opportunities, 

and a positive business climate  by forging partnerships. 

Partnership for Growth will help the economy prosper and 

create meaningful jobs. 

 

As we all know, it is small business who will create the new 

jobs. And one of the major complaints of small business, when 

surveyed recently, cited the government debt as being one of 

their major concerns. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the opposition, this government 

was the first province to eliminate the deficit and has taken 

giant strides to deal with the debt, without slashing the 

education, health, and social programs as the federal 

government is prone to do. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan, including small-business 

owners, appreciate this as was evidenced by the election victory 

 the largest majority for a second-term government ever in 

Saskatchewan. And I would like to remind the members 

opposite of this fact. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, we did not slaughter the social 

program but brought a great deal of financial stability and 

confidence to the business community. Heavens above, even 

Dale Botting lauded the government’s initiatives. Mr. Speaker, 

the gloom and doom from the members opposite is out of sync 

with the realities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another concern of the small business was the 

amount of government red tape. Our government is committed 

to reduce the number of regulations which impact small 

businesses. We will present a plan with which to review all  



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

government regulations, thus reducing the regulatory burden. 

 

Just recently the Saskatchewan Economic News, published in 

April 1996, gave an indicator of some of the activities which 

are occurring in this province. Farm cash receipts, for instance, 

went from 5,068.8 million to 5,206.1 million  a great increase 

of 2.7 per cent. 

 

Manufacturing shipments, which of course are recorded in 

foods  there were increases in that area. PCS (Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) first quarter earnings were 

up from 51.5 million in the first quarter of 1995 to 63.7 million 

in 1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  We have a strong food processing industry which 

has over 296 food processing companies and employ over 

6,000 people and generate more than 1 billion in sales. 

Saferco’s expansion, which of course ties in very nicely with 

the Pacific Rim countries, a hundred construction jobs and will 

inject about 15 million into the provincial economy in payments 

for equipment, parts, services, labour, and taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that agriculture is and remains the 

mainstay of the Saskatchewan economy and is a source of 

optimism for the future. Mr. Speaker, more that 200 million 

will be made available over the next four years through the 

agri-food innovation, Agriculture Development, and agri-food 

equity funds to encourage research, development, and delivery 

and diversification in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan have adapted to 

change and have diversified in various areas. Although wheat 

remains the main crop, many acres are being seeded to durum, 

canola, flax, and other special crops, such as lentil, peas, 

mustard, canaryseed, and sunflower. Along with this 

diversification has come the expansion of special crop 

processing industry. Mr. Speaker, farmers are very flexible and 

willing to change, as evidenced by all of the changes which are 

occurring in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some pressures continuing to concern 

agriculture. There are the rail abandonments. There are the trade 

regulations. There are the Canadian Wheat Board arguments 

and so forth. And these all play an important part on the trade 

which we have with the Pacific Rim countries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government will protect the policies and 

institutions that serve the best interests of our producers while 

working with the industry. Mr. Speaker, this government will 

work to achieve a strong, national safety net and fight to 

maintain national standards and appropriate levels of funding. 

It’s kind of a far cry from the federals who abolished the Crow 

and saved $320 million and then magnanimously allocate $20 

million back for roads. Which 150 kilometres should we fix? 

 

With regards to the Pacific Rim countries then and why I’ve 

been talking about the agriculture, is because this is one of our 

major markets. Saskatchewan exported approximately 381 

million in oilseeds to Japan last year. It’s Canada’s most  

important export customer for canola. And the reason why they 

deal with Canada is because they realize that Canada has the 

ability to supply a regular and consistent supply for what their 

needs are. 

 

Another release . . . Japan is a very important trading partner 

with the Canadian Wheat Board and has demonstrated a 

willingness to pay a premium price for the wheat and barley, 

and so that they realize that the Canadian Wheat Board is able 

to ensure high quality and even though they may have to pay a 

premium price for it. 

 

With regards to Taiwan, where are our minister went, it imports 

a wide range of products, such as canola, feed barley, dehy 

alfalfa and livestock genetics, and it was very surprised that 

Saskatchewan exports all of these products and more. And so 

because of this trip, again we were opening up a new market. 

 

And the last one we take a look at is with regards to South 

Korea. In 1995 South Korea purchased more than 37.6 million 

worth of agricultural good from Saskatchewan. They believe 

that the sales of pork to South Korea could double in 1996 from 

the 14.2 million realized last year. And as the previous speaker 

mentioned, that our minister dealt with one of Asia’s largest 

pharmaceutical companies to look at processing elk antler 

velvet. Saskatchewan has 180 elk farmers who produce about 

10 tonnes of antler velvet which is worth more than $2 million 

a year. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the motion that 

this Assembly affirm its support . . . whoops: 

 

That this Assembly support the efforts of the 

Saskatchewan businesses who are attempting to establish 

international business contacts through many efforts, 

including that of the recent trade mission to the Pacific 

Rim, which will improve the province’s economy and 

create jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 

enter into this debate on the motion put forward by the member 

from Shellbrook-Spiritwood, and I’m sure the member and his 

colleagues will be pleased also to know that I do support the 

motion. I do support Saskatchewan businesses who are 

attempting to establish international contacts, and I believe that 

contacts may lead to improved Saskatchewan economy and may 

ultimately create jobs. In fact businesses involved in 

manufacturing, processing, tourism, and agriculture are only too 

aware that entry into the global economy is the bright light for 

increased, sustainable jobs. 

 

The most important thing that the members opposite must be 

aware of is the fact that it is businesses who create jobs. 

Government cannot legislate job creation for businesses. I’ve 

said this time and time again, and I will continue to do so until I 

think this government has got the inkling about how jobs are 

really created. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at our provincial economy and think  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

about what is hindering economic growth, I am forced to point 

the finger across the floor of the Assembly at this NDP 

government. This is not something I want to do, but they’ve left 

me very little choice. They accuse me and my colleagues of 

preaching gloom and doom, but in fact we are speaking about 

reality. What they have to realize and what they have failed to 

realize is that things are nowhere as rosy as the Minister of 

Economic Development has attempted to portray. Many 

businesses are growing rapidly and are economically strong. 

I’m delighted when I hear this sort of news. But unfortunately 

there is another side to the coin. I have asked the Minister of 

Economic Development to take off the rose-coloured glasses 

for just a few moments and perhaps he may finally see that 

many in our business sector are indeed facing some very 

significant problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to discuss some of these problems for 

just a few moments. The first problem is job creation. Jobs are 

the absolute backbone to the health of any capitalistic economy. 

When people are employed, they spend money; when people 

spend money, businesses prosper; and when businesses prosper, 

the economy grows stronger and stronger. Job creation is the 

result of healthy businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of the smoke and mirror act that the 

Minister of Economic Development has so carefully crafted, 

job creation in Saskatchewan is totally non-existent. The 

minister claims that there have been 10,000 jobs created in 

Saskatchewan since 1992. I have asked the minister to provide 

me with a breakdown of these jobs and show me where they 

are. Where are these sustainable jobs? And he hasn’t been able 

to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the members opposite even know what 

a sustainable job is. A sustainable job is one that contributes to 

the overall health of the economy. It is a job that business has a 

need for. Sustainable jobs will provide a future for our young 

people. They will attract people to our province and they will no 

longer have to see our professionals migrating to provinces like 

Alberta who created 88,000 jobs in 1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about job creation, it is misleading 

to talk about jobs that are here today and gone tomorrow. We 

need to create an environment such that businesses have the 

opportunity to expand and to diversify. If businesses are able to 

do this, they will need skilled employees to be successful. As a 

result, they will create long-term, sustainable jobs that will 

benefit every person in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sustainable jobs are what the people of 

Saskatchewan want; and sustainable jobs are what will lead our 

province to economic well-being. Unfortunately the NDP 

government has failed miserably in its attempts. That is why, 

Mr. Speaker, the minister cannot and will not justify his job 

numbers. He has read the writing on the wall and he knows they 

have failed. The problem is he refuses to admit it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public doesn’t buy the minister’s rhetoric. 

They are the ones who ultimately gain or suffer the effects from 

the government’s actions or lack of action. The minister can say 

what he wants and manipulate the number any way they wish,  

but the truth of the matter is the people of this province aren’t 

convinced. They know better. 

 

This NDP government conducted a public opinion poll which 

clearly stated that 75 per cent of the people of Saskatchewan 

disapprove of the government efforts to reduce unemployment. 

The minister can fool the NDP back-benchers, but they can’t 

fool the rest of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the NDP government took power in 1991, 

there were roughly 44,058 people working in this province. One 

year later there were 4,500 people working in this province. The 

minister doesn’t like to discuss this issue but instead would 

rather attempt to pull the wool over everyone’s eyes. 

 

Unfortunately for the hard-working people in this province, he 

has not succeeded in his attempt. A recent Leader-Post article 

said, and I quote: “Given the silly manipulation we’ve seen 

from this NDP government on job numbers, such cynicism is 

well placed.” 

 

Mr. Minister, the gig is up. It is time to start focusing attention 

where it belongs  creating an environment conducive to 

economic growth, and then and only then will the people of 

Saskatchewan truly realize any benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next issue that needs to be discussed is the 

overall economic picture in Saskatchewan. Businesses are faced 

with a tremendous amount of restrictive legislation. The 

minister obviously agreed, because in his most recent glossy 

document, the Partnership For Growth, he made a commitment 

to reduce the regulatory and administrative burden on 

businesses by 25 per cent over the next 10 years to help them 

become more competitive. 

 

This is a positive step and a very, very slow process, but it still 

is a positive step. However there are two major problems with 

this initiative. The first is that many regulatory burdens will eat 

up many businesses well before the 10 years are up. For 

businesses that have just started up or are in the set-up stage, 

these oppressive regulations will be a very severe obstacle that 

unfortunately many will not be successful in overcoming. 

 

The second problem with his initiative is, where was it four 

years ago? If the minister would have recognized this problem 

four years ago, we’d already be halfway there. The minister 

speaks glowingly of his Partnership for Growth document. He 

said it is the mission statement for the government, the very 

foundation on which the next four years will be built. 

 

I would ask the members opposite: how many of you have 

actually read the document from cover to cover? I would guess 

not very many of them have taken the time to fully examine this 

document. They would rather accept the minister’s word than 

actually think for themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if they had read the document  and I do 

encourage you to do so  the first thing that would fly up in 

their face would be the first six objectives. These six objectives 

deal with the first two years of your mandate. 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

They say things like, by March 1997 we will analyse 

Saskatchewan business economy. By September of 1996 they 

will implement a plan to work with educational institutions and 

organizations. In 1997-98 they will begin to form partnerships 

with trucking and rail companies. 

 

These objectives use terminologies like: begin to work with, set 

out, and establish. Mr. Speaker, what has this government 

actually been doing for five years? These sort of things should 

have been happening five years ago. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m also very worried about the threat of the 

proposed occupational health regulations that will impose a 

further paper burden on businesses. Does this government 

really believe that employers are not responsible? Does the 

government really believe we don’t care about our employees? 

It’s not true, you know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, taxation in Saskatchewan is devastating our 

economic growth. This NDP government, led by the Minister of 

Finance, balanced the books on the backs of taxpayers. 

 

In February 1995, Maclean’s magazine examined 

Saskatchewan’s approach to the balanced budget. The article 

clearly shows that between 1991-92 and 1996-97 

Saskatchewan’s revenues increased by 25 per cent while total 

spending decreased by 3 per cent. Mr. Speaker, this is in light 

of closing 53 rural hospitals and dramatically offloading onto 

various third parties. 

 

But without a doubt the most alarming part of the article was 

the graphic entitled “The shifting tax burden”. This chart sadly 

shows the effects of the NDP philosophy. In 1990, the average 

farm income was just over $48,000, and the tax burden was 

$9,623 or 19.8 per cent. In 1994, after three years of NDP rule, 

the average family income was still just $48,000. But the tax 

burden has risen dramatically to $12,668 or 26 per cent. That’s 

an increase of 6 per cent. Mr. Speaker, this tax rate excludes 

any federal taxes but accounts for all provincial and municipal 

taxes. Yet the Minister of Finance continues to claim that they 

haven’t increased taxes. I would ask the minister if this isn’t 

increased taxation, then please tell me what is it? 

 

Perhaps a simpler question for the minister would be, what was 

the PST (provincial sales tax) when you formed government, 

and what is it now? Please tell me again how this NDP 

government hasn’t increased taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to oppressive regulations and stifling 

taxation, there is another beast that the NDP government has 

given birth to and mothered to become a major barrier to 

economic growth. This is indirect taxation, the increased utility 

rates, the unfair tendering policies, and the workers’ 

compensation fees. These things have a colossal effect on 

economic growth. 

 

Businesses were up in arms when this government attempted to 

increase workers’ compensation rates by as much as 565 per 

cent. The workers’ compensation in Saskatchewan was and still  

is a complete mess. 

 

The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement has had a severe 

effect on construction workers and construction firms. 

Saskatchewan firms have boycotted bidding on Crown projects 

solely because of the unfair tendering policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I conducted a survey on businesses across the 

province  about 200 in number  to find out what they feel 

are the biggest problems facing their company, what their major 

impediment to growth was, and to seek suggestions for changes 

in government legislation. I asked businesses, what is the single 

biggest problem facing your company today? Some of the 

responses were: government interference; retaining enough 

after-tax profit to maintain existing operations and still allow 

for growth; developing new products and services fast enough 

to replace those that have become obsolete; competition and 

regulation in industry; increasing input costs; lacking consumer 

confidence; increase in employee benefits; job stability 

concerns; and the economy. 

 

The next question I asked them was, what was your major 

impediment to growth? And they responded with, capital 

after-tax money to finance growth, market demand, access to 

markets and diversification, high taxes, declining rural 

population and the poor economy in rural Saskatchewan, 

unloading of cost by government, Saskatchewan labour 

legislation, and the rural infrastructure, notably the roads. 

 

And the other question I asked them was what change would 

they make to government legislation. And they said, no tax on 

product inputs, especially those relying on exports; removing E 

& H (education and health) tax on building materials used in 

hog barns; reduce taxation costs and employee costs; graded 

taxation for property reassessment; teaching entrepreneurship; 

reducing the size of government; and decrease governmental 

involvement in business. And also they have to expand small-

business deductions to $500,000 from the current $200,000 

limit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what the business people of Saskatchewan 

believe. The business people are the ones who know what’s 

best for them. They are the ones who should be deciding what 

course Saskatchewan’s economy should be on. After all, Mr. 

Speaker, it is businesses that are the job creators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn the attention to international 

business and trade missions. I am very much aware 

Saskatchewan needs to establish itself as a major competitor in 

the international market-place. Many opportunities exist for 

Saskatchewan businesses out of province and out of our 

country. If Saskatchewan is going to truly experience 

sustainable economic growth to a large . . . it will be due to a 

large extent on our ability to compete internationally. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have some of the richest natural resources 

in the world, and without a doubt we have the best farmers and 

agricultural industry in the world. As a result, our success relies 

heavily on exporting, and ultimately on our presence in 

international market-places. 

 



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

Mr. Speaker, we need to establish international business 

contacts. That is why I was somewhat bewildered when our 

Premier refused to participate in the “Team Canada” trade 

mission. That was a national effort to further promote our 

country and ultimately our province in the international 

market-place. 

 

The Premier’s counterpart to the east, Mr. Filmon, was asked if 

Saskatchewan and Alberta companies could lose business as a 

result of skipping the trade mission. He said and I quote, “I 

don’t think there’s any question about that.” And then he said: 

 

We have been hearing from companies that are on the 

mission both from Alberta and Saskatchewan that they’re 

tremendously disappointed. They felt that it was an 

opportunity lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very confusing for us. Why would our 

Premier refuse to participate in a trade mission that would allow 

Saskatchewan’s businesses and taxpayers to reap the benefits? 

Then one of his back-benchers, the member from 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood, wants the Assembly to support the 

international trade missions because they will improve the 

province’s economy and create jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is this NDP government’s position? Do they 

support international business or don’t they? Do they want 

economic growth? Do they want job creation? It’s time for 

them to take a position on these very crucial issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t say I blame the member from 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood. It seems like several of the 

back-benchers are confused about the government action or 

lack of action. I would like to believe that he wants to support 

economic growth, but I have a hard time believing it because 

he, like the rest of the back-benchers, continue to sit behind a 

cabinet and refuse to take a stand on behalf of taxpayers and 

business people. 

 

Last week we heard the member from Regina South encourage 

Saskatchewan businesses, workers, and communities to work 

with government. Obviously he too was just a little misguided. 

Saskatchewan people have been working for years to build the 

economic framework of this province in spite of the 

government  like the one opposite who have repeatedly 

mounted vicious attacks, attempting to tear it down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like to mention a few words 

about the business community in Saskatchewan. The business 

community in our province is made up of men and women who 

have faced major setbacks, yet continue to survive. The 

recession in the 1980s, coupled with the financially 

irresponsible Tory government, destroyed several businesses 

along its gruesome course of devastation. Several more have 

been destroyed by the tax regime and over-regulation of our 

current NDP government. In spite of this, Mr. Speaker, the 

business people in Saskatchewan have done remarkably well. 

 

In order to ensure that they will be able to survive into the 

future and to ensure new businesses have a chance to succeed, 

we need to drastically lower the cost of doing business in this  

province. The end result will be a significant economic growth, 

a healthy economy, and sustainable jobs for our residents. It 

will allow this province to become part of the global economy. 

It will mean a bright future for our children. And I ask the 

members opposite for their input to allow businesses to grow, 

so we can build a valuable place in our Saskatchewan. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I had not 

initially planned on participating in the debate, but I’m 

fascinated by the comments from the members opposite. 

 

I was particularly entertained by the member for Kelvington and 

her long explanation about sustainable jobs. And I have to take 

some heed of what she says. I think she, if anybody, would 

understand about the lack of sustainable jobs, if only because 

her job as a member of the official opposition is not sustainable 

either. Very soon she will be joining the ranks of the third party, 

sitting there in the little rump over on the side, if she’s fortunate 

enough to get re-elected. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let me return this debate to the substance of 

the motion put forward by my colleague from 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood. I think it’s important that we 

understand the importance of export to our economy. And there 

was a long diatribe by the previous member about CCTA 

(Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) and a variety of 

other things that really  I think at one point she was talking 

about health districts  that really didn’t fit into the export 

issues. 

 

I would encourage her to read the Partnership for Growth 

document, specifically point 18 regarding developing 

Saskatchewan’s export potential. It says that by June 1996, we 

would establish the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership 

Inc. to provide exporting firms with research, with programs, 

intelligence services, training on export products, and export 

financing. 

 

But it doesn’t stop there. But it doesn’t stop there. It goes on to 

say that we will: 

 

. . . re-focus our efforts to encourage Saskatchewan 

companies to become export ready through the adoption of 

quality assurance principles and practices. 

 

Very practical. Very practical. This is what the motion is about. 

The motion is about exports. The motion is about partnerships. 

The motion is about job creation. These are the sort of things 

that people should be talking about. 

 

Now what we need to take a look at is partnerships, and the 

importance here. Let me just remind the member opposite, in 

case she’s not aware, of the importance of our international 

merchandise trade. 

 

Now the member for Thunder Creek likes to selectively quote 

out of a publication called Sask Trends Monitor. And I want to 

take a look at what this article says from a February 1996 issue.  



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

It says: 

 

Preliminary 1995 data shows international merchandise 

exports at $8.9 billion . . . Compared with 1994, exports 

are up 16% . . . 

 

Exports are up 16 per cent under this government in one year 

alone. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is very positive and speaks well 

to the success of our initial document, Partnership for Renewal, 

and now our subsequent document, Partnership for Growth. 

And I’d say it goes further than that because we can see that our 

balance of trade has increased by a billion dollars over that one 

year alone  a 21 per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can also see from what is stated here in Sask 

Trends Monitor of February, where it says that both the market 

destination and the commodity mix are clearly becoming more 

diversified . . . In fact it’s interesting to note that roughly half of 

our exports are to the U.S. (United States) while the other half 

of our international exports obviously go elsewhere in the 

world. 

 

The importance of south-east Asia in particular to our economy, 

I think is growing. And it speaks well of the vision of many of 

the people throughout our province and many of the people in 

our research sector in particular, and in agriculture. The Globe 

and Mail on April 15 of this year put out a story under the title, 

“The Export Market: Success in Saskatchewan.” And I think 

that the members would be well advised to take a read of the 

article if they get a chance. 

 

The first paragraph simply says, and I quote: 

 

When a farmer in Southeast Asia brings in the local 

veterinarian to inoculate his herd of cattle against 

infectious disease, he’s completing the last step in the 

University of Saskatchewan’s drive to sell its products to 

the export market. 

 

Here’s a clear case where Saskatchewan people, our 

Saskatchewan institutions, our Saskatchewan-government-

funded institutions, are providing real economic export and job 

opportunities. 

 

The company at reference here in The Globe and Mail article is 

one that I’m quite familiar with  it’s called biotech . . . or 

sorry, Biostar, and Biostar is a subsidiary of the Veterinary 

Infectious Disease Organization, or VIDO, which is sponsored 

up at the University of Saskatchewan out of its research park. 

 

Now this is a clear example of where the government  and 

not just this government, but previous governments  have had 

the foresight to move forward. Now VIDO was established 

back in 1975 for this very purpose of moving technology from 

the microscope to the market-place. It’s a good example of how 

we’ve been advancing this over the past 20 years. 

 

(1530) 

 

The biggest export market for VIDO is not only the U.S. and 

Europe but south-east Asia, and I think this speaks very  

importantly to the issues of why it’s important to have our 

Minister of Agriculture over in south-east Asia promoting trade 

and export. 

 

And I appreciated listening to the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena say that she’d be supporting the motion. 

I’m sure she’ll stand in her place to do so later. But other 

Liberal members, I think, are also coming to finally understand 

the importance of this government’s economic development 

initiatives. 

 

I look here at a statement made to this Assembly only early last 

month by  I was going to call him the hon. member  by the 

member for Melfort before he shamed himself in this House 

today, and he goes on to say about Thomson Meats, that the 

president of Thomson Meats, quote, says: 

 

The presence of both Agriculture ministers is extremely 

important because of the scare concerning mad cow 

disease. 

 

He says that he can give potential international investors many 

assurances, but it really helps to have government officials 

reaffirming that Canadian beef has not been exposed to the 

devastating disease. 

 

The member for Melfort goes on to say: 

 

I would like to wish both ministers, and Mr. Thomson, all 

the best in their international trade mission. It’s this kind of 

cooperation and partnership that can help turn around 

Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Now I don’t know what happens in that opposition caucus 

because on the one hand, when they stand up to talk about 

what’s happening in their riding, they recognize the strength of 

the partnerships that this government is promoting. When they 

stand in their constituency to talk about job growth they like to 

take credit for it, and yet they know that a keen part of that is 

the Partnership for Growth document. 

 

Yet they come into this House and they launch attacks on this 

government. They launch attacks on our programs. They launch 

attacks on our ministers. I guess it’s simply duplicitous, 

simplistic politics. It simply reeks of hypocrisy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw today what I think was a shameful event 

that all of us should be quite embarrassed for the member of 

Melfort of. In what many of us were initially led to believe was 

a spontaneous outburst of emotion and passion, he comes 

forward and says some very unparliamentary things in this 

House, shames himself, and is removed. Well it turns out later 

on, as we’re looking at it, that as he’s walking out of the House, 

as he’s walking out of the House, lo and behold, his press 

officials are handing out statements saying exactly what had 

happened not 30 seconds before. 

 

This sort of cynical system is just awful. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

just think this is such an offence. I know many members will 

not have had this, so I’d like to lay this on the Table so that 

people can just see what level these Liberals will stoop to. If I  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

may have a page I’ll simply . . . Mr. Speaker, this is the sort of 

duplicity that we see coming forward. 

 

The members opposite . . . and I look at the speech by the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena today who puts forward a 

. . . starts out by saying she’ll be supporting the government and 

then proceeds through the remainder of her comments to attack 

the government. 

 

I don’t know what exactly this is except for some sort of 

duplicitousness on the part of the members opposite. They talk 

about partnerships, and yet when you take a look at where they 

stand, I read here about how they should . . . they lecture us at 

great length about how we should be forming real partnerships 

with business. Partnerships require us to talk with business. So 

my question is: where was the member for Thunder Creek? 

 

I’m reading a Leader-Post article from the third month, 18th 

day, saying: “Crown Life slams Liberals”: 

 

In his letter released Monday, (it goes to say) Johnson 

(namely the CEO of Crown Life) accuses . . . (the member 

for Thunder Creek) of making “reckless comments” that 

have had a negative impact on Crown Life’s business. The 

Crown Life president also says that . . . (that member’s) 

continuing refusal to meet with him and other company 

officials “shows a wilful disregard for the interests of 

Crown Life, the people of Saskatchewan and . . . over 

1,000 Crown Life employees who are Saskatchewan 

taxpayers.” 

 

Is that how the Liberals opposite would build partnerships? Is 

that how they would propose that they carry out business? By 

attacking businesses, by attacking working people, by ignoring 

them, by refusing to meet with them? 

 

That may be the Liberal plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that is 

certainly not our plan. We have put forward a solid plan, in 

writing, as to how we’ll build the partnerships. And here, as I 

constantly see growing before me, hundreds of pages of good-

news stories about job creation, hundreds of stories about 

economic development, hundreds of stories about businesses 

growing and becoming profitable and more sustainable in our 

province. 

 

This trade mission that the Minister of Agriculture recently 

went on is a good example of this. Let me just read to you what 

the Leader-Post says: 

 

Saskatchewan Agriculture minister is in Hong Kong where 

he met with officials of Tung Fong Hung, one of Asia’s 

pharmaceuticals companies. The Hong Kong companies 

expressed an interest in setting up a plant to process elk 

antler velvet in Canada. And the minister pitched 

Saskatchewan as the location. 

 

This is potentially a $2 million opportunity for our province. 

Are the members opposite supportive? No. Are the members 

opposite encouraging the minister? No. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not simply elk that’s of interest. There is  

markets over there that we can tap in other ways. Let’s look at 

South Korea. The Minister of Agriculture went over to deal 

with the South Korean government specifically on the issue of 

feed peas. As it turns out, Korea has some very prohibitive trade 

barriers and tariffs that are preventing us from selling our trade 

peas. 

 

The minister’s direct intervention is helping to bring the South 

Korean government with a better understanding of what the 

importance of this industry is, not only to Saskatchewan but 

what its potential benefits are to South Korea. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I say, there are hundreds of pages of 

this, hundreds of examples of where this government’s 

partnership approach is taking this province and how it is 

helping to create jobs, how it is helping to create export 

opportunities, and how it is helping to build business. 

 

And the members opposite to wilfully ignore this, I think is 

shameful. It’s shameful that the partisan tactics that they carried 

out today in this Assembly during question period . . . I think it 

also speaks to their contempt of the business community and 

their contempt for the cooperative spirit we’re attempting to 

bring forward in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll take my seat by saying, I very strongly 

support the motion put forward by the member for 

Shellbrook-Spiritwood. I encourage all members to join with us 

in voting for it. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives 

me pleasure to also rise this afternoon to speak a little bit on the 

. . . to enter this debate on trade and its importance to our 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In fact it is fast becoming 

apparent that export trade is a Saskatchewan success story 

which now totals up to $11 billion in annual income to the 

province, Mr. Speaker. Exports to the rest of Canada and 

international markets account for 50 per cent of the total gross 

domestic product of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan now produces more products than it 

can consume. For that reason we’re dependent on trade and to 

keep our economy going. Export markets are a necessary 

outlook for our grains, oilseeds, potash, crude oil, uranium, and 

our manufactured goods. 

 

Saskatchewan’s exports have diversified in recent years through 

increased trade in non-traditional areas, that is value added 

plants which now could total 27 per cent of our total exports. 

These products, Mr. Deputy Speaker, claimed 11 per cent of 

total exports just 10 years ago  a very significant increase. 

 

In recent years, Saskatchewan exports have been subject to a 

variety of negative factors ranging from poor weather and 

unfair competition in certain markets . . . During the 1980s, 

international grain subsidy wars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, caused 

price reductions for cereal grains and fierce competition 

amongst exporting nations. At the same time, resource prices 

fell. These factors, combined with a high Canadian dollar,  



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

restrained our growth in exports. 

 

In the last few years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, agricultural export 

subsidies have been scaled back and demand has increased. 

Demands and prices for other raw resources are also up. 

Accounting for inflation, Saskatchewan’s exports have 

increased 46 per cent between 1984 and 1994. 

 

The Saskatchewan Economic Development department, Mr. 

Speaker, has been proactive in promoting non-traditional 

products and developing export markets. Regions such as 

Africa, South America, and Oceania increased their overall 

consumption of Saskatchewan products during the 1990s. 

 

Other regions such as eastern Europe and the Middle East have 

also changed their buying patterns to include more 

non-traditional exports. Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

committed to building a stronger export trade sector, both 

interprovincially and internationally. 

 

Saskatchewan supports the Agreement on Internal Trade that 

was implemented by the provinces in 1995. The Agreement for 

Internal Trade is expected to reduce internal trade barriers 

within Canada and expand potential markets for Saskatchewan 

products. About 15 per cent of Saskatchewan’s GDP (gross 

domestic product) is generated by exports to these other 

provinces. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan intends to take advantage of 

any opportunities under the North American Free Trade 

Agreement to secure markets for our products in North 

America. Saskatchewan exports to Mexico increased 

dramatically to 172 million in 1994. In the last seven years the 

value of Saskatchewan exports to the U.S. has doubled from 1.9 

billion to over 3.8 billion. Overall Saskatchewan exports rose 

30 per cent. 

 

However, while North America remains Saskatchewan’s largest 

market, the province continues to seek new opportunities for 

traditional and non-traditional exports to the rest of the world. 

The recently completed Uruguay round of multilateral trade 

negotiations resulted in the World Trade Organization, which 

will replace the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade as the 

key international agreement governing international trade. The 

World Trade Organization holds the potential for key, 

significant improvements in trading conditions for 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural producers. 

 

Stronger rules against agricultural subsidies and higher prices 

for commodities are creating a more favourable business 

climate for our exporters. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, trade missions such as the one undertaken 

by the Minister of Agriculture and Food and Saskatchewan 

businesses can only enhance and improve this ever growing 

sector of our economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:43 p.m. until 3:44 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  25 

 

Van Mulligen Wiens Shillington 

Tchorzewski Johnson Upshall 

Pringle Koenker Trew 

Bradley Cline Stanger 

Hamilton Murray Langford 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Sonntag Murrell Thomson 

Draude Belanger Bjornerud 

Krawetz   

 

Nays  nil 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Point of order, Mr. Speaker. When the 

vote was taken, the member for Rosetown-Biggar did not vote 

from his seat. In fact he voted from the seat of the Minister of 

Finance, and therefore I would submit that his vote should not 

be recorded. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The point of order is well taken and 

the member’s vote will be stricken from the record. 

 

Motion No. 2  Northern Community 

and Economic Development 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 

today to move the following motion: 

 

That this Legislative Assembly condemn the government 

for neglecting northern Saskatchewan and, furthermore, for 

failing to provide any substantial initiatives and objectives 

to stimulate community and economic development in the 

northern regions of Saskatchewan. 

 

The motion will be seconded by the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we classify as northern Saskatchewan 

actually includes one-half of the land mass of Saskatchewan but 

only 3 per cent of the population. That’s right  only 3 per cent 

of the population of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s a total 

of 34,000 people. 

 

I know that that seems like an insignificant amount. Obviously 

the members opposite consider it an insignificant amount, 

judging by their lack of commitment to the people living there. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the members opposite that there 

is absolutely nothing insignificant about northern Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

I want to tell the members opposite that their priorities are 

misplaced and that people in the North both need and deserve 

respect and a true commitment from this government. I know 

my words will be ignored today and I know that members 

opposite may heckle and they will spend so much time wrapped 

in political games that they will ignore what I have to say. Still I 

firmly believe that what I have to say is important and that it  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

needs to be discussed in this legislature. 

 

The members opposite can continue to ignore the issue, but it 

will be coming back. Because the people of the North are strong 

and their potential is absolutely unlimited. A strong 

government, a smart government, a different government may 

channel the time and resources into our North and help it grow 

and prosper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have no choice but to throw up our arms in 

despair over what this government has done. They have yet to 

encourage economic growth on any front. Why should we 

expect them to be any different when it comes to the North? 

But, Mr. Speaker, we do expect them to be different. We expect 

them to work on behalf of Saskatchewan people  all 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because whether they realize it or not, they are elected to 

represent the concerns of their constituents. They are not sitting 

in those seats to show the utter lack of concern outlined in the 

NDP government policies. This government has lost touch with 

the people, and I think at least some of the members opposite 

know that. And I encourage them to take a stand. Talk to the 

Premier. Tell him that your constituents want a voice in how the 

province is run. That’s your job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is true that the voice of the people is lost in 

government bureaucracy, and nowhere is this more evident than 

in the communities of the North. You know what the saddest 

part is about this? The saddest part is that the government is 

ignoring input that could help our province flourish now and 

well into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that only 3 per cent of the population 

lives in northern Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, what I didn’t 

mention is that the demographics are changing. In the North, 

the population is growing by 5.5 per cent. Compare this to an 

overall provincial decline of 2 per cent. Times are changing, 

Mr. Speaker, and if this government continues to ignore 

northern Saskatchewan, they will pay for it in the long run. 

 

Most of the members in the House can’t begin to imagine the 

obstacles northern residents must overcome. We can’t imagine 

the widespread degree of poverty. Mr. Speaker, in the House a 

few weeks ago, I listened to the member from Athabasca talk 

about health care facilities in La Loche and Ile-a-la-Crosse. Mr. 

Speaker, I can’t even begin to imagine the conditions of the La 

Loche hospital  ATCO trailers pushed together with leaking 

roofs, faulty wiring, the front door falling off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite have any compassion 

whatsoever, the description of that hospital should have tugged 

at their heartstrings and at their very consciences. Mr. Speaker, 

sometimes I wonder where the NDP government’s conscience 

is. Do they even have one? I would like to think so, but with 

their lack of commitment to the North, I just can’t say for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the saddest part of this government’s inaction is 

that the children are the ones who will suffer the most. Fifty per 

cent of northern residents are under 20 years of age  50 per 

cent of all northern people are under 20 years of age; 44 per  

cent are under the age of 15. What this means, Mr. Speaker, is 

that every time the government ignores the North, they are 

ignoring the young people who need help the most. After all, it 

is our youth who will build our future. Don’t they deserve more 

from the government? 

 

Of course this government doesn’t seem to have its priorities 

straight. That’s become painfully obvious in the latest round of 

education cuts. 

 

Today the Minister of Education announced their latest plan to 

structure our education system for the future. She announced 

the province-wide consultation process that will let the people 

have a say in how education is run. Forgive me for being 

cynical, but this government’s history of consultation does not 

bode well for our children. Like the overhaul of our health 

system and like the utility rate increases, consultation on 

education could be sounding the death-knell. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the document released today by the minister, I 

note that she has indicated that this government has a 

commitment to maintaining and enhancing the quality of 

education of our young people, wherever they live in this 

province. That statement, Mr. Speaker, I think says it all for 

both northern and rural Saskatchewan. 

 

When we look at the North, tremendously large area, a lot of 

difficulties as far as delivering a quality education program. 

And when we talk about changes, when we talk about 

restructuring, I’m not sure that we can be looking at of course 

amalgamation when we talk about the three school divisions 

that are in the North. The description given for the consultation 

document by the Minister of Education is this, and I quote. It 

says: 

 

The purpose of this public consultation is to determine 

how we can best work together to structure our education 

system for the future, particularly in rural and northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

When we take into account a statement like that, Mr. Speaker, 

we note that of course all students require a quality education. It 

doesn’t matter where they live. If they live in the North or if 

they live in rural Saskatchewan or if they live in our two largest 

cities of Regina or Saskatoon, quality education must be 

maintained and in fact enhanced. 

 

The document also goes on to state that: 

 

Students in rural and northern divisions require the same 

full range of programs that are available in urban centres, 

particularly at the high school level. 

 

That is a statement that is in the document that was released this 

morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Minister has stated that there are options. But the underlying 

message of her announcement was that things would have to 

change no matter what people say. In other words, the 

government believes that fiscal restraint is more important than 

our children. Money is more important than our children. What  



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

kind of mixed up priority is that, Mr. Speaker? Our education is 

being carelessly shredded by a thoughtless, callous government, 

and education in the North is not escaping the vicious hacking 

of the NDP cabinet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may not realize that there 

are three K to 12 systems in the North. The provincial system 

runs 29 schools in northern communities and the federal system 

has 17 band-controlled schools. Mr. Speaker, of these 46 

schools, only 14 offer grade 12 programing. There are 

communities that do not offer a complete kindergarten to grade 

12 system. 

 

And this is not the only fact that I find distressing. Mr. Speaker, 

the average high school completion rate for the North is 24 per 

cent. Over one-third of the entire northern population is 

considered functionally illiterate. That means they have an 

education level of less than grade 9. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the members opposite can explain to me 

what kind of government sits back and lets these numbers roll 

off their backs. What kind of government will stand up in this 

Assembly, day after day, and insist they are committed to 

education in the face of these facts? What kind of government 

can do this? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I truly believe that it is only an irresponsible, 

unfeeling government that can put political power over the 

well-being of the people. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this 

government has done. With its drastic cuts to school boards, 

particularly in rural areas, this government has chosen politics 

over children. And I can’t tell you how deeply these cuts will 

hurt our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the members opposite know what kind of 

effect the lack of commitment to education has on northern 

communities. Education is one step in a cycle of poverty that is 

devastating northern Saskatchewan. Without education, young 

people are unable to find or to create meaningful work. This not 

only sinks them into the throes of economic poverty; they could 

also suffer irreparable damage to their self-esteem. 

 

From this cycle of poverty and low self-esteem comes abuse, 

crime, violence, and poor health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can pretend that education 

problems are an individual issue that they are dealing with 

properly. But I can assure them it is not a separate issue. Lack 

of education is merely one symptom of the government’s 

overall scorn towards northern problems. 

 

The cycle has to be looked at as an immense, deeply serious 

problem that must be addressed. The longer the government 

goes on pretending that the situation in the North is nothing but 

sunshine and roses, the deeper the cycle will get. Mr. Speaker, I 

strongly urge the government to take action now. 

 

(1600) 

 

There are so many positive things that could and should be 

happening in the North. There’s so much untapped potential  

that this government could and should capitalize on. Think 

about it. If this government would funnel the time, energy, and 

resources into northern education, they would be giving 

northern people a valuable tool to end the cycle of poverty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I truly believe Northerners don’t want to live off 

of government money. I think they want to build a lifestyle 

based on their own values and funded by their own economy. 

What they need from the NDP government are the basic tools to 

make this happen. It’s time the government realized that quick 

fix solutions to patch up the holes are not good enough. The 

need to start building a solid structure from the ground up. 

 

And there is no better place to start building than with the 

children. Mr. Speaker, I cannot impress enough how important 

education is, not only in northern Saskatchewan but throughout 

the province. I am completely appalled that this government 

doesn’t feel the same way. And I cannot believe that they are 

not willing to invest in our children, in our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, school boards will start to feel the earth-shaking 

impact of government cuts to education over the next few years 

and they will have no choice but to cut back themselves. We 

have already started to see what the future of education holds if 

this government continues hell-bent on their proposed courses. 

 

Schools are eliminating programs. Staff are being laid off. 

School weeks are being shortened. And the government likes to 

pretend that these are positive things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t see it that way. These are things that will 

negatively affect our children. I don’t know whether the 

government deliberately put blinders on so that they could 

pretend nothing bad will come of their poorly laid plan. Maybe 

they don’t want to see that far into the future. Maybe they hope 

that things will work out despite their bad choices. And maybe 

they just don’t care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all of the reasons I’ve just talked about, for all 

of the things the government is not doing for education in the 

North, for all the times the government has ignored needs of 

northern people, I must stand today and move that motion. 

 

I encourage the members of this Assembly to vote from their 

consciences today and not from the standpoint of their political 

party. Don’t listen to a government that continues to alienate 

northern and rural Saskatchewan. Listen to the people you 

represent because I believe if the members opposite were to 

truly listen to those people, they would hear what we have been 

hearing all along. People matter. And when we celebrate the 

spirit of this province, we celebrate the successes of the people 

 all people, including those in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that this legislature join me in condemning 

the government for failing to stimulate community and 

economic development for the people in the Saskatchewan’s 

North. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I second the  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the government for 

neglecting northern Saskatchewan and, furthermore, for 

failing to provide any substantial initiatives and objectives 

to stimulate community and economic development in the 

northern regions of Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s great that we finally have an opportunity to debate the 

neglect and low priority that this government has inflicted on 

northern Saskatchewan. When I travelled through these 

northern communities, I talked to hundreds and hundreds of 

people, and they tell me they are largely being ignored. Why, I 

ask? Because there’s no direct funding for things like cultural 

development, local social development, or economic 

development. 

 

Of all the government dollars that are controlled in northern 

Saskatchewan, the questions we have  what portion is under 

government control; what portion is under local control. Why is 

it that this government can find only $4 million for northern 

development but it can find half a billion dollars for social 

services for the whole province. Really, I believe it’s a question 

of priorities. Right now in northern Saskatchewan, this 

government’s system of disincentive is terrible. 

 

If you decide to get a job, you have to make at least 17 to $18 

an hour to make it pay. The cost of gas, the cost of utilities, the 

cost of food, the cost of clothing, and other essential services 

make it very expensive to live in northern Saskatchewan. 

Perhaps this government does not realize that there are about 

five main factors working against northern people besides their 

isolation. We’re thinking of communities like Camsell Portage, 

Uranium City, Fond-du-Lac, Stony, Patuanak, Pinehouse, Black 

Lake, and so on and so forth. 

 

But some of the systems in the North that really work against 

northern people, Mr. Speaker, is number one, the system of 

disincentives northern people have. Take for example the 

housing situation. The housing situation does not encourage 

people to go to work. Take for example some of the costs of 

living in northern Saskatchewan. It does not encourage people 

to continue to work. So really that’s the number one priority in 

northern Saskatchewan is the system of disincentives that exist. 

 

Number two, is northern people have little or no control over 

northern land and resources. Some of the problems we have is 

we have no influence one mile past our municipal boundaries. 

 

Number three, the Metis people of north-west Saskatchewan 

who are pretty well most of the population aside from the treaty 

people, are not respected constitutionally by both the federal 

and provincial governments. 

 

Number four, this government is not making any effort to look 

at the community development scenario. 

 

And finally, number five, northern people have not been 

allowed to develop the capacity to self-govern. These are some 

of the few restrictions, Mr. Speaker, that the people face. 

 

In addition, the business community in northern Saskatchewan, 

they have many challenges on their own. The business 

community is basically non-existent. The training, management, 

and skill development of business and expertise are not 

coordinated. The problems facing northern Saskatchewan are 

multidimensional. To tackle these problems, this government 

must also take a multidimensional approach to help foster 

community development. 

 

When I speak about community development, I want the 

government to examine the dynamics of each and every single 

community of northern Saskatchewan. This government must 

carefully look at the housing demands and how the lack of 

housing affects the economy; of how the costs of social 

housing, this affects the economy. This government must also 

consider the welfare situation and how that affects the creation 

of a local economy as well. The lack of training dollars and the 

ad hoc approach to training, negatively impacts on the skill 

level of local people and therefore the economy as a whole. 

 

Northern Saskatchewan does not need different consideration 

from southern Saskatchewan. In southern Saskatchewan, the 

population is ageing which requires different health and 

transportation needs, etc. It is the exact opposite in the North, 

where there’s a tremendous amount of young people. In fact, 55 

to 60 per cent of the population in northern Saskatchewan is 

under the age of 24. These are dynamic, energetic youth who 

want to contribute to their community and to their own lives. 

 

Because northern Saskatchewan is such a young demographic 

area, the planning at the local level in northern Saskatchewan 

must provide stimulating development, which is in dire need 

right now. In fact, there was a need 10, 15, 20 years ago. If this 

does not happen soon, we’ll begin to see an increase in the 

amount of social problems, such as alcohol and drug abuse, 

family breakdown, violence, and the list goes on and on. The 

government has a role to play in combating this type of abuse. 

 

I ask every member of this House in the government, to 

contemplate very, very carefully what type of impact will there 

be if northern Saskatchewan continues to be ignored and these 

issues continue to be not addressed. The neglect of northern 

Saskatchewan has gone on long enough. Now it is time to start 

initiating a very comprehensive economic and social 

development strategy for each and every community in northern 

Saskatchewan. We will save a generation if we act now. 

 

I have said time and time again that while government and 

corporations continue to reap northern resources for profit, not 

very many of those dollars are reinvested in northern 

communities. You and I can start now to reverse this trend. I 

ask you to look at the conditions in the North that will continue 

if we don’t work with the whole community  the people, the 

governments, and the corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all these people want is more local input and 

control over their program dollars currently spent by the 

province in northern communities. For example, we look at the 

various community . . . La Loche, for example, there’s a study 

done many years ago that says the government invests or  



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

pumps in 16 to $8 million per year into that community. That 

money is used for social services and for housing, for health 

and education. Now if you take at least 10 to 15 years that this 

has been going on, that adds up to maybe 180 to $210 million 

pumped into this particular community. 

 

Why is it then, can’t this community of 3,000 people develop a 

prospering economy? Why is it this same community continues 

to have problems time after time  and every single 

community, Mr. Speaker. Northern Saskatchewan communities 

are tired of the negative image that they portray to the rest of 

this province. We are all asking the simple question, is why 

doesn’t the government take time to answer and take time to 

consult and take time to sit down with us so they can together 

plan a better way? 

 

The simple fact is that this government is making no effort 

whatsoever to look at the community development scenario. 

The government is not showing these people how they can 

control and access this revenue to develop their own future. I 

have heard from several government members that this 

government’s agenda is to prepare for the 21st century. 

 

It’s high time that this government sincerely implement new 

ways to include northern Saskatchewan in its plans for the 

future of this province. Northern Saskatchewan and its people 

are part of Saskatchewan so let’s start treating them as part of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Right now most northern communities are in limbo. Many of 

their residents are aboriginal, as well as non-aboriginal. And 

basically they get very little recognition for where they live, but 

they are considered more for what type of funding category that 

they qualify for. 

 

If we look at the millions and millions of dollars that some 

people complain the government is wasting on Social Services 

and Justice, we can surmise that the system is not working as 

best as it should. It’s time for the government again to examine 

the current community development model. We all must make a 

conscious effort to work towards a model needed for the 21st 

century to redesign the whole system, if you will. If we don’t, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll have another lost generation of young 

Northerners that will look to us and at you with suspicion and 

regret. 

 

Some of the examples, Mr. Speaker, of how northern 

Saskatchewan can indeed rise to the challenge is a small 

community of 40 people in the far North area. It’s a community 

called Camsell Portage. Again, Camsell Portage has a 

population of 40 people and they have something like $170,000 

in savings from over the years as a small municipal government. 

And each year, Mr. Speaker, they get a grand total of $40,000 

 an operating budget of $40,000  and these guys have 

saved this type of money for year after year after year. 

 

This is, of course, an incredible amount of money for a 

community of that size. And my point again is that they are 

obviously able to handle money well. 

 

But what is the next step? Can they reinvest that money to 

something stimulating that will generate more revenue and 

more opportunity for that community to fit their needs. The fact 

of the matter is, no there isn’t. There isn’t any effort. There isn’t 

any super plan. There is no grand strategy for northern 

Saskatchewan. And it’s time that we all realized that, and time 

that we realized that if we don’t have a grand strategy, problems 

will continue on and on and on and on. 

 

(1615) 

 

The fact of the matter is we need more communities like 

Camsell Portage that are able to manage their money. But let’s 

go to the next level of community development. Let’s look at 

the whole picture. And again I go back to the point, unless and 

until we develop a plan  a super scenario in which all the 

communities can participate equally in  problems will 

continue to persist. 

 

Look at a number of other communities like Buffalo Narrows, 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval. They have no way of raising any extra 

revenues except through its tax base. The town council has a 

limited role. The question we have is why is that? Why haven’t 

these communities been recognized for their extra challenges 

that they have in developing an economy. Many people feel that 

the provincial government is limiting northern Saskatchewan 

people’s abilities and their potential by not having anything to 

design in cooperation with them, so they can come to the next 

step of developing their own economies and looking after social 

issues. 

 

Saskatchewan could lead the way with a very exciting 

provincial program that could be applied right across the 

province. In fact this could be applied right across the country. 

This scenario would involve community development; would 

involve recycling current welfare dollars; and would involve 

drafting up a plan over time. 

 

Northern people are not asking for huge amounts of money but 

rather fair access to resources, fair treatment, and above all else, 

respect. They want fair dollars normally committed to a certain 

region to allow the communities to do what they can for 

themselves. 

 

Many northern Indian bands have proven they are able to do 

things for themselves, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s time that 

we extend that opportunity to many of the smaller communities 

who consist primarily of Metis people. And I think if you allow 

the opportunity for northern people to prove what they can do, 

you will see that they can indeed deliver. And Camsell Portage 

 again I’m going back to that point  is another fine 

example. 

 

A lot of the programs that have been discussed for northern 

Saskatchewan over the years have been ignored. Take for 

example revenue sharing. La Loche’s hospital  if the 

government can find millions of dollars to maintain Crown Life 

jobs or to poach jobs from Intercon meat packing plant, why 

does this government only provide $4 million for northern 

development fund for all communities in northern 

Saskatchewan? We talk about 32,000 people  $4 million, Mr.  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

Speaker, this does not do anything. I think $4 million is what 

one community needs to develop the infrastructure and the 

capacity to really become part of this province. 

 

I feel it is because this government does not have the 

commitment to northern Saskatchewan. The government does 

not have a desire to see northern communities create their own 

economy so that they can become self-sufficient. We don’t 

want to come running back to the government every time I need 

something, Mr. Speaker. We want to be able to design our own 

future, and all we ask is for control and fair access to northern 

resources that are in our backyards. 

 

There has to be a concerted effort by this government to begin 

to base development of the northern economy on the renewable 

resource industries, not just the non, which of course are mining 

for uranium, gold, and diamonds. These things are mined out 

after 40 or 50 years. And are we to be left behind with big 

empty holes and no promise? 

 

The northern people are asking for a simple thing of revenue 

sharing so that we can develop industries that we are familiar 

with such as forestry, fishing, tourism, communication, 

agriculture, transportation, and the list goes on and on and on. 

 

I cannot do justice to the amount of ideas and the intelligence 

that northern people have when it comes to economies of this 

nature, so I won’t elaborate any further. But these are just a few 

of the examples, Mr. Speaker, of what the northern people can 

do to help themselves. 

 

This economy must be community based, community designed, 

and community driven, and the people tell us this over and over 

and over. 

 

Again for the community development plan to be successful, 

the government must also look at regional development. It must 

consider transferring over control of social services, of housing, 

of justice, of many things to northern communities. It must look 

at direct funding for local, sustainable development agencies. 

 

It must look at development of communities’ infrastructure; 

basic things like roads; basic things like natural gas; like 

medical service. We haven’t got those opportunities or those 

services available to us, Mr. Speaker. The big thing is that 

northern Saskatchewan people don’t have that control. 

 

As well we look at outside the municipal boundaries which 

many Metis communities operate under, the municipal 

structure. It does not have legislative co-management ability on 

the land and the resources of forestry and fishing and so on, so 

forth. So really we must start to be getting serious when we 

look at co-management of land and all the resources. This 

multidimensional approach to the complex problems facing 

northern communities would hopefully promote 

self-sufficiency. 

 

And again I go back to the municipal model, Mr. Speaker. 

When you look at the old situation over the last 10, 15, 20 

years, the municipalities in northern Saskatchewan, such as 

Camsell Portage, have proven that they are able to manage  

money in a good way; and secondly, that they are able to 

operate within systems that government put upon them as long 

as they have control and as long as they have decision-making 

ability. 

 

The government must really begin to start developing these 

small northern communities. They must start defending these 

small northern communities, and they must start promoting 

these small northern communities. Above all else, Mr. Speaker, 

the government must initiate a new community development 

process for all people of all the region to have a say. Our young 

people need to be challenged; they deserve no less. And I think 

as long as we continue to ignore them, we are asking for many, 

many problems. 

 

This government has always and has most recently been 

boasting about its consultation. Why then are we seeing 

reoccurring problems happening in northern Saskatchewan? 

The statistics everybody is aware of in this House. We talk 

about the crime rate. We talk about the unemployment rate. We 

talk about the social problem rate. These facts have been 

consistent for many, many years  the health problems and the 

housing problems and the road problems. These things have not 

surfaced overnight; they’ve been going on for 10, 15, 20 years. 

 

And yet when we talk about these things, they say well, we’ve 

consulted. Basically most of the consultations that they have 

taken or have been under way at this time and in the past are 

being taken for government’s purposes. But it’s not really 

meant to gather input and consultation and true participation 

from northern people. 

 

Up until now, sincere and valuable consultations had not taken 

place. The government is not listening to these people’s ideas 

relating to community development or developing a capacity for 

these communities to take over their social services system, 

their housing, and the proper medical services. Mr. Speaker, the 

government does not want to listen to plans that will allow 

northern communities to train their people at their own will. 

This government has never had any of that type of valuable 

consultation. This agenda must stop. We must go back, and we 

must listen to what the northern communities have been saying 

to us for years and years and years. 

 

The people in the North are their own answers. The Indian 

bands throughout northern Saskatchewan and some in my very 

constituency have done very well. They’ve done very well 

basically because they have helped themselves. They were 

given control over their resources, control over their system, 

and they’ve done well, not because of this particular 

government’s support but because they have the drive and the 

initiative to do so. 

 

On the flip side in northern Saskatchewan, we have 

communities . . . a community of Metis people and a 

community of non-aboriginal people. They would like the same 

opportunity. And again, I go back to the Metis situation. 

They’re being kicked back and forth between the federal and 

provincial governments when we talk about whose 

constitutional obligation are the Metis people. So in the 

meantime life continues as we go along. These northern  



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

communities have not changed over time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is just entering a brand-

new era. When this government talks about its consultation with 

northern people, it’s simply talking about the development of 

our northern resources without our involvement and with very 

limited benefit nor control to us. 

 

Government should be talking about community development 

in its very fine sense. This is a provincial jurisdiction; this is a 

provincial matter; these are provincial Saskatchewan people; 

these are provincial Saskatchewan communities. So if you don’t 

want to deal with it on a Metis agenda, then at the very least get 

your compassion going and start dealing with it on a community 

development sense. Because there and only there can we really 

say that we’re committed to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So we can start seeing some of the social problems decrease. 

We can start seeing the unemployment rate decrease. We can 

start seeing the housing demand problems decrease. We can 

start seeing the medical problems and medical services 

decreased, and the list goes on and on. We cannot continue to 

sustain the madness that’s happening in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, the government could improve on its dismal record 

in the North by starting to take up some of the initiatives I’ve 

outlined. This will only help northern Saskatchewan people 

make northern Saskatchewan a better place to live and grow for 

future generations. 

 

I don’t say it for my grandfather, I don’t say it for my father, 

and I don’t say it for myself, Mr. Speaker; I say it for my 

children and the many other children that walk the streets of La 

Loche or Buffalo Narrows, of Dillon, of Camsell Portage, and 

the many people that have childhood dreams that may never be 

realized if we don’t start this process now. 

 

So I urge the government to stop ignoring northern 

Saskatchewan and start building northern Saskatchewan 

alongside the people. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 

listened to the member from Canora-Pelly and the member from 

Athabasca, I think nothing could be further from the truth. And 

I will be moving an amendment, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my 

remarks that — and I will just read it for you — that will go as 

follows: 

 

delete all the words after “Assembly” and in its place insert 

the following words: 

 

affirm its support for the people of northern Saskatchewan 

who, together with the government, have been working to 

create new opportunities for job creation and community 

development. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to . . . or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

should say, I’d like to refer to a . . . I could go on here for  

probably two or three hours with all the things that we have 

done, but I’d like to refer to a number of the things that we have 

done, only highlighting on a few. 

 

I’ll begin by referring to the La Ronge Health care centre that 

was opened not too long ago, I believe, in the . . . several weeks 

ago, and it was a culmination of years of effort, Mr. Speaker, by 

many people. The grand opening was attended by chiefs and 

mayors from across the North. It had local sponsors and 

volunteers. There were corporate sponsors and certainly the La 

Ronge and area residents  truly a full community effort. 

 

The La Ronge Health Centre will offer a wide range of 

integrated services including home care, Mr. Speaker, public 

health, health education, mental health counselling, alcohol and 

drug recovery, speech and language pathology, dental health, 

early childhood intervention, a resource centre, a holistic 

healing room, as well as acute care and long-term care. 

 

The Health Centre’s holistic healing room recognizes the 

uniqueness, Mr. Speaker, of the region and an approach to 

health that focuses on the healing body . . . on healing the body, 

mind, and spirit. This is a $14 million project, Mr. Speaker, 

including 9 million from the provincial government. I think this 

is very good news for northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Komis gold mine project is going to create northern jobs. 

It’s owned by the Golden Rule Resources Ltd. of Calgary and is 

located 170 kilometres north of La Ronge near Brabant Lake. 

The mine will be operated by Waddy Lake Resources 

Incorporated, a wholly owned subsidiary of Golden Rule. When 

operational the mine and processing mill will employ about 100 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, many, many of them 

northern people. As a result of the agreements Northerners will 

receive every possible opportunity for employment on the 

project, including training if needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, estimated capital expenditures for the project are 

$8.5 million with estimated annual operating expenses of 15.6 

million. A monthly payroll for direct and contract employees is 

expected to be about $440,000, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

phenomenal amount of money being put into northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The mining industry, which employees currently 5,600 people 

and generates millions in dollars of revenue annually, has been 

identified under the province’s economic development strategy, 

the Partnership For Growth paper, and it is one of the keys to 

sustaining economic growth. The Komis mine demonstrates our 

government’s commitment to capitalize on the opportunities 

outlined in that Partnership For Growth paper. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, this is another clear indication, an 

example, of how our government is working in partnership with 

industry to create jobs in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I referred to as well, Mr. Speaker, the implementation of the 

province-wide 911 system. This will ensure that all residents, 

including  and maybe I should say more especially, most 

especially  Northerners, will have a common access to 

emergency and protective services. This Bill is an important  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

step in the process to secure 911 services throughout the 

province by providing an opportunity for municipalities and 

emergency service providers to work together in the delivery of 

the 911 service. It seems to me that where distances are great 

and the population is sparse, this 911 service makes a whole lot 

of sense and will aid northern Saskatchewan immensely. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the aboriginal tourism strategy. 

Saskatchewan’s Partnership for Growth economic strategy 

identified aboriginal tourism as a key target for growth within 

our tourism sector. This aboriginal tourism development 

strategy is an extremely good starting point. It contains an 

extensive inventory of new or expanded tourism attractions and 

products, highlighting aboriginal culture and offering exciting 

opportunities for aboriginal economic development and 

certainly for job creation. 

 

The opportunity for Northerners include development of parks 

and heritage sites, museums and galleries, crafts, the performing 

arts, guided hunting and fishing trips, and certainly many 

wilderness tours. And I know, Mr. Speaker. I’ve spent a lot of 

time personally up in that area, having grown up in there and 

certainly even further north, travelling and trapping with my 

father along the Waterhen River and canoeing further into the 

North along the Churchill River. And it is phenomenal country, 

I should say, to see and to appreciate and enjoy. 

 

And further, the Saskatchewan’s aboriginal people will be able 

to use this study that I referred to earlier to develop specific 

plans for the tourism projects that they’d like to start or expand. 

And we the government will work with them to help implement 

those plans. 

 

There is growing interest in aboriginal tourism especially 

among people from Germany and the United Kingdom and 

from France. Developing our aboriginal tourism industry will 

increase the number of visitors who come to, especially, 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

There will also be spin-off benefits for the rest of the province’s 

tourism industry and for our economy as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 

I think this is great news for northern Saskatchewan, and still 

more proof that this government is committed to development 

in the North, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Closer to my home, Mr. Speaker, the province and village of 

Green Lake signed a wood supply agreement which guarantees 

a long-term wood supply for the Green Lake saw mill. Under 

the terms of the wood supply agreement, Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management guarantees to the 

Green Lake saw mill an annual wood allocation of 30,000 cubic 

metres for the next 20 years, renewable every 5 years. 

 

This supply will be made available from the NorSask and 

Weyerhaeuser Forest Management Licensing Agreement areas 

and other Crown lands. And if I’m not mistaken, Mr. Speaker, I 

do believe that I heard the member from Athabasca in a private 

members’ statement even alluding to this and complimenting all 

of the people from the area about the good work that they had  

done. So it’s a bit ironic that he now stands up and chastises our 

government. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, in regards to this agreement, what it does 

is provides a secure wood supply and that is very good news, 

not only for those who are making their living directly from the 

mill’s activities but certainly for the community as a whole. 

 

The mayor of Green Lake, Fred McCallum, says that this 

agreement brings us closer to our shared goals of local 

economic opportunities and a healthy forest. The harvesting and 

saw mill operations of the Green Lake saw mill together 

contribute about 50 jobs, Mr. Speaker, 50 jobs to the local 

economy. 

 

I don’t know why we would want to condemn our government 

for wanting to help create jobs in northern Saskatchewan up 

where I live, Mr. Speaker. And here’s another one, Mr. Speaker. 

It refers to the remote housing program. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, that often  and again the member from Athabasca 

referred to this  often Northerners live in dwellings that are 

severely overcrowded and lack basic services such as water and 

sewer. The province was therefore pleased to work with the 

federal government and the community to develop the remote 

housing program. 

 

In this pilot project, clients, families, and friends work together 

to build homes. This is proof that Northerners are taking a 

leadership role in developing solutions to community concerns. 

Northerners have little opportunity to address their housing 

needs as there is a severe shortage of housing and virtually no 

private market. 

 

Saskatchewan Municipal Government housing division is cost-

sharing the remote housing program delivery on a 75/25 per 

cent federal-provincial basis. The province is responsible for 

coordination and supervision of the entire project. Yet another 

clear sign that our government is committed to working with 

communities in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And still closer to home, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer to the 

joint venture agreement that was signed with the Meadow Lake 

Tribal Council. It was announced that the signing . . . The 

Meadow Lake Tribal Council, I should say, announced the 

signing of a joint venture agreement between the tribal council 

and the Miskito Indians of Nicaragua. 

 

The Meadow Lake Tribal Council is made up of nine first 

nation bands from throughout the north part of the province. 

And I think the tribal council speaks to the concerns of the 

majority of first nations people, certainly within that tribal 

council and that organization. 

 

The agreement is a commitment to study the feasibility of 

developing joint venture opportunities involving forestry, 

mining and minerals, oil and natural gas. This is the first 

international agreement for a Saskatchewan first nations 

organization. Again, Mr. Speaker, wonderfully good news for 

northern Saskatchewan, and a real opportunity for yet more job 

creation in the North. 

 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

The tribal council is a major shareholder in NorSask Forest 

Products and is a major employer in that industry as well as in 

other areas in our community. And it is in that vein that I want 

to refer to a book that has just been published. I circulated it 

around to many of the caucus members. And I just want to 

speak briefly about that, if I could. And it ties in with the 

amendment and the motion that’s here before the House today. 

 

And I want to quote briefly from that story. It’s called The 

NorSask Forest Story. I think it’s very apt . . . I think the quote 

very aptly summarizes what is the focus of the book  the 

communities and people working in harmony with each other 

and the entire ecosystem. 

 

And in the introduction, Mr. Speaker, there is . . . It starts like 

this. It says, “The Cree word from which our word 

‘Saskatchewan’ comes means swift-flowing water.” 

 

This is a good description of our province since Saskatchewan 

contains about 13,725 square miles of fresh water  more than 

any other province in Canada. Over half of Saskatchewan is 

forest, and most of the lakes, rivers, and streams lie within its 

northern forest boundaries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The subject of the story is an area of about 3 million hectares of 

Crown land located in north-western Saskatchewan. From its 

location, the area takes the name of NorSask. For approximately 

8,000 years the forest has been a great source of fish, fur, and 

game for northern people. It is only in most recent times that the 

northern forest has been valued as a source of goods for trade 

and sale. Today it is also valued as a source of timber, and 

currently the forest is being explored for oil and gas. 

 

But forest is more than trees, Mr. Speaker, more than a listing 

of things. For an understanding of the NorSask forest and the 

kind of forest management the first nations and Metis people 

want, we turn to the words of the elders . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, some time ago there 

was a ruling by yourself in the House about members reading 

directly from material such as books. And I’d like your ruling 

on the member; for some time he’s been reading directly from 

printed material which is not a speech, but in fact a book. And I 

would like your ruling on that member’s actions. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I have noticed that the member has 

been reading, but has not been reading for that long a time, and 

I do not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Order, order. I don’t 

think that the member has been reading from the book for that 

long a time and I will let him continue with caution. 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do want to quote. I 

do want to take one quote from out of here that, as I referred to  

earlier, the first nations and Metis people . . . and it’s the words 

of the elders. It goes like this: “The way of the people is respect 

for the wonder of creation.” And these words I think, Mr. 

Speaker, invite all people who have made the North for their 

homeland to respect creation and to respect each other. And one 

other quote that I do want to take out of the text here that I think 

summarizes everything that I wanted to say, it says that “All 

things bright and beautiful, all creatures great and small, all 

things wise and wonderful, the Creator made them all.” 

 

And it is in that vein, Mr. Speaker, that I read from this . . . that 

I quote from this text, I should say . . . and the Meadow Lake 

Tribal Council, as I said earlier when I was referring to this text, 

this summarizes what they are trying to do in working with 

northern people. 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, the people in the North are really 

genuinely moving ahead, perhaps quicker than some people in 

this Assembly know, or perhaps quicker than some people in 

the province even want them to move ahead. 

 

And I think it’s a sure sign of success when you see an 

organization like the tribal council from Meadow Lake and 

creating jobs on their own. And they certainly have to be 

commended for that, Mr. Speaker. They have truly been very 

progressive. And I think that this story is a testament to the 

pride of the tribal council and the partners in NorSask and 

Mistik Management. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I have just several more issues that I want 

refer to that will highlight some of the things that have actually 

taken place in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

This government certainly continues to place a strong emphasis 

on both the community and the economic development in 

northern Saskatchewan, and we are providing the necessary 

infrastructure which in turn provides solid foundation for 

economic growth in the North. We have established a long-term 

agreement with Cameco Corporation and COGEMA Resources 

Incorporated for them to make 10 to $25 million in a safety and 

efficiency improvements to Highways 102 and 905 between La 

Ronge and points north over the next number of years as new 

mining developments occur. Communities benefit along with 

the mining companies, not to mention Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Further reflecting this government’s emphasis on partnership 

approaches as the way to go, construction on schedule for a 

new . . . construction is on schedule, I should say, for a new $6 

million bridge at Cumberland House, which I know the member 

from Cumberland is very proud, to be funded equally by the 

province, the federal government and the local Cumberland 

House Development Corporation. This new bridge, to be 

completed in September 1996, is already providing construction 

jobs for local residents through a $400,000 contract with the 

local development corporation for development of associated 

roads and approaches and will provide a year-round link for 

1,350 residents, Mr. Speaker, of the isolated community, when 

completed. 

 

As well, and still on the subject of partnership approach, 

agreement has been reached with federal agencies and the  



May 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

Prince Albert Grand Council on a cost-shared construction of a 

new $8 million seasonal road to link and to provide access to 

the Athabasca communities of Black Lake, Stony Rapids, and 

Fond-du-Lac. The Prince Albert Grand Council is in the process 

of establishing a road maintenance corporation that would be 

able to deliver road maintenance contracts related to this, and 

possibly other similar projects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The list of recent infrastructure investments supporting strength 

and economic development in the North certainly continues. 

Fond-du-Lac airstrip improvements in 1995, Mr. Speaker, are 

worth 550,000. The long-term upgrading of Highway 965 

between Beauval and Cole Bay under the NorSask Forest 

Management Licensing Agreement also commenced in 1995. 

 

Here are many, many other projects and developments that this 

government has worked on and worked with in harmony with 

people and communities in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and I could go on at some length. But I will now 

officially move, seconded by the member from Lloydminster, 

the amendment. And I will read the amendment into the record, 

Mr. Speaker. The amendment is as follows: 

 

That all the words be deleted after the word “Assembly” 

and substitute the following therewith: 

 

“affirm its support for the people of northern 

Saskatchewan who, together with the government, have 

been working to create new opportunities for job creation 

and community development.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to speak on the 

motion put forward by the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Like my colleagues, I feel that the issues facing northern people 

are too serious to be casually dismissed by this NDP 

government or for the members opposite to try to camouflage 

by quoting poetry from a book. 

 

As elected representatives for all people in Saskatchewan, it is 

our responsibility to speak up and encourage meaningful 

discussion to facilitate changes. This is particularly important 

when talking about our northern residents whose voice in this 

House is limited by the government’s neglect of northern and 

rural issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have already touched on some of 

the countless challenges facing northern Saskatchewan, and 

they have talked about a lack of commitment to northern people 

by this NDP government. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the term 

“lack of commitment” even begins to cover this government’s 

attitude towards northern people. Apathy might be a better term. 

If this government really cares about people living in northern 

communities, why have they turned away from the profound 

problems facing these communities? 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the members opposite can tell me why the  

unemployment rate in the North remains three times as high as 

the provincial rate and why male workers earn only 53 per cent 

of their southern counterparts. There is no doubt that the 

unemployment in this province is high throughout the province. 

And with this government’s lacklustre record of job creation, 

we know that unemployment is a problem in the South too. But, 

Mr. Speaker, the facts show that it is even worse in the North. 

 

The Minister of Economic Development, the Premier, and the 

Minister of Northern Affairs have done virtually nothing to 

help. In fact when we look at the endless number of problems 

facing the North, we can only conclude that none of the 

ministers in this government nor the Premier have taken 

assertive steps towards helping the North. Yes, we will see 

them stand up in this House and protest this, and we will hear 

them declaring a burning commitment to help change things in 

the North. But actions, Mr. Speaker, speak louder than words. 

And in this case of this government, inaction has spoken  has 

spoken volumes. 

 

This government’s inaction has perpetuated the 

poorest-of-the-poor syndrome in the North. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Canora-Pelly touched on the cycle of poverty that 

has gripped so many northern residents. This cycle of poverty 

has created a ripple effect that has engulfed entire communities. 

 

Instead of feigning ignorance and making half-hearted 

promises, this government should create viable plans that will 

help Northerners fight to escape this cycle. These people want 

freedom, freedom from their struggle so that they are able to 

use their talents to build their communities. 

 

Perhaps the members opposite are not fully aware of what this 

means and what this struggle is about. Do they know, for 

instance, that the rate of homicides in the North is four times 

higher than the general population rate? Do they know that the 

suicide-death rate for Northerners aged 15 to 34 is twice the 

provincial rate? Do they realize that alcohol- and drug-related 

abuse is rated five times higher there than in the province as a 

whole? And, Mr. Speaker, these kind of statistics are just the tip 

of the iceberg. 

 

If we look at the indicators of social health, we see that the 

government’s apathy has caused the problems to grow. We are 

now seeing second and third generations coping with the same 

problems that have continued to plague the North for years. 

 

For example, let’s look at emotional and mental health. People 

in northern communities rank mental illness, along with alcohol 

and drug abuse, as the leading health problems. And these 

people also show higher rates of anxiety and depression. But, 

Mr. Speaker, they have the lowest use of provincial mental 

health clinics. This does not mean those are avoiding health. 

What it means is that this government has not provided 

adequate facilities for these people to receive care. 

 

Sadly though, this government refuses to take any 

responsibility. They refuse to look at the problem realistically 

and to provide valid and workable solutions. And what about 

problems like the rates of teenage pregnancies that are three 

times as high as in the South? What about the high number of  



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 1996 

single mothers living in poverty? In Saskatchewan in total 11 

per cent of families are single-parent families. But in the North, 

this figure jumps to 22 per cent. When we take into account a 

recent estimate that 65 per cent of children living in poverty are 

from single-parent families, this number becomes even more 

alarming. Obviously the government’s solutions are not 

working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may consider the discussion 

paper on redesigning social services to be a viable answer, but 

the proposals outlined in this paper are like throwing a glass of 

water on a raging forest fire. It’s the right thought, but what 

does it really accomplish? Mr. Speaker, I applaud the 

government’s effort to address issues facing people living in 

poverty. Unfortunately I can’t applaud the results. Not only 

does the discussion paper ignore the facts that northern people 

face unique challenges; it ignores the fact that the welfare roles 

are higher. Education levels are lower, and facilities are sadly 

lacking in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if they haven’t adequately addressed the 

problem, how can they find a solution? Mr. Speaker, in 1987 

when the NDP was in opposition, they also advocated for the 

expansion of preventative services in the North. At that time, 

they insisted that social assistance allowances should take into 

account the higher cost of living. Well it’s almost 10 years later, 

and I find it hard to believe that the members opposite are from 

that same party. I guess compassion died when the present 

government decided to take a right-wing, anti-socialist path. 

 

I wonder how many of the members sitting opposite me today 

still have the roots of compassion in their hearts. I wonder how 

many of them would like to speak out but are afraid of feeling 

the wrath of the Premier and his cabinet. Mr. Speaker, I am not 

advocating the same policies . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. The Speaker is having 

some problems hearing the speech. Now would the members 

come to order. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I am not advocating the same 

policies that the NDP government of the past talked about. I 

just wanted to point out how this government has failed to hold 

true to its word. And believe me, this comes as no surprise to 

anyone. The government strategy is to make as many promises 

to as many people as they can without really caring if those 

promises can be kept or not. 

 

A perfect case in point is the Premier’s statement last week. The 

Premier admitted that his 1991 election campaign included a 

promise to eliminate child poverty. Then, in speaking with the 

media, he said that was a promise he made but he did not know 

if it could be kept. I guess this is what the NDP considers a 

promise. The rest of the world considers it political arrogance. 

So now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not surprised that this government 

had no qualms about reneging on its words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the answer to the problems in the North 

reaches far beyond this government’s limited vision. They are 

looking at solutions slapped together with a minimum of 

thought and energy. They are not looking to the root of the  

problem, and that is exactly where they will find the answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like my colleagues pointed out, the answer is to 

end the poverty and to create an environment for economic 

opportunity in northern communities. And that means 

comprehensive, realistic plans that come from and will work for 

northern residents. 

 

It is my understanding that the people of the North don’t want 

the government’s pity, and they most certainly don’t want to be 

patronized. They want systems put in place that will help them 

start building on the roots of their culture and of their unique 

heritage. That is what the government should be looking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the government wants to ignore what 

my colleagues and I have been saying today. But by ignoring 

this, they are ignoring a vast problem that is continuing to grow. 

We brought this motion forward, Mr. Speaker, because it is a 

problem that hits deep at the heart of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are compassionate. They 

care about each other, and they care about the future of all 

members of our province. Our very culture has been built on 

cooperation and caring. Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to see that 

destroyed by a careless government so intensely focused on its 

own priorities that it forgets to put people first. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to support the motion proposed by the 

member from Canora-Pelly, and I would encourage all members 

to carefully consider how important northern Saskatchewan is 

to all of us and offer their support as well. Thank you. 

 

Amendment agreed to on division. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:56 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1421 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1422 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1422 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1422 

  Murray .....................................................................................................................................................................................1422 

  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1422 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union New Executive 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1422 

 Tourism Saskatchewan 

  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1423 

 Recognition of Farm Boy’s Manufacturing 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1423 

 Cargill Plant to Open in Clavet 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1423 

 Davidson Boy Enters National Hockey League 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1423 

 Trans-Canada Trail 

  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1423 

 Saskatchewan Job Numbers Down From Last Year 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1424 

 Saskatchewan Express 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1424 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Education Funding 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1424 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1424 

 Long-term Care in Melfort 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1425 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1425 

 Health Care Complaints Procedure 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1426 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1426 

 Education Restructuring 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1427 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1427 

 Unfunded Pension Liabilities 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1428 

  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1428 

 Northern Highways 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1428 

  Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................1428 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Announcement of a Public Consultation Process on the Future of Public Education in Saskatchewan 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1429 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1429 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1430 

 Emergency Preparedness Projects 

  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1430 



 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1430 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1430 

  Haverstock ...............................................................................................................................................................................1431 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 84  An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 

  Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................1431 

 Bill No. 85  An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1431 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

PRIVATE BILLS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 01  An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon, being an Act to Amend and Consolidate 

An Act to incorporate St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon ....................................................................................1431 

 Bill No. 02  An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan, being An Act to Amend and 

Consolidate An Act to incorporate the Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan ...................................................1431 

 Bill No. 03  An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Act ............................................1431 

 Bill No. 04  An Act to Amend An Act incorporating Luther College, Regina ...................................................................1431 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 01  An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon, being an Act to Amend and Consolidate 

An Act to incorporate St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon 

  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................1432 

 Bill No. 02  An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan, being An Act to Amend and 

Consolidate An Act to incorporate the Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan 

  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................1432 

 Bill No. 03  An Act to Amend The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Act 

  Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................1432 

 Bill No. 04  An Act to Amend An Act incorporating Luther College, Regina 

  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1432 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 7  International Business Contacts 

  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1432 

  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1433 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1434 

  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1437 

  Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................1439 

 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1440 

  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................1440 

 Motion No. 2  Northern Community and Economic Development 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1440 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1442 

  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1446 

  McPherson ...............................................................................................................................................................................1448 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1449 

 


