


















































April 1, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 641 
 April 1, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise tonight to make a 
few brief comments on the very positive message delivered in 
last Thursday’s budget address, and to indicate that I will, at the 
conclusion of the budget debate, be voting in favour of its 
acceptance. 
 
As I sat in my place in this legislature and listened to our 
Minister of Finance deliver the 1996 budget, I was filled with a 
feeling of confidence in our minister and ultimately a sense of 
confidence in our entire approach as government to the 
responsible management of this province’s business; a province 
that has been and continues to be managed in a businesslike 
manner, businesslike as only the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) and NDP (New Democratic Party) 
governments of this province have managed our affairs. 
 
The present government, of which I am a member, realizes that 
in order to manage the province’s business with compassion 
and consideration for all, we, like the Blakeney, the Lloyd, and 
Douglas governments before us, know that the poorest in our 
society suffer the most when governments are not responsible. I 
have to admire our minister and her ability to set the path of 
renewal, a process that quite frankly appeared impossible some 
four short years ago. 
 
As Sir Winston Churchill said, referring to the fighter pilots 
during the Second World War: never have so many owed so 
much to so few. Well never have a people owed so few so 
much as the people of Saskatchewan owed when finally we 
were released from the Devine reign of terror. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  What we owed was a massive Tory debt. 
Fortunately what we owe the present Minister of Finance is a 
debt of gratitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  Gratitude for having the foresight to manage the 
province’s purse properly so that once again Saskatchewan 
people can afford to dream of better days ahead. 
 
When I look across at the remaining entrails of the former Tory 
government I am just amazed  while they themselves even 
refer to themselves as the new Conservatives, as in not wanting 
to be associated in any way with the old Conservatives. An  

attitude that you cannot blame them for  amazed that they 
want to be seen in public after what the Tory government did to 
this province. 
 
People of today and future generations, long after we are gone 
from the political scene, Saskatchewan people will pay the price 
for ever letting down their guard to the point of where this 
province was cursed by a Conservative government. Or as the 
columnist Mr. Dale Eisler so appropriately put it in the March 
30 issue of the Star-Phoenix, and I quote: 
 

the almost childish political and economic naiveté in the 
Grant Devine years, 
 

Mr. Eisler points out in the same article the fact that: 
 

. . . 10 years ago the Conservative government . . . 
(brought) in a budget that ended up with an operating 
deficit of $1.2 billion. 
 

For that year alone  1.2 billion in 1986, which clearly points 
out the difference in a government’s ability to manage. 
 
That year was just one of the budgets that created the almost 
impossible situation. And do the so-called new Conservatives 
show any remorse? No. The third party sits opposite, gleefully 
proposing that the people of Saskatchewan should give them a 
chance to once again turn loose the wrecking crew. Well history 
shows that they may some day get that chance because, as the 
old-timers are so quick to point out, people don’t learn by 
history. Each generation, it would appear, has to have one Tory 
government so they can learn the error of electing a 
Conservative government themselves. Fortunately, it will likely 
be many years before Saskatchewan people will forget the 
complete incompetence of such a regime. However, 1986 
wasn’t the only example of their misconduct. 
 
They averaged approximately a billion dollars per year in deficit 
financing from 1982 to 1991. Such a contrast: capable, 
responsible, businesslike approach to government by the 
present Minister of Finance and our government today, 
compared to nine and a half years of what could better be 
described as the Devine demolition derby  demolition on a 
grand scale by Tory governments, both provincially and 
federally. 
 
In spite of that burden, our minister has been able to bring a 
sense of logic to the Saskatchewan financial picture. Her 
success at bringing an end to the deficit was rewarded last June 
with the largest second-term majority of any government in 
provincial history. The successful management of a tough 
financial situation by our government and by our Premier and 
our Minister of Finance is admired by financial people and 
politicians in other jurisdictions throughout North America. 
 
This year we are faced with major cuts in equalization 
payments, cuts that are truly justified because Saskatchewan’s 
economy is doing so much better than previously compared to 
other provinces. Yes, some of these cuts are justified but none 
the less they have to be back-filled with provincial dollars. As  



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

has been indicated in the budget speech, in order to continue to 
provide balanced budgets from now to the new century, we will 
have to offload to other levels of government some of the 
offloading that we received from the federal government. 
 
This is where our government differs from the federal Liberals’ 
approach of slash and burn. Our government is going to 
back-fill in health, social programs, and education, to maintain 
the programs that Saskatchewan people indicated to us must not 
be lost in spite of what the Liberals in Ottawa have done to us. 
A Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal, regardless of whether they 
are in Ottawa or right here in Regina as the official opposition. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to extend to the official 
opposition, my sincere thanks on behalf of Saskatchewan 
people everywhere, for clarifying a very major concern that has 
been evident for many years. 
 
I, of course, am referring to the confusion of just whether the 
Liberal Party was somewhere close to the centre in the political 
field or far over to the right wing. Or perhaps it would be more 
accurately described as the wrong wing of the Reform 
approach. 
 
After purging the only member of their caucus that appeared to 
at any time have a social conscience, it is very clear what 
remains. And what remains is one more conservative party on 
the far right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  For cleaning up this very important matter, I 
sincerely thank you. 
 
There will be some job loss as the new budget is implemented. 
These cuts are also consistent with what the citizens of the 
province tell us about less government. When anyone loses his 
or her job, it is a major concern. 
 
However, with the early retirement provisions and the 
opportunity to transfer within departments, the negative impact 
is kept to a minimum. The level of service to Saskatchewan 
people can be maintained at a level that will permit our 
province to continue to be the best place in the world to live, as 
has been indicated by the United Nations. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers continue to contribute the highest per 
capita investment in agriculture of any province in Canada. As 
the minister points out, we will invest up to $238 million over 
the next four years to diversify and strengthen agriculture. That 
is an investment of nearly one-quarter of a billion dollars in the 
Agriculture Development Fund, the agri-food equity fund, the 
federal-provincial agri-food innovations fund, and marketing 
research and technology. 
 
If our agricultural industry is to thrive in the future, it also 
needs a reliable transportation system to get products to market. 
This budget responds to the loss of the federal Crow benefit and 
the resulting demands on our highway system by providing 
$125 million to upgrade and maintain highway routes in 
Saskatchewan. We will also ensure that the federal government  

transition funding is urged to upgrade our vital road network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farming is an occupation with many risks. Our 
farm families need security of income. We will help provide 
that security by working with farmers to redesign crop 
insurance while striving to achieve an effective and an 
affordable program. The Minister of Agriculture and Food, after 
consulting with farmers, will provide details to a new and better 
crop insurance program for farm families. 
 
Saskatchewan people were pleased to hear that this budget 
contains no tax increases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  And a promise kept. 
 
This government will also keep its commitment to cut taxes by 
continuing the decrease in the debt reduction surtax announced 
last year. Fairness was the main reason for choosing this 
particular reduction. While it provides tax relief for all 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, it eliminates income tax entirely for 
more than 6,000 low income earners. And all taxpayers will 
benefit by this tax reduction. 
 
This tax cut will put up to $150 into the pockets of individuals; 
up to $300 in the budgets of two-income families; and inject 55 
million per year into the Saskatchewan economy. This budget 
provides 11 million of new provincial funding to replace the 
1996-97 federal cuts to health, post-secondary education, and 
social services. It back-fills 100 per cent of the federal cuts to 
health; it back-fills 100 per cent of the federal cuts to social 
services; and it back-fills 100 per cent of the federal cuts to the 
operating funding of universities and federated colleges. 
 
Recently the Government of Saskatchewan sold a significant 
portion of its ownership in Cameco Corporation, the world’s 
largest uranium company. The net proceeds from the sale of 
Cameco shares will be used exclusively to pay down debt and 
reduce interest costs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
As a result of this and other measures, the annual interest cost 
on government proposed debt will be $100 million per year less 
in 1999-2000 than it is this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as our Finance minister indicated, by the year 
2000 the province’s debt will be 2.4 billion lower than it was in 
1994. This reduction will bring the total debt load from 68 per 
cent of the province’s gross domestic product down to 44 per 
cent over the same period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Jess:  This is an outstanding improvement in our overall 
financial stability. In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister 
of Finance indicated, we have shown with this budget that 
government can lead the way. 
 
In 1996-97 budget, it builds on our successes of the past as it  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

charts a course to prosperity and security for Saskatchewan 
people in the 21st century. Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of 
this debate, I will be proud to stand in my place and vote in 
support of the motion and by so doing be part of the progress 
for all Saskatchewan people created by this government, a 
government that truly believes in providing sound financial 
management and believes in humanity first. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to stand here today, tonight, and speak in support of 
this budget. I say that in the same way as I said that I was 
pleased to stand and speak in support of the throne speech 
because, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind  and I 
believe in the minds of the vast majority of Saskatchewan 
people  that that throne speech and this budget set the right 
priorities, prepare this province for the future, and provide more 
and more hope for our young people and our families and 
generations to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Now, Mr. Speaker, that didn’t happen by 
accident. That happened by this government, the Minister of 
Finance, the executive members. . . the members of Executive 
Council, all of the New Democratic members of this Legislative 
Assembly, taking a lot of time and putting in a lot of hours, 
talking to a lot of people in Saskatchewan, and listening to what 
they had to say. 
 
And the result of that, Mr. Speaker, is that we have here today 
in this debate, a budget that not only looks after the needs of 
today, but a budget which also looks to tomorrow and beyond, 
as all budgets must. 
 
If there is any one thing that can be said about budgets in the 
past under the former Conservative administration and the 
administration in Ottawa which happens to be a Liberal one, is 
that there is too much consideration of the politics of today and 
not enough consideration of the future, of tomorrow, and the 
kind of future that the people of this country and the people of 
this province are going to have. 
 
I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, to you, that in my constituency, 
everyone of my constituents was able to have an opportunity to 
look at the options that were before the government and had an 
opportunity to respond to those options before this budget was 
finalized. And many of them took that opportunity and 
responded, both by telephone and by letter and by card. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I feel comfortable standing here tonight, knowing that 
this budget reflects the responses that were sent in to that 
request to my constituents to have an input. 
 
And maybe that’s why, as we listen to the debate back and forth 
here, we find that the opposition has not been able to mount a 
credible argument so far in this budget debate. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, to my, I don’t know whether it could be called 
amusement or surprise or amazement, even the Tories have 
grudgingly admitted that the budget goes in the right direction. 

I’m reminded of something about being on the road to 
Damascus and being struck by something. Well, Mr. Speaker, if 
only they had known the damage and the harm and the 
destruction that they were causing in the 1980s when they were 
in the government. If only they had this view that somehow 
seems to come from their mouths when they respond to the 
budget, but does not go any further, than that in the 1980s when 
they created one of the greatest travesties on this province that 
any government in the history of this province has ever created. 
 
Now I know . . . I hear the Tory Leader of the Third Party say 
that that’s an old story. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this 
about that. It’s not an old story nor is it going to be an old story 
as long as there are 700 to 800 million in interest dollars that 
the taxpayers of this province are going to have to ship out 
every year out of this province because of the debt that was 
created under that administration. 
 
It’s not an old story and will not be an old story as long as this 
debt hangs over the heads of the people of this province and our 
children and their children into the future. And it’s not going to 
be an old story as long as the people who witnessed what was 
happening in the 1980s live and breathe in the province of 
Saskatchewan, because they will remember and they will tell 
their children that story. And if they think that they were out of 
office for a long time before 1982, Mr. Speaker, I can assure 
you that the people of Saskatchewan will make sure that they’re 
not back very soon in the future either. 
 
What happened then, Mr. Speaker. We had a government in the 
1980s that took this province from essentially being debt free 
on the consolidated side  debt free  and created a debt 
which . . . a situation where we had the highest per capita 
deficit in Canada and we had a debt of almost $15 billion. They 
can’t deny that and they can’t separate themselves from that, 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of their pleadings and in spite of their talk 
of an old story. 
 
Now the Tories might show up for question period, Mr. 
Speaker, and do a little grandstanding, but the public can, and 
does, see through it; short-term politics. And I say to them, 
short term-politics is fine, but if they continue on the path that 
they are going right now, they have no room to grow. And they 
may be ahead of the Liberals in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and I believe they are, but it’s not so much because of what they 
are doing, but I think it’s rather probably more of the fact that 
the official opposition has been so inept in their performance so 
far. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let me talk about the Liberal official 
opposition, because when I spoke in the throne speech I said 
that probably after that I would not be quite as kind. Now, what 
do the Liberals say in this House? And to some degree the 
Tories are with them. Well we’ve heard them say we should 
reduce taxes. Well isn’t that nice. Who would not want taxes 
reduced? 
 
Now if they would stop there, Mr. Speaker, they might be 
credible. But I sit here in question period every day and I hear 
the questions. I listen to the speeches, and those that I miss I 
read in Hansard, and what do I hear, Mr. Speaker, and what do  



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

I read? I hear things like, don’t deal with the duplication and 
overlap between ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) and the Farm Credit Corporation; continue the 
old system. Let’s have two of them. Let’s waste taxpayers’ 
dollars. I hear them saying, don’t make crop insurance more 
efficient so it can be of better service to the farmers of this 
province. I hear them saying, don’t reorganize and make 
government more efficient; leave things just as they are. 
 
And of course they always have their favourite places in which 
they would like to spend more money: one day it’s on health 
care; another day it’s on education; another day it’s on 
somebody’s favourite highway. But it’s always spend more 
money, Mr. Speaker, spend more money and reduce taxes. Now 
come on. How incredible can any political party sound . . . how 
more incredible can any political party sound than that? 
 
Day after day the member from Arm River has been getting up 
in this House, Mr. Speaker, and talking about farmers shouldn’t 
repay their overpayment on the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program). I’ve never heard him say that people on 
unemployment insurance shouldn’t have to repay the 
overpayment, or people on social assistance, but it’s spending 
more money. Fair is fair, Mr. Speaker, and everybody has to be 
treated fairly in our system of government, and that’s what this 
budget does for the people of Saskatchewan. Considering the 
circumstances and the resources that this government has to 
work with, the people of Saskatchewan are being treated fairly 
and they appreciate it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, nobody, no taxpayer, no 
voter, no citizen, likes a double standard. But I hear every day 
in this House, from the Liberals and the Conservatives, talk of a 
double standard. And I’m amazed. I remember once in 1982 
when I suffered from a certain kind of retirement at the express 
wishes of my electorate  just fair; that’s democracy  I 
remember hearing speeches from somebody called Grant 
Devine. And guess what he was saying? He was saying spend 
more money and cut taxes. Well isn’t it interesting. We now 
have a Conservative Party that sounds like the Reformers and a 
Liberal Party that sounds like the Grant Devine Conservatives. 
 
Now I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I just say to the members opposite, 
they have got to realize that they can’t be all over the map and 
they can’t be inconsistent. And they can’t say that you’ve got to 
spend more, and then you got to cut taxes, and you got to 
balance the budget, and you got to repay the debt. That is not 
credible. And you know, Mr. Speaker, the reason why the 
Tories may probably be ahead of the Liberals is because the 
people of Saskatchewan believe that that’s not credible. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Melfort talk about 
vision. I heard the member from Melfort talk about the lack of 
vision in the budget. And he read some letters, which is fair. I 
thought that’s what we as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) are supposed to do. We should pay attention to what 
people tell us and write to us. And I listened carefully because I 
thought he was articulating what he had to say very well. 

But what I could not hear him saying, Mr. Speaker, ever in his 
speech, is what his vision was. And I did not hear the Finance 
critic in his short address to this House say what his vision was. 
They were critical. They wanted more taxes, and they wanted 
more expenditures, and they wanted the vision. But when they 
stand up in this House with an opportunity to express that 
vision, it does not come forth. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because as the member from Wascana said 
this afternoon, the vision is clear. The Liberal government in 
Ottawa has shown the vision of the Liberal Party. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Nightmare. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  One only has to look at what is 
happening in Ottawa. As my colleague says, it’s not really a 
vision; it’s probably more like a nightmare. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the vision of the Liberal Party? The 
vision of the Liberal Party, something they don’t want to talk 
about, is arbitrarily cut funding to health care, social services, 
and education, without having any idea what is going to come 
out at the other end, but just simply cut and slash. That’s, Mr. 
Speaker, the Liberal vision. 
 
And so is it any wonder, is it any wonder that when members 
opposite stand up, they’re not prepared to talk about it? I’ll tell 
you, if that was the vision that I believed in, with my 
colleagues, I wouldn’t want to talk about it either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know what the Liberal vision is. The people of 
Saskatchewan are seeing it from Ottawa every day, and that’s 
why we see the Liberal Party over there being in the kind of 
state that it is. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what about the budget, and what kind of 
response has it got . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to my colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to you and through you to the 
members a group of young people that are seated in your 
gallery. They’re ages 8 to 11 and they’re members of the Regina 
33rd Cub Pack. They’re accompanied here this evening by their 
chaperons, Malcolm Lafave, Darla Letourneau, Ray Sali, and 
Herb Gillies. 
 
In welcoming this group here this evening, I also ask members 
to recognize the volunteer time that many adults put into the 
Scout movement and the Cub movement to teach our young 
people good citizenship skills and about service to others. 



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1930) 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and may I 
extend my greetings to our visitors here in the gallery as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was about to say, what are others saying 
about the budget? Because if only us were to say that . . . if only 
we were to say that it was a good budget, I suppose it would be 
fair to say that nobody else thinks so. 
 
I’ll give you one example, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking at the 
editorial of the Leader-Post, which I do not quote that often, in 
which it is said that the budget makes significant progress in 
improving the province’s finances, and not only are balanced 
budgets projected for the next four years but money will also be 
put aside to pay down the province’s debt by $2 billion by the 
year 2000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if taxes were reduced in a big way like the 
members wanted right now, while expenditures are increased, 
this couldn’t happen. This couldn’t happen. Our debt would 
stay high as it is, interest being paid out, $800 million a year, 
and we would have continually this monster hanging over our 
heads and the heads of future generations because we will not 
have dealt with it. 
 
I would not be prepared to be part of that kind of a decision, 
Mr. Speaker. It may be good enough for members of the 
opposition; it’s not good enough for this government. Because 
this debt has got to be dealt with and this debt will be dealt with 
to the tune of a reduction by $2 billion by the year 2000. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, will provide $100 million a year each and 
every year in additional money that the province can have 
because it’ll save that much or even more in interest charges. 
 
That’s how you run good government, Mr. Speaker. You don’t 
come into this legislature and try to be everything to everybody. 
People don’t expect that. People expect governments and 
people expect even opposition parties to have some sense of 
what is good public policy, not what is expedient. And they see 
through it, and they have always seen through it, and they’ll see 
through it four years from now unless the members opposite 
change their views. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, this editorial concludes by saying that: 
 

Since its election in 1991, the NDP government has done a 
credible job of managing the province’s finances. That 
tradition continues with Thursday’s budget. 

Just imagine. Just imagine, Mr. Speaker. Just imagine, Mr. 
Speaker, if the government of the 1980s had thought about that 
and what kind of position this province would be in today. Just 
imagine. No $800 million a year in interest charges. We could 
do all kinds of things. We could reduce taxes, and we could 
even make up more of what the federal government has hacked 
away from health care and education and social services. But 
we can’t because nobody in the government of that day was 
prepared to make those kinds of decisions. 
 
Now I heard pleading for forgiveness from the Liberal members 
opposite because they had voted Conservative in 1982 and in 
1986. Now isn’t that interesting, Mr. Speaker, pleading for 
forgiveness. They had made a mistake. Well isn’t that 
interesting that they say in the House they made mistake. But 
when you listen to what they say, they sound exactly like that 
Conservative government that was elected in 1982  exactly 
like them, the same speeches. You know, Mr. Speaker, if you 
put a shroud over their faces when they rose, you would almost 
say that the ghost of Grant Devine was speaking in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, credibility is what people want from their 
politicians. In this budget, Mr. Speaker, I am supporting it as 
my colleagues are because Saskatchewan people can look 
forward to the 21st century with a sense of confidence and 
security. 
 
Confidence because their future promises more jobs, a balanced 
budget, reduced taxes, and a declining public debt. Security 
because these cornerstones of our quality of life  our 
education; our health; and our social programs  will be there 
for them, their children, and their grandchildren in spite of the 
actions of the federal Liberal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a vision. There is a vision about the need 
to change our social programs and our social security programs 
so that they meet the needs of today, and the year 2000, and do 
not continue to make people dependent  and the old system 
does that. There is a vision because we are reforming our health 
care system to be in tune with the new technologies, and the 
new demographics of this province, and the needs of today. 
That’s a vision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a vision because this government is being reorganized 
so it can be the most efficient government in Canada, as it is. 
And there is a vision because it provides a financial plan which 
brings increased hope for the future instead of the despair that 
we saw in the 1980s and the despair that we’re seeing 
propagated by federal Liberals in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, opposite members in this debate have dug in. 
Members opposite, Mr. Speaker  as the intellectual from 
Shaunavon points out  members opposite have dug in. Mr. 
Speaker, they have dug in, in the past. They have dug in, in the 
past. They have spoken against change, every one of them when 
they get up in this House. Because when you ask them, well 
what would you like to see done, they’re not able to tell you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, building prosperity and creating jobs are 
important, and this budget addresses that very important issue.  



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would be surprised, except for maybe 
political reasons, that the members of the opposite would vote 
against the budget . . . members opposite. As a matter of fact, 
listening to the Conservative leader the day of the budget on 
television, I thought he was ready to vote for it that day. But 
we’ll see. 
 
We’ll see whether partisan politics and expediency  or 
thought to be expediency  overrules what is the right thing to 
do. And the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker, is to manage the 
finances of the province well, protect our core services of 
health, education, and social services, so that the people of this 
province know that they are secure. And under this New 
Democratic Party government, they see tangible evidence that 
they are secure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll see whether the members opposite believe 
that or whether they will spend the rest of this session 
defending their brothers and sisters in Ottawa, which they have 
been doing. I sit here in some amazement because I can’t really 
understand whether these people forgot that they were running 
in a provincial election and not a federal election, because they 
speak like Members of Parliament instead of like members of 
the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to say this. In 1991 this 
province and the people of this province elected a new 
government. It could have been any government, but it was this 
New Democratic Party government. And in 1991 we had an 
independent commission tell us and the people of 
Saskatchewan what challenges we had to face on the financial 
scene, and it was not a good story. 
 
It was a horrendous story. And this government went to work, 
and the people made sacrifices and understood what had to be 
done. And in the true tradition of Saskatchewan, together we 
have turned this province around from one with the highest per 
capita debt in Canada to a first province in this decade to have a 
balanced budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski:  And we did it, Mr. Speaker, while we at 
the same time protected those core services which are so 
important to the security of our people  health, education, and 
social services. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t do it the Ontario way, the Ontario 
Conservative way. We didn’t do it the Jack Klein way in 
Alberta  now there’s an example of no vision. We didn’t do it 
the Liberal way in Ottawa. We did it the Saskatchewan way, 
Mr. Speaker. We did it the NDP way, which showed good 
judgement, tough decisions with compassion, and that’s why, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, and all of those who 
have commented on this budget, are saying it’s a good budget. 
It’s the right budget for this time, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 
I’m prepared to stand here and say I am going to support this 
budget wholeheartedly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am also pleased 
to join in this budget debate tonight and to follow my colleague, 
the member for Regina Dewdney, who spoke so eloquently 
tonight about our priorities and in particular our commitment to 
health, education, and social services. 
 
I obviously share many of the same sentiments that the member 
for Dewdney expressed, particularly in our ability to come 
forward and recognize the importance of these particular issues 
in areas where the federal government seems more than 
prepared to abandon the poor, more than prepared to abandon 
the ill, more than prepared to abandon the children in our 
society. But tonight I don’t want to talk so much about the 
social programs. Rather I want to talk about some of the things 
the folks in Regina South have been talking about over the last 
several months. 
 
In getting ready to work on the budget and to take a look at 
what the government was proposing, I went out and did some 
consultations in the riding and asked people what they thought 
their priorities . . . what our priorities should be. They said very 
simply they thought there were five key areas that we needed to 
focus in on. They said that we needed to get the debt under 
control. They said that we needed to hold the line on taxes. 
They said that we had to do something to ensure that the federal 
government’s plan for downsizing social programs did not 
proceed. They said we must do something to ensure there’s job 
growth in our province, and finally they said they wanted 
smaller government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on those five areas, in each of those five 
areas, this budget meets the mark and meets the expectations of 
the people in Regina South. 
 
Let me talk just a second about the debt situation. We have seen 
and we have talked about and we have heard many times about 
the problems of this province’s debt. We know that today that 
that debt was approximately 68 per cent of our GDP (gross 
domestic product). Under the plan presented by the Minister of 
Finance, by the year 2000 that will be reduced to 44 per cent. A 
remarkable decrease considering the horrible financial atrocities 
committed on this province’s books by the Conservative 
opposition when they were in the government benches. 
 
This is a very positive step forward and something that all 
members should be embracing. It’s easy for the Liberal 
opposition to sit across the aisle and say, oh well, we’d do it 
differently; oh well we’d be reducing the debt even quicker. 
And yet when you listen to their speeches what is it they 
propose? Oh, well they’d be cutting taxes more quickly, but 
they’d be spending more. Well if you’re cutting your revenue 
and you’re spending more money, you end up with a kind of 
mess that these folks put us in across the way. 
 
What we have here today is a four-year plan, not only for a 
balanced budget but balanced priorities, and I think that that is 
something that the members opposite, particularly the Liberal 
members, should be paying attention to. 
 
Let me take a look at the issue of taxes. Now the members 
opposite say, oh hurry up, you’re not doing enough on taxes.  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

They say, oh you’re not reducing taxes quick enough; you’re a 
high tax regime. Well let’s take a look at what their tax plan is. 
 
We have, sitting across from us, the see-no-evil, hear-no-evil, 
speak-no-evil Liberals, when it comes to their federal 
counterparts. I mean obviously their red book, give or take a 
little bit of white-out, is the same as the federal Liberals’ red 
book. So we can assume that they are just every bit as 
committed to tax reform the way the feds were, a tax reform 
that said GST (goods & services tax) would be abolished in the 
red book. But what has happened? Nothing. In fact if anything, 
they’re back working on Brian Mulroney and Grant Devine’s 
plan of harmonization. 
 
So we can guess then from that, we can assume from that then, 
that what we’re looking at is a Liberal plan that would 
harmonize the GST with the provincial E&H (education and 
health) tax. Well then this is tax reform for you. What they’re 
talking about then is really increasing taxes, putting taxes on 
children’s clothing. What they’d be talking about is putting 
taxes on restaurant meals again. After four years, we have just 
now seen the restaurant industry climb back out of the hole 
Grant Devine and that Conservative caucus put it into. 
 
We also see then under this great plan of harmonization that the 
federal and provincial Liberals support, the idea of putting taxes 
onto the service sector. They’d put it back on used goods. 
They’d put it onto electricity, put it onto telephone services, put 
it on natural gas. Well we listened to the members opposite give 
some sort of a statement; couldn’t figure out whether they were 
supporting or opposing our plan for natural gas today, but we 
know where they stand. They are in full support of putting that 
GST back onto all of these services through harmonization. 
 
(1945) 
 
The fact that they have said nothing to the contrary would lead 
us to believe that all they are being is politically expedient by 
remaining silent, a shameful approach in this Assembly. But it 
seems to make no difference to them. While they’re prepared to 
accuse us of not moving quickly enough to lower taxes, even 
though we have held the line, even though we’ve reduced the 
surtaxes, they are prepared to support a plan of harmonization. 
 
That’s the Liberals’ plan. It’s not a plan to cut taxes; it’s a plan 
to increase taxes. It’s a plan to increase taxes that will in 
particular hurt specific sectors of our industry. Our government 
does not support that approach. That’s why in 1991 we 
removed the harmonization, and that is why through our plan of 
targeted tax reductions this province’s economy continues to 
grow. 
 
But let’s take a look at what our friends in the Conservative 
opposition say. Well of course they support harmonization, 
always have. But not the way Grant Devine did, no, no, no, no, 
no because they’re not really Grant Devine’s Tories. Oh sure, 
they might have run on the same platform. Sure they might have 
even supported him for leader at one point. Granted they were 
all very supportive of him when he was here, but they’re not 
quite the same. The Leader of the Opposition continues to tell 
us, oh no, it wasn’t me; I didn’t do it, he says. A bit like  

Bart Simpson I’m afraid over there, in more ways than one, in 
more ways than one. I didn’t do it, he says. 
 
Today he actually has the audacity to move a motion, an 
amendment to the motion before us today, concerning MLA 
pay, and he comes forward and says, oh, this is a rip-off; you’re 
ripping off the taxpayers. Yet I don’t notice the Leader of the 
Third Party turning back a single cent that he collects as Leader 
of the Third Party  not a dime  $20,000 that he pockets this 
year as being Leader of the Third Party and where is it? In his 
pocket. 
 
We’ve got his whip, $4,000 a year for marshalling the massive 
forces of the Conservative Party  $4,000 a year to look after 
. . . that’s almost $1,000 a head to keep them in line. But he 
doesn’t stop there, no, no. The stellar row of that third party 
opposition needs another $60,000 in research grants; it needs 
another 25,000 during the session for research. It needs 36,000 
to pay its secretaries, and it needs $73,000 to run the leader’s 
office  $218,000  and if you turn that back today, and I say 
to the members opposite, turn it back today . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no, no, now turn it back . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now I understand that all 
members have great enthusiasm for involving themselves in 
debate and will be given a full opportunity to do that. I would 
like to caution the hon. member for Regina South to direct his 
debate through the Speaker and not directly to other members 
and I’ll ask all members to give him their full attention. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say to 
you, as you know, under our system, this third party is 
pocketing $218,000 this year for what  for being a rump in 
the legislature. For being simply five members, the Leader of 
the Conservative Party collects $20,000 today, $20,000. 
 
Well let’s say the Leader of the Opposition gets a change of 
heart and decides to give it back. At the end of this term they 
will have simply returned to the province the $800,000 that 
went missing when they were in these benches. Here’s your 
chance for restitution, I say to the member opposite. Here’s 
your chance to pay back the people. Give up the perks. Give up 
all of the extra pay. Come clean. Here’s your chance to . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now I do want to remind 
the hon. member for Regina South, and he knows what I’m 
going to say, to . . . Order. Now the Speaker is not . . . Order. 
The Speaker is not seeking advice. Order. The Speaker is 
confident that if he should ever seek advice there’ll be a large 
number of people willing to offer it, but this isn’t one of those 
times. 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My apologies. I use 
the issue simply to illustrate the priorities that we see coming 
from the third party in their approach to this budget speech. We 
see them on the one hand say oh, the biggest issue of the day is 
how the MLAs get paid. Well except it’s only part of the way. 
They don’t want to talk about the real issues here. They don’t 
want to talk about their priorities when it comes to their 
pocketbooks. They don’t want to make real restitution, they 
simply want to piggyback on some of these other higher  



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

profile issues in terms of gaining credibility. And I think that’s 
shameful. 
 
We also see them, in terms of their priorities, talk about us 
needing to reduce the E&H tax. They say we’re not moving 
quick enough on this; they say we’re not moving fast enough to 
reduce the sales tax which they claim is causing great problems 
in our retail sector. Hard to believe, considering our retail sector 
is growing so quickly. 
 
But let’s assume they’re right. Let’s assume the E&H does need 
to come down. We would be able to eliminate the E&H tax 
today if it had not been for the debt that that Tory opposition 
built up when they were in government. Completely eliminated. 
On par with Alberta. On par with Alberta if they had not built 
up that $14 billion worth of debt. Because that’s essentially 
what that E&H tax brings in today, is enough to cover the 
interest payments alone. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know that this is a difficult situation. 
Even though we didn’t accumulate the debt, it’s our 
responsibility to manage it and to help bring it down. And that 
is in fact the very plan that the Minister of Finance has 
presented in this Assembly  a four-year plan that is 
reasonable, that is fair, that is balanced. And it is a plan which 
merits not only our attention but our support. 
 
It is balanced because it provides a long-term vision to reduce 
$2.4 billion in debt and bring down those interest payments by 
$100 million a year. It’s a plan which commits almost $900 
million this year to job creation through investments  through 
the Ag equity fund; investments in high technology at the 
universities; investments in agriculture and highways; and $630 
million in infrastructure. 
 
But in addition to that, we’re going further. We recognize that 
trade and export are important to our economy and are going to 
be part of the engines of growth. As such, we’re providing 
funding to create the trade and export corporation. The minister 
has said that she’s preparing to cut the red tape; she’s providing 
money for student jobs. On the whole, through the targeted tax 
breaks of this government over the past four years and the 
targeted tax breaks over the next four years, we know there’ll be 
growth. 
 
Let me use an example from my riding alone. In my riding since 
the election, just since the election, we have seen 12 new small 
businesses open  a dozen of them. And although the Liberal 
members opposite will tell us of course there’s no job growth, 
guess what? There are people employed in those businesses. 
Guess how many  105; 105 new jobs in the community of 
Regina South alone since the election. Since the election. That’s 
how we are building on this economy because it is small 
business that’s the engine of growth. 
 
Well we don’t need to build up the bloated bureaucracies that 
the Tories did. And it’s been so long since we’ve seen what 
Liberals do, we can only assume it won’t be much different 
than the Tories. 
 
This plan that we’re presenting is a plan which is sensible; it is  

a plan which is stable; it is a plan that will build Saskatchewan 
strengths. And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to 
take my place and say that I will be supporting this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to join 
in this debate on the budget speech. I would like to begin by 
congratulating the Minister of Finance on once again 
introducing a budget that is all smoke and mirrors. 
 
I would like to say a few words about the NDP approach to 
budgeting. They begin by telling the people of this province that 
we must prepare for the worst. They say we are going to cut 
funding in the areas that are so essential to the very fabric of 
Saskatchewan. They tell the health boards, the school boards, 
the universities, the technical institutions, and the people on 
social assistance that they are going to be hit hard with cuts. 
And then they tell the people, but don’t blame us, it’s the nasty 
federal government again. The federal government is cutting 
your health, your education, and your social program funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP members did a great job once again of 
offloading the blame onto someone else. They just had the 
Tories before and now they use the federal government. 
 
We went through an election last June listening to them make 
promises to the voters of Saskatchewan that they knew they 
would never be able to keep. The people of Saskatchewan put 
their trust in these NDP members and their promises. 
Unfortunately, all the people received were broken promises 
after broken promises. They said, we have to break our 
promises because the federal government is cutting our funding. 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government knew of these cuts long 
before they started campaigning but it never became an issue 
until after the election results were in. 
 
After the election was over they spent the next six months 
telling the people of this province about the upcoming budget 
and how it was going to hit them very hard. Cabinet members 
went on TV to tell the people of Saskatchewan to prepare for 
the worst. Even the Premier held a $30,000 infomercial to tell 
the people of Saskatchewan what he wanted them to believe. 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were 
living in fear, wondering what this government was going to do 
to them next. 
 
Then on March 28 the Minister of Finance stands up and says, 
don’t worry, folks; we’ve found some money and we’ll put 
some of these problems off for another year. We’ll take a little 
bit off the top of our Crown sector and indirectly raise taxes by 
$100 million. And then the minister had the nerve to say, we’ve 
done what the people told us to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very hard to believe that the people told 
the Minister of Finance to slash the Department of Agriculture 
and Food by $50 million. I really doubt that the people said, cut 
funding to municipalities by $20 million. And I sincerely doubt 
the people said, cut funding for post-secondary education by 
$10 million over the next three years. 



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

Mr. Speaker, what is truly frightening is that this government 
has actually convinced themselves that they do listen to the 
people when in fact they simply just dictate. If they had really 
listened to the people, the budget would have been one of tax 
decreases. It would have been a budget where things like the 
Crown Tendering Agreement was openly discussed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my wildest imagination I can’t believe that 
people who have lost their hospitals, are threatened with school 
closures, RM (rural municipality) amalgamations, would have 
said, sure, spend an extra $100 million on Crown tendering; we 
don’t mind. We don’t mind that our facilities are being closed 
left and right and that our way of life in rural Saskatchewan is 
being destroyed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe the people told this government 
that raises for political appointees were acceptable when social 
service recipients are just below the poverty level. Mr. Speaker, 
I don’t believe that the four extra cabinet positions were asked 
for instead of additional health care benefits. And, Mr. Speaker, 
maybe I’m a little sceptical, but I believe if you had asked a 
farmer who is trying to find money to put a crop in, if he would 
rather have his GRIP payment that was supposed to have been 
cancelled, really cancelled, or maybe we should hire a bunch of 
deputy ministers and aides, I think he would have chosen to 
have his GRIP bill cancelled. 
 
The approach this NDP government took was nothing short of 
immoral. They held a gun to the head of everyone, and then on 
budget day they decided we’ll just shoot you in the foot instead 
and expect everyone to say thank you to the Minister of 
Finance. Mr. Speaker, this is indicative of the NDP politics. 
 
I would like to take a minute to respond to the rather tasteless 
comments made by the member from Regina Victoria last 
week. This member claimed that the official opposition’s 
strategy was just to simply criticize this government. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I can assure you and the member from Regina Victoria 
that his NDP colleagues . . . and his colleagues, that criticizing 
this government’s choices is more than a full-time job. There 
are not enough hours in the day to allow enough criticism in the 
direction that they have chosen to take this province. 
 
The member from Regina Victoria spoke of job creation and the 
unemployment rate in Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know if the NDP members even look at their own Bureau of 
Statistics reports or if they just take the Minister of Economic 
Development’s word as gospel. If they did even take one quick 
glance at these monthly reports, they would clearly see that 
between February 1995 and February 1996, Saskatchewan lost 
4,000 jobs. They would also see that the unemployment rate 
actually rose in that time. And if the member from Regina 
Victoria and his fellow NDP members can’t see this or for some 
reason can’t understand it, then I’ll be quite happy to sit down 
and explain it to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to address the issue of political 
cousins. One of the NDP members opposite  and I believe it 
was the new Minister of Agriculture  said a Liberal is a 
Liberal is a Liberal. Mr. Speaker, I agree. Liberals are Liberals, 
and I believe that us Liberals, our number one priority is to  

serve the people who’ve elected us. 
 
(2000) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP members opposite should 
look two provinces to the West when they start speaking about 
political cousins. We haven’t heard the members opposite 
saying too much about bingos or hydro companies. I guess it 
would be fair for them to say an NDP is an NDP is an NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about economic 
development in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is a province that 
is filled with opportunity for business people. It is a province 
that is rich in natural resources, rich in the land on which we 
farm, and above all Saskatchewan is a province that has the 
hardest working people in the world. We are fortunate to have a 
very entrepreneurial and very innovative people. The people of 
this province have a lot of great ideas and the ability to start up 
and run successful businesses in spite of some of these recent 
policies. 
 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is the business environment that has 
been created in this province by the current NDP and previous 
Tory government is deplorable. Businessmen and business 
women face stifling taxation, outrageous utility rates, 
oppressive labour legislation, and over-regulations. 
 
And what has been the result? Nearly 2,300 businesses have 
gone bankrupt since they took power in 1991. Manitoba has 
experienced only 1,400 in the same time frame. Mr. Speaker, 
the solution to these problems is not a glossy document entitled 
Partnership for Renewal, and it is not even a glossy document 
entitled Partnership for Growth. The solution is less 
government involvement. 
 
Businesses have said over and over again, they don’t need the 
government to be involved in everything they do. As Abraham 
Lincoln said, in all that people can do individually well, for 
themselves, government ought not to interfere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for the Minister of Economic 
Development to take a good, hard look at what he has done to 
the business community. It seems very easy for him to sit back 
and decide which businesses he wants to see prosper, and 
which businesses he prefers to see fail. 
 
He’s been mistaken from time to time, as was the case when he 
used Spar industries as an example of a thriving business in 
Swift Current. The next day they laid off 55 employees. The 
fact, is Mr. Speaker, it is not the Minister of Economic 
Development’s job to decide who should be successful and who 
should not. 
 
As economist Charles Schultze said, the one thing that most 
democratic political systems cannot do well at all, is to make 
critical choices among particular firms and municipalities and 
regions, determining cold-bloodedly which shall prosper and 
which should not. 
 
The government can, and continuously does, adopt policies that 
have indirect consequences of harming, particularly individuals  



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

or groups. But a cardinal principle of government is never to be 
seen to do direct harm. I think Charles Schultze summarizes our 
current NDP government and the Minister of Economic 
Development very well. He should be listening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day in the Assembly I asked the Minister 
of Finance if she knew what the Minister of Economic 
Development was saying in the Partnership for Growth. I guess 
bluntly I asked her if she knew if the left hand knew what the 
right hand was doing. The Minister of Economic Development 
talked about stimulating the economy and the Minister of 
Finance thinks it means laying off front-line workers, who put 
every cent they make back into the local economy. The Minister 
of Economic Development said, economic growth and 
ultimately job creation will depend largely on the private and 
cooperative sectors taking risks. 
 
Businesses do take risks. That’s what business is all about. 
That’s what we do and that’s what we’ve always done. We 
accept the challenges of competition, we accept market-place 
changes, and we can even accept the fact that consumer demand 
is sometimes fickle. But, Mr. Speaker, we cannot accept any 
more challenges, put more bluntly, roadblocks, from 
government. 
 
Do you know what the changes to the labour regulations cost 
business people in the hospitality industry last year? Definitely 
not just the $15 per year, per part-time employee, as indicated 
in the Price Water analysis that the government chose to believe 
over the business friends, if they have any business friends. 
 
It was even more than the pittance offered to employers through 
the hire a student program. I know and the business people in 
this province know what the changes to these labour regulations 
cost, and I’m going to wait with bated breath to see if the 
government can come up with the right answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this budget was designed to help get this 
economy on its feet, not just wait for good luck to intercede, we 
would have seen some cuts in taxes  and I don’t mean the 
lousy $150 that they came up with for next year. This 
government would have listened to what people told them about 
cutting the PST (provincial sales tax) and that it would reduce 
the desire and the need of people to go across the border just to 
shop. Business people would have seen it as a positive step 
towards putting some spending responsibility back into the 
hands of the people of this province. 
 
Let the people of this province decide how to spend the few 
shekels they have left over at the end of the month. Give the 
Saskatchewan people even half a chance to believe in 
themselves and we’ll just see the spirit of Saskatchewan rise up 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for business people, do you know what this 
budget reminds me of? The plaque I’ve seen on people’s wall 
that says: the beatings will continue until morale improves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen this government create the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, $100 million to 
invest in the business community. The result: 1,100  

applications and only 11 approvals. In addition to that they 
received $3.2 million in taxpayers’ money in grants in ’95 and 
’96  $3.2 million to manage 11 investments. 
 
That’s not all. In a time when this NDP government is crying 
poor, they’ve allocated another $1.1 million grants for SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) for this budget year. 
Now they’re up to 4.3 million. And as if that wasn’t enough, 
they’ve even introduced a Bill asking for another $100 million 
on top of the original $100 million to set up research and 
development parks. 
 
And this is at the same time we see the budget for small 
business loans association program cut from the 1.2 million to a 
measly $550,000. I wouldn’t put it past this NDP government to 
start charging some outrageous interest rates on these loans to 
further decimate the small-business community. After all, it’s 
not a megaproject, so why does it matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to speak about the NDP 
government’s commitment to rural Saskatchewan. I guess I 
should say their lack of commitment to rural Saskatchewan. The 
rural residents of Saskatchewan continue to be extremely hard 
hit by the choices of this NDP government. What is the solution 
when we need to save a buck or two? Apparently the 
government’s solution is to shut down numerous hospitals, 
Crop Insurance offices, highway depots, and break a promise 
not to collect GRIP overpayments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that this government has absolutely no 
problem with decimating rural Saskatchewan. What completely 
saddens me is to see that the rural NDP MLAs just sit back and 
let it happen. I say to those members, stand up to your Premier, 
and stand up to your Minister of Finance, and stand up to the 
Minister of Economic Development. Look after your 
constituents, because without them you wouldn’t be here. And 
if you continue on your current path, you won’t be here in three 
years from now. 
 
When this budget came down, there was absolutely no 
indication that revitalizing rural Saskatchewan was on the mind 
of the government. In fact the opposite was true. The cut-backs 
to programs affecting rural Saskatchewan was there and the 
need to stimulate hope for the future was not there. 
 
We’ve heard the Premier and the minister emphatically state 
that municipalities would not be forced to amalgamate; it would 
be optional. Well next year’s $20 million cut-back to 
revenue-sharing grants to municipalities will leave some of the 
option out of these people’s minds. 
 
The dollars allocated for education in ‘96-97 was unchanged 
from last year. The obvious omission was the cost of covering 
the pay increases given this year by the government. It’ll have 
to be picked up by the boards from stagnated funding. This will 
mean that the local boards will have to pay tax increases just to 
retain the same level of teaching services we have this year. 
 
There is also no accommodation for increased costs in 
operation or increased costs in salaries. Every board will be 
forced to determine if they can keep the same level of teachers  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

employed and the same number of schools open. 
 
Post-secondary education and job training will be cut by $10 
million over the next three years. Our biggest investment is our 
young people. Unfortunately this government appears to feel 
otherwise. 
 
The budget allocated for highways is down from the spending 
levels of ‘95-96. The list of construction projects proposed for 
this year will make a minor dent in the deplorable condition of 
many of the highways in this province. Rural Saskatchewan 
residents should not expect that the trips to the city for their 
medical needs will be any easier on their vehicles, nor will it be 
cheaper. Gasoline taxes remain at one of the highest levels in 
this country. 
 
The health care budget is the same as last year. Allocations for 
long-term care and acute care are down, and home-based care 
budgets are slightly up. There was no consideration for 
increased costs in operations or inflation. Neither was there any 
help for district health boards for problems with their deficits or 
for the workmen’s compensation assessment still hanging over 
their heads. The budget for Agriculture was down for nearly 
$50 million. 
 
The sale of Cameco shares will save this province over $100 
million in interest payments alone. There are other Crown 
corporation assets affected by this province’s economy that 
must be looked at in the same light. Taxpayers have the right to 
decide how this province’s dollars are spent. Selling Crown 
corporations and using the profits to pay down the debt to save 
interest payments will affect our ability to retain the level of 
education and health care we have the right to expect. 
 
The future of Saskatchewan, specifically rural Saskatchewan as 
we know it, is at stake. Change is imminent and not necessarily 
bad, but we must find a way to blend the future changes with 
the best of the past. We have to retain the way of life that keeps 
the spirit of Saskatchewan alive and makes us the best place in 
the world to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does nothing for economic 
development in our province. It doesn’t ease the tax burden on 
businesses or individuals. It doesn’t lower extremely high utility 
rates. It doesn’t remove oppressive labour legislation. And it 
doesn’t reduce regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the best ways to stimulate the economy, to help it 
grow, and to allow businesses to thrive, is through job creation. 
The problem is that this NDP government believes they are the 
only ones who know how to create jobs. We all know, or at 
least we should know, that government doesn’t create jobs; 
businesses do, although government can certainly force 
businesses to lay off employees and implement hiring freezes. 
They do this simply through their legislative power to increase 
taxes, utility rates, and introduce laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after closely examining this budget, looking past 
the smoke and mirrors, it’s very evident that this NDP 
government thinks they are untouchable. They have convinced 
themselves that the 42 of them truly represent the will of over 1  

million people in this province. 
 
They claim they consulted prior to making any budget 
decisions, but I would have to disagree. To simply expend in 
excess of $100,000 on a public relations campaign can’t be 
confused with consultation. Their consultation process was 
simply to place the fear of God into people so they’d expect the 
worst. They spent in excess of $100,000 to play a political game 
with the lives of the people of this province. Mr. Speaker. That 
is why their approach can only be called immoral. 
 
People have a right to know what the financial situation of this 
province truly is. To parade around telling people that the 
federal government is at the root of all evil, and then in the 11th 
hour find a new way of funding, is indicative of the respect this 
NDP government has for the people who sent them here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will prove to be very interesting to see what 
happens in the budget in the next 11 or 12 months. We saw in 
the ‘95-96 budget an estimated $24 million surplus and we 
found out after the election the surplus was less than $600,000. 
It is very difficult to put a great deal of faith in the numbers that 
this government puts forward, although I’m quite confident that 
if once again their pencils aren’t so sharp and their reliable 
calculators aren’t so reliable, they’ll find someone else to 
blame. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of concerns arose from the budget that was 
presented in the Assembly, far too many to list in the time 
allocated for this debate. We will in the very near future be 
discussing things like the $100 million indirect tax increase, 
$20 million cut to funding for municipalities, the $10 million 
cut for funding to education, and the $100 million that was 
suddenly available for SOCO, and the many other problems 
surrounding the business climate the NDP government has 
created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to say this budget is not a 
document that gives hope to the people of Saskatchewan, and if 
this is how the government is preparing for the new century, 
then all the people need to be worried. And in closing I can only 
say that I hope that this budget was a cruel April Fool’s joke 
published a few days early. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 1996-97 
Saskatchewan budget is the result of cooperation and 
consultation of Saskatchewan people, enabling us to priorize, 
prepare, and plan for the 21st century. It reflects the input and 
priorities of we, the people of this province. This year’s budget 
is very forward-looking but it is based on the realities of the 
present and it is guided by the values of the past  compassion, 
community, and cooperation  the same values that have made 
Saskatchewan the best place in the world to live. 
 
People told us their top priority was jobs and opportunities, and 
the 1996 budget responds to that message. It supports the  



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

province’s plan for economic development, Partnership for 
Growth. It builds on the province’s strengths in export and 
world trade, with funding to establish STEP (Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership Inc.), the Saskatchewan Trade 
and Export Partnership. STEP will enable business, industry, 
and government, in cooperation, to find and develop new 
markets and trade opportunities for Saskatchewan products. 
This will promote and expand our export and trade business and 
create jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
To encourage business growth, we are using targeted tax 
incentives and cutting red tape. A 9 per cent investment tax 
credit in support of manufacturing and processing, a reduction 
of up to 7 per cent in the income tax rate applied to 
manufacturing and processing, and a reduction in the small 
business income tax rate to 8 per cent  these are positive 
incentives to complement STEP. We are also continuing 
support for regional economic development authorities and 
northern Saskatchewan community-based regional economic 
development organizations. 
 
The budget offers considerable support for another major 
strength of this province  agriculture. It invests up to 238 
million in agriculture over the next four years to diversify and 
strengthen this vital part of the Saskatchewan economy. It also 
provides 125 million to upgrade and maintain the province’s 
highways so farmers can get their products to market. And we 
have a promising new industry related to agriculture. It’s called 
agricultural biotechnology and it’s experiencing rapid growth 
here in Saskatchewan. And we will continue to identify and use 
tax incentives to stimulate economic growth and jobs. 
 
But this budget has not forgotten families and individuals. Not 
only does this budget contain no tax increases, but we are 
keeping our commitment to make the tax system more fair. 
Everyone in Saskatchewan who pays income tax will benefit 
from the debt reduction surtax, but the greatest benefits will go 
to middle and low income taxpayers. This tax cut will inject 
$55 million a year into the Saskatchewan economy to 
strengthen local businesses and create jobs. We are looking to 
the future as we create jobs for today and we are preserving the 
cornerstones of our quality of life: health, education, and social 
services, for our future and for our children’s future. That’s 
why our budget back-fills 100 per cent of the federal cuts to 
health, to the operating budgets of universities and colleges, and 
to social services. 
 
We are doing this because the priorities of the Government of 
Saskatchewan are the same as the priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and our priorities are the people of 
Saskatchewan. In order to maintain these cornerstones, we must 
work with the people of this province to redesign and 
streamline programs and delivery. The work we have been 
doing in health has already earned international recognition 
based on local accountability, on prevention, and 
community-based services. We are redesigning social services 
to protect children, to help people move off welfare into work 
and independence, to ensure our young people can receive 
training. People want to see less duplication, less 
administration, and more resources directed to programs. 

This budget means our partners have time to prepare for the 
demands and new fiscal responsibilities and realities of the 21st 
century. It gives the people of Saskatchewan the financial 
freedom to make choices, to choose their own future. It allows 
us to look forward to the 21st century with a sense of 
confidence and security. And this budget makes sure 
Saskatchewan will continue to be the best province in the best 
country in which to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget reflects what the people of 
Saskatchewan want and it sets the path for the future. 
Therefore, I support this budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise this evening and to participate 
in this budget motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very proud of the Premier, the Minister of 
Finance, the cabinet, and all my colleagues. And of course I’m 
proud as well of the people of Saskatchewan who in large 
numbers and very clearly shared their views with the 
consultation process in terms of the issues that were important 
and the programs and services to preserve, Mr. Speaker, of 
course, as we’re preparing for the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was interested to hear the comments from the 
hon. member from Kelvington-Wadena a few minutes ago who 
talked . . . I’m not sure which budget she was referring to; 
maybe the federal budget, which she should be concerned 
about. But she was talking about cuts that we were making. We 
had made cuts in this budget to health, education, and social 
services and that we blamed the feds for it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a little help from her would have been 
appreciated in terms of the concerns of Saskatchewan people 
about the federal budget, but we didn’t make cuts to those 
areas. And I think it’s important to correct the statement, you 
know, for the public record, that we didn’t make cuts to those 
areas. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, we were able to back-fill, not 
because we had scared Saskatchewan people and didn’t need to. 
We were able to back-fill because we had made good 
management decisions over the past four years, and were able 
to put some interest from the Cameco shares to increase the 
revenues. 
 
In addition we were able to renegotiate because some of the 
those previous Devine loans came through or came to maturity. 
We were able to renegotiate those interest costs at a lower rate 
because we’re in a better financial position. So I’m concerned 
that the hon. member feels that by putting that Cameco share 
money to the debt, we somehow found the need to cut health, 
education, and social services programs, because we didn’t do 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were some job losses in the budget, which I 
feel very badly about. I think that we all have to recognize that 
unemployment is devastating for anyone who is unemployed,  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

so I’m not happy about that. I think we tried as best we could 
 unlike other administrations, I might say  to cushion 
through the early retirements and the vacant positions and so 
on. 
 
But importantly, we’ve tried to give in this budget the focus to 
economic development and job creation throughout 
Saskatchewan; diversification of agriculture in terms of the new 
money there; enhance growth related to trade with the new trade 
corporation. And we’ve maintained  we’ve maintained  the 
integrity of the health, education, and social services systems 
and importantly, the jobs there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that this is an alternative vision 
budget relative to pretty well any other jurisdiction in Canada, 
because our consultations told us that these are programs that 
Saskatchewan people want to maintain. But they want them 
reformed and redesigned so they can be sustainable in the 
future, so we can protect the most vulnerable people and sustain 
these programs for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the only government in Canada  this is a 
matter of public record  that has got this kind of vision. For 
example, of course, the federal government, I believe, giving us 
114 less this next year to manage with, and it would have been 
very helpful, Mr. Speaker, if we would have had the provincial 
Liberals expressing at least a little bit of concern about that, 
rather than being a cheerleader for the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also eliminated, I believe, the flat tax for 6,000 
new low income families. So we tried to introduce the issue of 
taxation fairness along with the targeted tax measures to 
stimulate the economy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, April Fool’s Day, which the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena referred to today and somehow relating it 
to this budget, while this is the very day that the Canada 
Assistance Plan is eliminated by the federal government, by her 
federal counterparts. Now I think that that’s one of the most 
fundamental things that’s happened in Canada in the last 30 
years. That happened today. And she’s condemning this budget; 
she should be condemning the federal budget because, Mr. 
Speaker, we already see a patchwork quilt of social programs 
occurring across Canada. And this is the very day that that 
Canada Assistance Plan, which ensured federal presence in the 
social policy area with regard to social assistance, is gone  
effective today. Sure they’ve reduced . . . they’ve given more 
flexibility to the provinces, but they reduced the pot very 
substantially, Mr. Speaker. And the reason the Canada 
Assistance Plan was established in the first place, 30 years ago, 
was for the very reasons that we see the patchwork quilt 
developing today. 
 
For example, she’s said that we cut social services program, 
which we didn’t do. But in Newfoundland, in Newfoundland, 
Liberal Newfoundland, we see that that government has 
announced that for every penny and dollar that anybody on 
assistance makes, they’re going to take it away. That will trap 
people on assistance, and there’ll be no incentive and supports 
to get off assistance. Now that’s what the Liberals are doing in 
Newfoundland. 

Mr. Speaker, the Tories in Manitoba, what are they doing? Well 
last year, they took money out of shelter rates for low income 
people. This year they’ve announced a 10 per cent decrease in 
social assistance rates. I believe May 1, a 10 per cent decrease 
when they took money away from these people last year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What do the Tories do in Ontario? They hit the lowest of the 
low income people by 21.6 per cent in terms of the social 
assistance rates. So that’s the vision of right-wing Liberal 
governments  Newfoundland, the federal government  and 
right-wing Tory governments: Alberta, Ontario. That’s what we 
see them doing. So that means that the loss of the Canada 
Assistance Plan today is of even greater significance. 
 
But the member from Shaunavon doesn’t care. He’s chirping 
from his seat. I haven’t heard him get up and speak. But I hope 
that he has some compassion for people who are going to be 
devastated by the loss of the Canada Assistance Plan which is a 
very major, significant reduction that occurs this day  not to 
mention the massive federal offloads with regard to their 
responsibilities for treaty Indian people and the loss of the 
money to the medicare programs throughout Canada and, of 
course, to the education program. 
 
We didn’t cut funds to education; the federal Liberals did. We 
didn’t cut training spaces in SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology); your federal counterparts 
did. And this isn’t funny. I’m surprised that you wouldn’t be 
concerned about that. I’m sad that you wouldn’t be concerned 
about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member mentioned reduction in money to 
municipal governments in Saskatchewan, when her Liberal 
New Brunswick friends cut $19 million to municipal 
governments, and New Brunswick is half the size of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regardless of what the Liberals say about poverty 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and the member just referred to 
that, the National Anti-Poverty Organization, who had their 
board meeting in Regina, believes that Saskatchewan is perhaps 
the only government who is not dealing with their debt 
problems on the backs of poor people. It’s the only government 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker, but we’re dealing with our financial 
problems by increasing the economic activity, job creation, and 
by being fair across the piece in terms of balancing our budget. 
 
So it’s a principled approach, one that shows compassion. If 
you look at the approach with regard to the post-secondary 
education institutions, once again the official opposition 
attacked the other day, attacked that process  they don’t have 
any ideas of their own  but attacked the process where we’re 
going to look very seriously at again positioning our 
post-secondary institutions so that we’ll meet the training and 
educational needs of our young people in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Speaker, our approach is the reason why our Premier has  



654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

been invited to speak at a national conference in Ottawa later in 
the year, as this national forum looks at strengthening 
communities and providing supports to families. They’ve 
chosen to invite our Premier to make a major address to that 
conference because of our balanced approach of compassion, 
community-based solutions, of fairness, financial integrity, and 
because we’re redesigning systems with compassion to prepare 
for the future. I’m not aware that they’ve asked any Liberal 
premiers to speak, Mr. Speaker, to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also, I’m happy to see and to be part of, 
unlike the federal Liberals, who have not . . . or who have 
reneged, I guess is the right word to say, on their child care 
promise, the red book child care promise, $750 million in child 
care, we’ve chosen to enhance  marginally, but it’s 
appreciated by the child care workers  to enhance their 
salaries and benefits, and in addition, some badly needed 
subsidies in the child care field. Because we recognize that 35 
per cent of the moms are the people on assistance, are 
single-parent mothers who need to feel good about their child 
care in order to pursue training and employment opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were, of course, announced . . . the Minister of 
Finance has announced, the Minister of Social Services as well, 
the discussion paper regarding the redesign of the social 
assistance program to deal with the issue of family poverty and 
also to give people on assistance the tools to help them build 
the bridges, to move into training programs and to work 
opportunities. 
 
I had the pleasure yesterday, Mr. Speaker, of attending a 
discussion group at the Nutana Mennonite Church in Saskatoon 
with regard to the whole question of the challenges around 
maintaining the social safety net. And there was a fair amount 
of interest in the Saskatchewan redesign, Mr. Speaker, because 
again it has a vision; is based on a set of principles, with 
compassion as the underlying tone, and also giving people the 
opportunities to move into training and employment programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the 60 or so participants at 
that church in that discussion. They were responding to our 
discussion paper. They were very . . . had some creative ideas 
and they were very positive about the plight of, of course, the 
people who are less fortunate, which is what the church is all 
about. And they had a number of good ideas which I will share 
with my colleagues as we try and do things in the Saskatchewan 
way, which is why we’ve got the alternative vision to the 
federal Liberals and the other regimes across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will . . . there are many other things that one 
could say about the budget speech. My colleagues have 
mentioned a number of those. Tonight I’ve tried to confine 
some of my remarks to the human service area  that is the 
health, education, and social services part of the budget, which I 
am very proud of because it’s an integrated approach, it’s 
holistic, and it maintains the fundamental services that people 
in Saskatchewan want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this budget with great pride 
because I believe that it helps to position Saskatchewan for the  

future and that we’re the alternative vision to the dismantling 
we see in the Liberal and Tory provinces, and by the federal 
Liberal government. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 
a great deal of pleasure that I rise this evening in support of the 
budget speech as delivered here last Thursday in this room. 
 
I too was home for the weekend, Mr. Speaker, and after arriving 
back here I sort of wish that I would have stayed at home with 
the weather being as bad as it was. But generally the community 
up in Meadow Lake and the surrounding towns were very, very 
supportive of the budget, and for that I appreciate it. 
 
I want to begin by paying tribute, Mr. Speaker, to the 
individuals displaced in the department reorganization. One 
never really likes to see any one lose their jobs, but when I 
compare it to the newspaper  the changes in the restructuring 
that took place within the newspaper industry here in 
Saskatchewan  I think our reorganization was done with a 
fair bit of compassion and consultation. So anyway, to those 
employees, Mr. Speaker, I know that they’ve been under a fair 
amount of stress for the last several months and I want to take 
my hat off to them. Tough decisions were made, because I’d 
like to think that we’re leading the way in preparing for the 21st 
century. 
 
And I think this point that I’m going to make now, Mr. Speaker, 
is key as far as I’m concerned. Many of the decisions that we 
made were in fact not driven by finances but were really as a 
result of the environment in which we now live. 
 
I think that people realize that our government has a plan in 
place now and they’re willing to accept that. And part of that 
plan includes, as you will know, Mr. Speaker, a balanced 
budget coming up of course and also another four-year plan  
a plan to balance budgets for the next four years as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all use all sorts of clichés when it comes to 
budgets and speeches like this that we’re engaged in, some of 
them like cornerstone and benchmark. One that I really like and 
I think that symbolizes what this budget is all about for me is 
watershed. 
 
I think that while I’ve always had confidence that the budgets 
that we were involved with in the past were heading in the right 
direction, this time is the first time, and after speaking with 
people at home as well, this is the first time that I can really 
feel, Mr. Speaker, that in fact we see the interest costs starting 
to come down and we see the overall debt being decreased as 
well. And people really are starting to see some gain for the 
pain that they have put in over the last four and a half years. So 
this is the one that really has made me feel very good, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re seeing a budget with no new tax increases. There’s a  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

plan to reduce the debt by 2.4 billion by the year 2000. Our 
overall interest costs, as I referred to earlier, will have an annual 
savings of nearly $100 million in interest costs by the year ’99, 
in the budget year ‘99-2000. 
 
It’s truly amazing when you consider where we were in 1991, 
Mr. Speaker, and I really want to thank the people of 
Saskatchewan who bit the bullet and worked with us over the 
past four and a half years. They told us that health and 
education and social services were their priorities. And through 
the extensive consultations and with many, many good 
suggestions from many of the constituents, in fact in Meadow 
Lake and the surrounding communities in the constituency of 
Meadow Lake and of course from across the province of 
Saskatchewan, I think we came up with a budget that really 
speaks to the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to refer very quickly to a quote that I know several 
others have in the past, but to the Globe and Mail. I think this 
just summarizes it very, very well for me. The headline, it says 
is, “Again common sense in Saskatchewan.” 

 
And one quick paragraph that I’d like to read out of it says: 
 

The New Democrats have governed imaginatively since 
they took office in 1991. Facing a deficit of $845 million, 
the worst per capita in Canada, they feared the collapse of 
the social system they had built. They didn't create the 
mess  the NDP had left the Conservatives a balanced 
budget when they were defeated in 1982  but they knew 
it would take drastic measures to clean it up. And to save 
the social programs, they would have to recast themselves. 

 
And I think that summarizes very well for me, Mr. Speaker, 
what I think this budget is all about. 
 
When I look at our budget and the priorities identified by the 
public, it was extremely gratifying to be able to provide $110 
million in new provincial funding to replace the federal cuts in 
transfer payments. And speaking of cuts, Mr. Speaker, I am 
very pleased that we’re not taking advice from the Liberal 
caucus across the floor. They’re not, as I would describe them, 
Mr. Speaker, not exactly a drawer full of the sharpest knives. 
 
One area that I’m proud of, though, that we will continue to cut, 
is the taxes that Saskatchewan people will have to pay. And in 
that, I want to refer to what exactly was done. We’re going to 
continue with the debt reduction surtax announced in last year’s 
budget, to provide tax relief for individuals and families. That 
will now amount to $150 per taxpayer, a reduction fully 
implemented during this budget year. 
 
Also we’re using targeted tax incentives and cutting red tape to 
encourage business growth, and I want to list off just a few of 
those. There is the 9 per cent investment tax credit in support of 
manufacturing and processing. There’s a reduction of up to 7 
per cent in the income tax rate applied to manufacturing and 
processing, Mr. Speaker; a reduction in the small business tax 
 income tax I should say  rates to 8 per cent. We will retain 
a reduction in the aviation fuel tax from 7 cents to 3.5 cents a 
litre. And beginning January 1, 1997, the improved tax  

treatment for Saskatchewan-based, interjurisdictional truckers. 
 
And that one is of particular importance to me up in the 
Meadow Lake area because of the forest industry with a lot of 
logs being hauled back and forth there, and also being close to 
the Alberta border. A lot of the stuff that’s hauled into the 
Meadow Lake area and the Goodsoil and Pierceland and other 
areas crosses the border between Alberta and Saskatchewan, so 
I’m particularly appreciative of this change. 
 
As well, we’re investing up to $238 million over four years to 
strengthen and diversify the agriculture and food industry. And 
also, as well to me, Mr. Speaker, this is very important. We will 
be contributing as well $630 million in capital projects. 
 
These are the reasons that I’ll be supporting the budget. And 
from everyone that I’ve spoken to so far, so too do the 
constituents of Meadow Lake. 
 
In closing, I want to again thank the good people of my 
constituency who have been so supportive over the past four 
and a half years. So I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 
everyone in the Meadow Lake constituency. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1991 our 
government felt a little bit like a woman comedienne that I 
heard on the radio. She said, I woke up the other day and I 
looked in the mirror and I said to myself, there’s no way I can 
fix this. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we recognized, as she did after the initial 
shock, that beauty is just skin deep. So we went to work. I want 
to talk a little bit today about the big picture, because as I hear 
the comments of the opposition and the third party, I think 
they’re ignoring the big picture. 
 
In 1991 it was clear that major change was overdue. The voters 
agreed. But I want to talk a little bit, because people always 
attribute all the changes taking place to globalization, and I 
don’t feel that all of these changes that are required are due to 
globalization. There was many changes that were needed in the 
province that had to do with conditions existing in the province. 
 
Governments were spending money that we didn’t have in order 
to keep promises that we couldn’t afford. Health costs were 
escalating at 8 per cent a year, even though economies were 
only growing at 2 or 3 per cent. And there was no improvement 
as a result of these expenditures in people’s health, nothing that 
contributed to additional health or independence. 
 
Government-supported job creation we know can be successful, 
but unfortunately the Tories blew literally millions . . . well, 
billions of dollars on projects that had few returns and that 
depleted the available dollars and tools that we had to use in 
that way. 
 
And I think the population, in general, over the years has 
become more educated. We might call them older but wiser and  



656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

more interested in making decisions for themselves and 
communities. 
 
I think that people realize that more government and more 
money was not the answer to every question, any more than less 
government and less taxes is the answer to every question. So a 
new vision was needed to pull these pieces together. And our 
government has that vision to meet the Saskatchewan 
challenges and it’s a vision for the 21st century. 
 
It’s not all new. I remember seeing an old poster from the 1944 
election when the CCF was elected to get the Liberal debt off 
our backs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and yes, it was the 
Liberal debt at that time  same old chicken but the Liberals 
were the ones causing it at that point. And I do understand that 
the 100 million that the federal government . . . the $100 
million problem that’s been created this year kind of pales in 
comparison to the 800 million problem in Tory dead-weight 
debt that we have every year. 
 
But still in all, it all adds up and it all creates part of the 
problem. Our party has always understood that economic 
freedom was the first step to social freedom and we decided to 
start with balancing the budget, living within our means, and 
eliminating the debt. In terms of health reform, we placed 
resources and control over decisions in the hands of 
communities, with needs-based funding and community-based 
care. 
 
In REDAs (regional economic development authority), we went 
towards sustainable jobs, based on value added potential in 
communities, diversification, and the integration of local skills 
and investment. 
 
And in 1992 we signed an historic agreement on treaty land 
entitlement, addressing 100 years of unfinished business, with 
first nations of Canada. This settlement will contribute to the 
land base and resources needed to build a base for prosperity, 
jobs, and self-sufficiency for the new century. 
 
(2045) 
 
The first term built this base for continued renewal, and in this 
second term of government we continue to build on this base. 
And as we challenge our thinking, we expect that people in 
education and in municipalities will challenge their thinking. 
They’re the experts and they’re the best able to determine how 
they can achieve the economies that we’ve been working hard 
to achieve within our government. They have the most 
knowledge of their own systems. 
 
And we continue to understand the need to work towards 
financial freedom. We know you can’t have it all ways. You 
can’t have more programs, less taxes, and balance your budget 
all at the same time. It’s a physical and a fiscal impossibility. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I support this budget. It challenges all of us to 
examine new ways that we can move together in partnership, 
with confidence, towards the 21st century, while ensuring the 
economic stability and security that comes from knowing that 
the cornerstones of health, education, and social services, are  

there for our children and our grandchildren. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I join with my other colleagues in supporting 
the Minister of Finance in this budget for the future. 
 
Thanks very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I am privileged to enter the budget debate because I support the 
budget of this government. And I am proud that we have been 
able to accomplish what we have been able to accomplish with 
the Saskatchewan people. I wasn’t able to speak on the throne 
speech debate, so I’m really pleased to have this opportunity to 
speak on the budget debate. 
 
I want to thank the people of Lloydminster for electing me for a 
second term. And I can tell you that I was there this weekend 
with the Minister of Municipal Affairs. We met with many 
community leaders and with ordinary people, and they were 
pleased with the budget. They had many questions, tough 
questions, that we were able to answer. But as far as the budget 
was concerned, it was very, very well accepted. The media 
accepted it well and so did the folks in the community as we 
walked around on Friday and had lunch and met with 
community leaders. 
 
I want to tell you that I am proud of my colleagues on the front 
benches. This has not been an easy six months. It has not been 
easy for the cabinet ministers or the deputy ministers as they 
restructured departments to make this budget work. I want to 
say thank you to them and to the back-benchers who helped in 
any way that they could. This budget is balanced, this budget 
has vision, and this budget prepares Saskatchewan for the 21st 
century. 
 
In this vast province of ours, the Saskatchewan people have 
built well. Every stripe of political party, NDP, PCs 
(Progressive Conservative), and Liberals, have assured the 
people of this province that they would have equal access to 
services whether they lived in Shaunavon, Swift Current, or La 
Ronge. We have built an amazing infrastructure in health, 
education, highways. Incidentally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have seven east-west highways, the only province to have that 
in all of Canada. We’ve built electrical power which is 
accessible to everyone, telephones for everyone, and now in the 
competitive and deregulated free-trade environment we, as 
government, have had to restructure, rebuild, and redefine how 
we deliver services so that the quality of life will be maintained 
for our children and grandchildren. 
 
And how were we able to do this? How were we able to do 
this? Since 1991 we have struggled with the highest per capita 
debt in Canada. We have struggled with interest payments on 
the debt exceeding $800 million per year. We have struggled 
with a changing economy and work environment. How has this 
government been able to accomplish our goals? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of the province gave us clear 
directions and they gave us directions and their wishes. The  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

people of this province wanted jobs for their children. They 
wanted to preserve the cornerstones of our quality of life, 
education, health. We’re back-filling 100 per cent so that we 
can maintain health, education, and social safety nets in this 
budget. 
 
The people told us that they wanted to restructure and 
streamline government, they wanted to cut administration, 
eliminate duplication and overlap, and they wanted to deliver 
services more effectively. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province is 
running the leanest government in Canada and is doing it more 
efficiently than any other province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, unlike many of the opposition 
members, people on this side of the House understand the 
politics, and the dreams, and the aspirations of Saskatchewan 
people. When I look at my colleagues, I see years of 
commitment and service to the Saskatchewan people. These are 
not people who bought a political membership two or three 
years ago in a political party; these are folks that have three 
generations of commitment. 
 
My good friend, the Minister of Indian and Metis Affairs, has a 
lifetime of working with our party. Her father, a former deputy 
minister of Labour in the Douglas government. The Premier, 
the Deputy Premier, and the House Leader  75 years of 
dedicated service to the New Democratic Party and the people 
of this province. 
 
My colleague, the member of Regina Coronation Park, sits in 
this legislature following in the footsteps of his grandmother, 
Beatrice Trew, who represented the constituency of Maple 
Creek. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Stanger:  The Minister of Post-Secondary Education 
comes from a family committed to rural Saskatchewan. Again, a 
family with years of commitment to Saskatchewan and the 
NDP. The key word in all of this is commitment. That is why 
we were able to balance the budgets and why we will balance 
the budgets in the next four years. This is a team that is 
committed to our principles of compassion, caring, cooperation, 
and vision. A team that believes in working together, a group of 
individuals who are more interested in common goals and the 
common good rather than in individual ambitions. 
 
And now I turn to the federal Liberals. My father used to say 
this about the Liberals  and he’s been dead for many years, 
old Ukrainian, and he used to say  Liberals, Liberals, Violet, 
you remember; remember when they’re out of office, they talk 
like us; when they’re in office, they govern like the 
Conservatives. 
 
And my father was right. And in spite of the massive cut-backs 
to social programs announced by Liberals in Ottawa, and the 
Romanow government  we have made a clear and strong 
commitment to provide vital services for Saskatchewan people. 
Federal Liberals have cut 114 million this year from our health,  

education, and social programs. The provincial NDP 
government has provided $110 million of new funding to 
protect programs and to shield our partners from the impact of 
federal costs. 
 
By the year 2000 Ottawa will only be contributing 15 per cent 
 15 per cent  towards the cost of health care, education, 
and social programs. The provincial government will have 
picked up 96 per cent of the federal shortfall. 
 
Just remember, the federal government had to deal with debt 
and deficit too; it’s the way that they did it. We cut 8 per cent to 
health, education, and social services when we were elected in 
’91 and 25 per cent to the rest of government. The federal 
government did exactly the opposite. They cut 25 per cent 
initially  and it’s going to be much more in the end  to 
health and education and social safety nets; and only 8 per cent 
to the rest of their federal government. Then they have many 
more departments to cut from than we did. 
 
We do not like or agree with Ottawa’s priorities but we are not 
prepared to slash essential, basic services like health and 
education. And in this budget for ‘96-97 no funding cuts for 
social services; no funding cuts for health districts; no reduction 
in post-secondary operating grants. There will be a $4 million 
reduction in capital spending for post-secondary because we 
have had to set priorities; and K to 12 education will receive a 2 
million increase this year. 
 
With this budget the province has made a strong statement 
about the importance of maintaining high quality, accessible 
social programs. So together with my government colleagues, 
we will work to provide the most efficient, compassionate 
government in Canada. 
 
I will be supporting this budget and I am proud to do it. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m certainly 
honoured to say a few words on this budget. In fact I’m very 
honoured to support this budget. 
 
When I was first elected in 1991, I was privileged to sit on the 
Public Accounts Committee. And as I became more familiar 
with the work of that committee, and through that committee 
became more familiar with the provincial finances and the 
incredible mess that they were in, I clearly remember thinking 
to myself, how on earth are we going to handle this; how on 
earth are we going to get out of this? 
 
How can a province of 1 million people deal with a deficit of 
almost a billion dollars? How can a province of 1 million 
people, about 400,000 taxpayers, deal with a $14 billion debt? 
How can a province with the extensive infrastructure that we 
have  the roads, the hospitals, the schools, the power 
distribution system, the energy distribution system, the local 
governments  how can we keep going? How can a province 
which has a history and record of valuing people and social 
programs continue to provide and sustain those values and not  



658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

either go further into debt or go bankrupt? Shall we say to the 
federal government, well you make our financial decisions for 
us? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we decided that we would fight, that we 
would be bold, that we would be courageous. And so we had 
our first budget in 1992 which laid out a financial plan to 
achieve a balanced budget in 1995, and we did that. The people 
of Saskatchewan and this government balanced the budget in 
1995  the first province in Canada to do so. We had a plan, 
and it worked, and we did it while maintaining our enduring 
values of fairness and compassion. 
 
So here we are in 1996, a new term, thanks to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and just presented our first budget in this new 
term with a new plan: “Preparing for the New Century.” 
 
“Preparing for the New Century”  this budget is about 
responding to the priorities of Saskatchewan people. This 
budget is about building prosperity and jobs for the new 
century. It’s about preserving the cornerstones of our quality of 
life. It’s about restructuring and streamlining government, and 
it’s about providing the freedom to choose and control our 
future. This budget is about building prosperity and creating 
jobs for the new century. 
 
How does it do that? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it does that by 
providing funding for the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership to help businesses take advantage of the new global 
market-place. It does that by building on our strengths in the 
key growth sectors such as agricultural biotechnology. It does 
that by investing up to $238 million over four years to 
strengthen agriculture. It does that by stimulating investment 
and job growth by continuing the 9 per cent investment tax 
credit on capital purchases for manufacturing and processing. It 
does that by continuing the reduction in the aviation fuel tax 
announced last year. It does that by continuing the reduction in 
the debt reduction surtax to provide tax relief for Saskatchewan 
families and pump an extra $55 million a year into 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
And it does that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by investing over $630 
million in government and Crown corporation capital projects. 
 
This budget is about preserving the cornerstones of our quality 
of life. This is especially significant today because April 1  
today  is the first day of implementation of the Canadian 
Health and Social Transfer. As we now all know, that means 
over $100 million less from the federal government just this 
year  $114 million less in fact. 
 
(2100) 
 
Well our budget replaces 100 per cent of the federal cuts in 
1996-97 to health, social services, and the operating funding of 
our universities and federated colleges. This budget works with 
universities and federated colleges to reduce duplication, cut 
administration, share resources, and pass the benefits on to 
students. 
 
This budget develops a made-in-Saskatchewan training and  

upgrading strategy, coordinated by the new Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. This budget 
helps employable men and women move off social assistance 
and into jobs with new incentives and more opportunities for 
training and work experience. This budget provides increased 
funding for children in need, including providing $500,000 of 
new funding to help ensure that child care workers are paid a 
fair and decent wage. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget is about restructuring and 
streamlining government. We have already begun. We have 
already started to restructure, to adapt to new realities. We knew 
we could maintain the services Saskatchewan people have said 
are important to them if we restructured and streamlined 
government. We are doing this by reducing administration 
costs, eliminating duplication, improving service delivery, and 
redirecting essential services. In fact we are cutting government 
expenses by $50 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Mr. Speaker, this budget is about the freedom 
to choose and control our future  the freedom to choose and 
control our future. We were the first in the ‘90s to balance our 
budget. Well this budget gives Saskatchewan people a balanced 
budget for 1995-96 despite reductions in federal equalization 
payments and difficulties with forest fires and floods. This 
budget gives Saskatchewan people a plan for four more 
balanced budgets right up to the turn of the century. And this 
budget gives Saskatchewan people no tax increases for 
individuals, families, or small business. This budget gives 
Saskatchewan people a plan to reduce the province’s debt by 
$2.4 billion between 1994 and the year 2000. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this budget focuses on Saskatchewan values. And we 
know what they are because we went out there and we talked to 
the people. We listened to the people. We consulted with them. 
We asked them what their priorities were. And they told us. 
And we thanked them for participating in that process. 
 
And they told us that those Saskatchewan values continue to be 
jobs, health care, social programs, education, and skills training 
 and, Mr. Speaker, the freedom to make our own decisions 
and our own choices so that we can maintain those 
Saskatchewan values. This budget, Mr. Speaker, ensures that 
we will be able to do just that, and I’m proud to support it. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to begin by saying it’s a great pleasure to rise in support of 
the Government of Saskatchewan’s 1996 budget. I want to 
commend the Minister of Finance for long-range planning in 
this year’s budget. 
 
This government faced a number of challenges, the greatest of 
which came as a result of the federal government’s intention to 
tackle its deficit  but more important, in the way in which it 
did it, not by economizing at the federal level, although 
everyone agrees there’s ample room for that, rather they chose 
to take the vast majority of the savings at the expense of the  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 659 

provinces and at the expense of health, education, and social 
service programs. 
 
This made our chore enormously difficult. I felt that the 
Minister of Finance can congratulate herself on a successful 
budget. I felt that over the weekend as I talked to people and 
they were generally accepting of the budget. I thought the proof 
that the Minister of Finance had been successful in putting 
together a budget which met people’s expectations was today in 
question period when the Liberal members opposite ignored  
this, believe it or not, on the second day after the budget  
ignored the budget, went on every other issue, and only got to 
the budget when they needed a filler to kill off the last five 
minutes of question period. That was when they got to the 
budget. 
 
I think that no greater compliment could have been paid to the 
Minister of Finance and her efforts to put together a good 
budget than the Liberal reaction  the reaction of Liberal 
members in the House today. 
 
I want to bring greetings from the constituency of Regina 
Northeast. I’ve now had the opportunity to run in this riding 
and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I greatly appreciate the 
contribution from the member opposite and we look forward to 
his contribution, if and when he rises to his feet. 
 
I want to bring greetings from the constituency of Regina 
Northeast. I ran in this constituency and it is my third 
constituency in as many elections, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 
whether the folks just . . . I seem to wear out my welcome after 
one term or not. But this is the third constituency I’ve run in in 
as many elections. 
 
I want to thank the people of Regina Northeast for their support 
in the election. I want to congratulate the candidates who ran 
against me; in particular I thought the Liberal candidate put up a 
sterling effort. He was young. He was energetic. I thought he 
put up a good campaign, and the results in some ways belied his 
efforts. His efforts should have resulted in a somewhat better 
finish than what he achieved. 
 
I want to congratulate also the Speaker on his election as 
Speaker. The member from Moose Jaw North brings to the 
position a very considerable interest in the Legislative 
Assembly, a very considerable interest and energy, I might say, 
in trying to improve this institution. 
 
I think the member from Moose Jaw North who was elected as 
Speaker is one who is ideally suited for the job. He will bring to 
the job integrity, energy, and I think perhaps, if I may dare to 
speculate, I think perhaps some drive to reform the Assembly. 
 
This Assembly is not in the forefront of Canadian Assemblies 
in terms of our procedure. In some ways we have been more 
traditional than many. I happen to believe that there are many 
ways in which this institution could be improved and I look 
forward to leadership from the Speaker in initiating changes so 
that this Assembly might better reflect the hopes and aspirations 
of the public of Saskatchewan as we see them and as members 
opposite see them. 

I am not sure it is as effective as it might be in providing a 
forum in which the hopes and aspirations and the needs and 
desires of Saskatchewan people can be reflected and can be 
debated. I look forward to leadership from the Speaker. In some 
ways I think he’s ideally suited to perform that role. 
 
The budget’s long-term plans recognize the advantages and the 
disadvantages of the new era of global competition. Global 
competition can increase trade and prosperity; however it can 
also be used to put pressure on social programs. 
 
I want to talk briefly about these issues, especially in light of 
yesterday’s deadline for provinces to register NAFTA (North 
American Free Trade Agreement) exemptions with the federal 
government. I’m going to use the bulk of the time which I have 
in the budget speech to talk about NAFTA and the agreement 
which we have recently concluded. 
 
I want to begin first of all with a word about global 
competition. Global competition is a part of our heritage. It is a 
part of what has made Saskatchewan what it is. Read anything 
about the pioneer days in Saskatchewan. Pick up any newspaper 
during that era, the Regina Leader or the Moose Jaw Times or 
the Moose Jaw Herald. Look at what they said about their 
province. They believed this province was going to found an 
agricultural industry which would take on the world, and indeed 
they did. And up until the markets changed after the Second 
World War, indeed this could be the claim  to be the bread 
basket of the world. 
 
Sometime after the war, and indeed perhaps starting in the ‘60s, 
markets changed, and unfortunately Saskatchewan agriculture 
in some ways remained a wheat economy after a period when 
the demand for grain began to decline. 
 
It’s noteworthy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
agriculture is once again changing, becoming much more 
market driven, and is doing so faster than virtually any other 
agricultural economy in western Canada. In some ways, 
Saskatchewan is an island which is an island in a larger sea. 
Saskatchewan is adapting to the market economy faster than 
any other jurisdiction. It is becoming market driven . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  And it’s good, isn’t it? It’s good though. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  And it is good. Yes. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Let’s hear it for Ralph Goodale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well let’s also hear it from the 
member from Rosetown who courageously brought to an end 
some programs which inhibited the natural development of 
agriculture, and GRIP was almost certainly one of those 
programs which inhibited the natural development of 
agriculture. And one of the reasons why Saskatchewan 
agriculture has moved ahead faster and has gone further than 
other provinces is because that program was brought to an end 
earlier in this province. The GRIP program inhibited 
agriculture’s adaptation to a changing economy and in that 
sense it was a bad program. This government has in many ways 
led agriculture towards their natural inclination, which is to  



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

respond to the market and be independent. 
 
Members opposite refer to the federal government. I think it’s 
fair to say . . . and I think most rural people are very critical of 
the role that the federal government has played in providing 
leadership to agriculture. I look forward to the upcoming 
federal election. And if Liberal candidates succeed in any 
measure in rural Saskatchewan, I for one am going to be quite 
surprised. I think rural people are very critical of the role that 
the federal government has played in the area of agriculture. 
 
Since the Second World War, Mr. Speaker  to return to the 
theme  since the Second World War, there has been a 
worldwide trend to open markets and to an end of 
protectionism. This trend towards freer and freer trade is 
generally credited with fuelling an enormous increase in world 
trade and an enormous increase and a continuing increase in 
worldwide prosperity. 
 
Central to how we are adapting and what impact global 
competition will have on the province is NAFTA. NAFTA, it 
should be recognized, has both positive and negative aspects. 
On the positive side, NAFTA, and the Free Trade Agreement 
which preceded it, have probably met the expectations of those 
who were promoters of the agreement. In terms of the increase 
in trade it has probably met its promoters’ expectations with 
respect to increase in trade. The bare statistics tell a story of an 
agreement which has been successful in increasing trade. 
 
Between 1988, the first year of the Canada-U.S. (United States) 
Free Trade Agreement, and 1994, the first year that NAFTA 
operated, Saskatchewan exports to the U.S. increased by 97 per 
cent. That really is quite a remarkable increase. When you 
consider that the U.S. is our largest trading partner and the trade 
totals $3.8 billion, which is more than twice as much as the next 
five largest trading partners combined, that is an enormous 
increase in trade. 
 
(2115) 
 
By way of comparison, Saskatchewan’s next four largest 
trading partners are Japan, China  Japan at 613 million, 
China, 558 million. South Korea at 330 million. Algeria  this 
one surprised me  Algeria, at 273 million. In total, those five 
as I said, the sum total of those five is less than half of our trade 
with the U.S. 
 
Our other free trade partner, Mexico, is not among the top five 
trading partners. It is however growing at a phenomenal rate. It 
has increased by 237 per cent between 1988 and 1994. 
 
In total, Saskatchewan’s international exports account for a very 
large percentage of our gross national product; 32.2 per cent of 
our gross national product comes from exports. That is, by a 
wide margin, the highest percentage of any province in Canada. 
Virtually everything we produce is exported. 
 
When all is said and done, Saskatchewan and Canada have, as a 
whole, a trading economy, and our budget and our plan for 
economic development, the Partnership for Renewal, 
recognizes this fact and builds upon it. 

Indeed Canada is one of the great trading nations on earth, 
deriving as we do a larger percentage of our gross national trade 
than virtually any industrial nation on earth. Far more so than 
most nations. It is critical to our present high standard of living 
that we seek every advantage we can to develop and promote 
trade. 
 
There are obvious advantages to improving trading 
relationships. Let me mention a couple that touch people in very 
real ways. 
 
Some parts of our economy, Mr. Speaker, are going flat out. Let 
me name a few of these  oil and gas, transportation, 
machinery, manufacturing, mining, dimensional lumber, pulp. 
These industries are going flat out. These industries have one 
common feature. They’re all export industries. 
 
As that portion of our economy is going flat out, it’s virtually 
the only portion that is going flat out  that which is export 
orientated. 
 
Let me try putting the matter another way. Most of these 
industries all pay well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Actually 
if the member from Wood River is so curious about where this 
is leading, he might want to be quiet and listen for a change. 
The member from Wood River has never learned the elemental 
lesson, when the mouth is engaged, the ears cannot be. So if the 
member opposite would listen he might find out where I’m 
going with this. 
 
Moreover, these export industries pay well. If you’re making 
good money, say $12 an hour or more, chances are pretty good 
that you’re either working in (a) the public sector, or (b)  and 
I mean that in the broadest sense to include health or education 
 if you’re making high wages, chances are you’re working 
either in the public sector or in an export industry. There are 
some exceptions to that, but there aren’t very many. Good 
paying jobs in Saskatchewan are derived from one of those two 
sources. 
 
For all the advantages of free trade and NAFTA, there are some 
very serious disadvantages. Canada and Saskatchewan have 
always defined themselves not by their high standard of living. 
As the Premier has said so often, we define ourselves not by our 
high standard of living but by the compassion which we show 
for our fellow citizens. We believe that what makes us different 
than other peoples, and particularly our good neighbours to the 
south, is that we are a compassionate society, we are 
community orientated, and that is what makes us different. And 
it is that key definition of Canadian society which is under 
threat from NAFTA in particular. 
 
This problem is rooted in NAFTA’s narrow, one dimensional 
nature. It is strictly an economic agreement which is blind to 
any consideration of social objectives and social costs. It was 
after all negotiated by a Conservative government in Ottawa. 
What would you expect indeed but an agreement to be 
negotiated which would misunderstand the very nature of this 
country? 
 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, the litany of problems which were left  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

to this country, both nationally and provincially, after the 
Conservatives exited the scene will be with us for a very long 
period of time. 
 
I see I might have touched a bit of a sore spot opposite. If I 
were members opposite, I think I would want to be . . . if I were 
members opposite, I think I’d want to be a little careful about 
talking about their record as well. 
 
One of the things that differentiates members on this side from 
members on that side — members on this side have a proud 
history in office. We’ve provided superb government. Members 
on that side of the House have left a litany of disaster both at 
the federal and provincial level. I can well imagine why the past 
is not something the members opposite want to dwell on. 
 
We of the NDP need to be precise. We of this government and 
the NDP need to be precise when we are talking about free 
trade. We don’t fear free trade. Indeed our standard of living is 
based on it, both here in the province and in Canada. What we 
fear is not free trade but that this particular agreement will 
erode our social programs, and the fear is grossly aggravated by 
the hostility of U.S. corporations and many of their politicians 
towards Canada’s social programs and by their view that areas 
such as Canada’s public health system is merely another market 
which they’re being unfairly prevented from entering. 
 
This approach, Mr. Speaker, contrasts sharply with the 
European Economic Union. The European Economic Union 
began with a series of social principles to which all nations had 
to agree. There were principles with respect to labour standards. 
There were principles with respect to the provision of basic 
services: education, health, shelter for all Europeans no matter 
where they lived. And, Mr. Speaker, many Europeans believe 
that the success of their union, and the fact that it has continued 
to develop through a series of fits and starts, can be credited to 
no small degree to the fact that their agreement has some 
common social objectives upon which that agreement is based. 
It is not strictly an economic agreement. 
 
I mentioned our public health system. This is just the most 
recent example of a social program which has come under 
stress. There has been a growing fear that the U.S. and Mexico 
will challenge our right to publicly funded medicare. The origin 
of the problem is that NAFTA guarantees not only free borders, 
it also guarantees equal access to investment. Thus American 
investors and Washington have argued that private companies 
should be able to compete to provide health services, and 
NAFTA seems to support them. 
 
As a result of concerns expressed by Saskatchewan, and in 
particular British Columbia, and other provinces, these security 
problems have been largely addressed. The provinces began, 
Mr. Speaker, by listing a series of exemptions which they had a 
right to make to the NAFTA agreement. The Government of 
Canada had announced at the 11th hour they were taking charge 
of the matter, and it appeared that they have done so. While the 
agreement has not yet been finalized, it appears that the 
Government of Canada has at the 11th hour been able to 
arrange for an exemption for all provinces of social services, so 
that health, education, and social services can remain public  

functions within Canada. 
 
In the meantime, we have demonstrated our commitment to 
ensuring maximum protection by transmitting an official list of 
our reservations to the Government of Canada in case their list 
turns out to be insufficient. We will remain vigilant in 
protecting our social safety net from the operation of trade 
agreements which are and should be limited to the provision by 
the public. We want . . . I want to say in closing, in closing this 
comment off, this is probably just the first threat. Others will 
come. The agreement is too narrow, the NAFTA agreement is 
too narrow. There is no recognition of common social goals. 
Nothing is stated. And this central defect in this agreement is 
going to continue to haunt us. This is simply one challenge 
which I think we have successfully met but which will 
undoubtedly come back in other ways. 
 
Ultimately, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can only be a 
spokesperson on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
Government of Canada is a signatory to the agreement and it is 
they who must do what they can to protect programs. 
 
The last round which we had gives us little comfort, I must say, 
in depending upon the federal government, federal Liberals. 
The federal government did nothing to protect social programs; 
first of all spent months assuring the provinces that they had 
nothing to be concerned about. Fortunately provinces such as 
Saskatchewan and British Columbia, led by New Democratic 
Party governments, did not take that advice. We gave leadership 
to other provinces. 
 
Finally at the 11th hour, and I mean like last week, like a few 
days ago, the Government of Canada became so embarrassed by 
the process, and under some pressure from the U.S. and Mexico 
to show a little more leadership, finally the Government of 
Canada took charge of the process and provided an overall 
exemption. It’s noteworthy, though, that the Government of 
Canada had to be embarrassed beyond all that was reasonable 
before they took the necessary steps. One can’t help but being 
critical of the federal government for its conduct on this. One 
can’t help as well in being concerned about future challenges 
which may come forth. 
 
I want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that this budget 
demonstrates that the Government of Saskatchewan is adapting 
to changes which are going on throughout the world. This 
province is adapting as fast and as successfully to a 
globalization of our society  it’s not just our economy; our 
society . . . this province is adapting to globalization as fast as 
any province in Canada and Canada is adapting as fast as any 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of our earlier prime ministers, Sir Wilfred 
Laurier, said that the 20th century would be Canada’s. I’m not 
quite sure that he was right but he may have just been . . . he 
may have just missed it by one century. It may well be that the 
21st century will be ours. I’m delighted to support the budget, 
and delighted to support a budget which promotes and protects 
fundamental values. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to support this 
budget. 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, very much. 
It’s my pleasure to enter this budget debate — this budget that 
is really about change and really about preparing all of us in 
Saskatchewan for the next century. 
 
Change is a byword that has been on our minds and on our lips 
for some time now, but change seems to be about the only thing 
that remains absolutely constant in the real world in 1996. And 
though it would be nice at times to just sort of pause and maybe 
slide back 10 or 20 years, and go back to what we fondly 
remember as a simpler time, that reality just isn’t there for our 
sons and our daughters, for the young people of Saskatchewan. 
I don’t think that option is there for us either. So that’s part of 
what this budget is all about, is the preparation for the next 
century. 
 
And frankly it’s a budget that I am going to be very delighted to 
be supporting, standing up and supporting, when it comes our 
time to stand up and vote, Mr. Speaker. I am so intensely proud 
of our Minister of Finance, our Premier, the Treasury Board, 
and all of my colleagues  be they cabinet ministers or 
back-bench MLAs. I’m incredibly proud of this wonderful team 
that has gone out, listened to the people of Saskatchewan to the 
very best of our ability. And I know some will say that our 
ability to listen, Mr. Speaker, might be a bit challenged. But 
nonetheless, we collectively went out, did our very, very best 
effort to listen to our constituents and others across the 
province. 
 
(2130) 
 
We heard them quite clearly saying health care is a real concern. 
We are desperately concerned that if I get sick  or if my wife, 
or my son, or my daughter, or my aunt, or my uncle get sick  I 
want to be assured that the quality health care is there and 
available for them. That’s the very first priority that 
Saskatchewan people talked to us about. 
 
Well the reality is this budget back-filled $47 million of federal 
Liberal government offload in health care alone; $47 million 
they reduced, we put it back in. So for every dollar up to 47 
million that the federal Liberals took out of the Saskatchewan 
health care budget through the long-standing sharing formula of 
paying for health care, for every one of those $47 million that 
Paul Martin and Jean Chrétien and the Liberals in Ottawa took 
out, we put a dollar back in to the $47 million. 
 
But you know what’s the frustrating part, Mr. Speaker, is the 
price that had to be paid in other areas of our budget, the price 
that had to be paid. Ask our civil servants, ask the more than 
500 that are no longer employed and they will tell you that they 
paid about as big a price as any government or any employer 
can ask them to pay. I can tell you that that price that we asked 
those people and their families to pay, was not one that we took 
lightly. Because we didn’t take it lightly there was a fairly 
generous early retirement program put into place. I’m delighted 
to tell you that the take-up was very good on that early 
retirement program. 

Is it perfect? No. No, Mr. Speaker, it’s not. Saskatchewan in 
1996 is not a perfect world. My heart goes out to everyone who 
has lived through the insecurity of what has gone on and words 
just can’t adequately describe that. I’m again proud of the 
efforts. I think that the efforts to manage this transition in 
Saskatchewan are second to none anywhere in the universe. 
 
Show me anywhere where the same efforts have been made. 
Certainly nobody’s going to hold up Ontario and say that’s the 
model. Closer to home, I can’t believe that even the third party 
would hold up Ralph Klein’s kinder, gentler Alberta as the 
model. The kinder, gentler Alberta where they charge $816 a 
year health care premiums and then willy-nilly lay off people, 
be it in health care, education. They fired all the kindergarten 
teachers a year ago and tried to hire them back this year. It’s 
sort of a jerky, on-again, off-again relationship that Alberta has. 
 
But that’s Alberta; they’ve got their problems and frankly I 
wish we had more of their joy from the oil royalties. That would 
solve a fair number of problems. I think the Minister of Finance 
agrees that if we could . . . if we had a little bit of that wealth 
we would undoubtedly be able to govern and look like saints. 
 
But that’s not the reality again; just not the reality in 
Saskatchewan. We can only deal with the reality as it presents 
itself. And yes, we try and make adjustments to that reality, but 
$47 million offload in health alone from the federal Liberals 
and we back-fill $47 million at a price that I’ve enunciated. And 
isn’t it a shame, isn’t it disgraceful that all we’ve got to show 
for that $47 million back-fill on the federal Liberal offload, is 
we’re able to say, oh, but we’re treading water in health care; 
we’re broke even; we’re the same place as we were a year ago 
basically. Now nothing remains totally static, but $47 million in 
health care should have bought the people of Saskatchewan a 
terrifically huge amount of joy, should have. What did it buy 
us? Status quo, thanks to our federal Liberal government. 
 
This budget, as I said, protected health care. Well we talked to 
our constituents, our friends, our neighbours, people across the 
province, and I was delighted with what I heard from people of 
all ages. This absolutely transcends . . . I’m not talking just high 
school students, just university or SIAST or community college 
students, Mr. Speaker, but everybody right up to the most senior 
person that I had the joy of talking to in this budget 
consultation, without fail they said education. If we can do 
nothing else, if we can’t provide a $50,000 a year job for my 
nephew Johnny or my niece Mary; if we can’t do that, the very 
least we can do is provide these young people with the very 
finest education that we possibly can. 
 
Education is a huge commitment; it’s an obligation that this 
generation has to the next generation. It, as you know, gets paid 
back many, many times. Our whole standard of living is in no 
small measure due to the great education that our population 
overall enjoys now. Particularly, cast your mind back 100 or 
200 years when you had basically an illiterate population. When 
the minister or the preacher happened to be a minister or 
preacher because they could read and nobody else could for the 
most part. Fortunately things have really improved, but  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

education, a major commitment, a major commitment to our 
future  what did the federal Liberals do?  cut 
post-secondary education $15 million this year, more next year. 
What is our response? We back-filled $11 million in 
post-secondary education. It’s 4 million short. I know some of 
you are paying attention to the numbers, Mr. Speaker. The 4 
million shortfall is in a capital program for post-secondary 
education. And as everyone in the universe that’s paying any 
attention to education knows, there are some real serious 
questions about what post-secondary education is going to look 
like next year, the year after, the year after. 
 
We’re back-filling but there’s no point in getting involved in a 
capital project that might or might not be the best capital 
project, the best capital project that we could undertake. And 
that situation should be clearer 12 months from now. So 12 
months from now we should be back in a position where 
education, post-secondary education capital, can hopefully 
figure into the equation again. 
 
Federal Liberals cut 15 million. Our response  put back 11 
million for post-secondary education. Very important. 
 
Social programs was the third item that again, without fail, 
there was individuals that said well, you got to do this or you’ve 
got to maybe make it so people receiving social services 
benefits can be encouraged to seek better employment, more 
paying employment. I understand the sentiment. What these 
people by and large need is the jobs, and that’s why the focus in 
this budget is jobs, that’s why we’ve laid out the job creation 
target. Unlike the federal Liberals who were silent on it, we’ve 
laid out our job projections right to the year 2000 and we 
proudly talk of our record over the past nearly five years now in 
terms of job creation. 
 
It’s not enough. I’ll be the first person to say that, Mr. Speaker 
— it’s not enough. What we would all like to see is another 
50,000 or 100,000 jobs in Saskatchewan, just like that; but it 
doesn’t happen just like that. You have to have the foundation. 
The business community have told us repeatedly what they need 
is the fiscal stability, the knowledge to know that taxes aren’t 
going to have to escalate as governments chase that debt and 
deficit devil. 
 
Well this budget, Mr. Speaker, is our third. Not our first, not 
our second, but our third in a row balanced, surplus budget. Not 
the first, not the second, our third in a row balanced, surplus 
budget. This budget that we’re projecting for this year, that 
we’re debating as we speak, shows an $8 million surplus. That, 
on a total revenue of five billion, three-hundred-and-some 
million, is a lot of revenue for a very, very skinny surplus. And 
we acknowledge it’s a very skinny surplus. 
 
What are the options? The Minister of Finance could have 
projected perhaps, as the former Devine government did, could 
have projected a $200 million surplus. And it really would have 
been very simple. I have some advice for the Minister of 
Finance. All you do is you take out a pack of cigarettes or 
something, and you project that the price of oil, instead of being 
$18.50 or $19 a barrel  you say, well what happens if the 
price of oil goes to $27 a barrel? Oh, the revenue increases  

$200 million. Well there; we just made ourselves a $200 
million surplus. 
 
That was the Conservative method of budgeting. For nine and a 
half long years, we witnessed this in Saskatchewan. We know 
the record. We remember, many of us remember, 1986. Grant 
Devine won his second term of election. That year, Gary Lane 
was the minister of Finance. Gary Lane was projecting a $277 
million deficit. Before the election. 
 
After the election, some two weeks after the election, Gary 
Lane, not embarrassed at all, not red-faced at all, he says, well 
whoops, I guess I wasn’t paying attention. It’s not 277 million 
deficit this year, it’s 1.2 billion. And I’m quick to point out to 
the Leader of the Third Party, Mr. Speaker, that this $1.2 billion 
deficit wasn’t after a change of government. That wasn’t a 
run-up, artificially run-up number, run up by a different 
government. That was the Conservatives got re-elected and had 
to report  because the Provincial Auditor wouldn’t let them 
not  had to report the fiscal and financial reality. 
 
So 277 becomes 1.2 billion. What is the then Conservative 
minister of Finance’s response? He says, well what do you 
expect? We’re politicians. I can’t describe the sinking feeling in 
my guts when I heard that, Mr. Speaker. I think that public 
service, that being an MLA, is one of the most honourable 
callings that any of us could have. I am so proud to be able to 
stand here and speak the truth as I see it. And then to have 
somebody say: what do you expect; we’re politicians. What do 
you expect; we’re politicians. This may be a joke for the Leader 
of the Third Party but it’s your shame. It’s your joke. It’s not for 
anybody that respects this place and what it stands for — this 
democracy, this democratic place that has its own nuances and 
some many good things happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud that we delivered a balanced, surplus 
budget two years before the election. We delivered a balanced, 
surplus budget the year of the election, and now our first budget 
after successfully being re-elected, we’re offering up a 
balanced, surplus budget. Not only do we speak . . . talk the 
talk, we walk the walk to the very best of our ability. And I 
know with $8 million, this is skinny. I know that if we have 
another year of forest fires like last year, the Minister of 
Finance is going to be scrambling to try and somehow maintain 
this in balance. I know that. I think the people of Saskatchewan 
understand that. But what I am hearing is that this budget lays 
out a realistic plan for this year and we’ve laid out a realistic 
plan right to the year 2000. 
 
(2145) 
 
A realistic plan, unlike the federal Liberals, unlike the federal 
Liberals who . . . what’s their idea? Well Paul Martin will tell 
you that he’s making fantastic headway on the deficit. Well as I 
understand it, this year, this year the federal Liberal deficit is 
going to be more than $20 billion. The total debt, the federal, 
the national debt, is over $600 billion. Well this is their third 
year, going into their fourth year, and the best he can come up 
with is a 20-plus billion dollar deficit. 
 
In our third year we delivered . . . and I’ll come back to finish  



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

this point, but we delivered a balanced, surplus budget. Now 
when I say we delivered it, our Minister of Finance put together 
the budget; a million people in Saskatchewan delivered it. A 
million people participated, Mr. Speaker, in those tax increases 
that were necessary the first couple of years we formed 
government, and in those service cuts that were also necessary. 
 
I’ve said from my place before, unfortunately there is no magic 
to government. It’s just like somebody selling you snake oil. If 
this snake oil off the back of a station wagon sounds like it’s 
too good to be true, it probably is. And it’s no different with 
government. If the snake oil sounds too easy, too good to be 
true, you’ve got to ask, where’s the price? Canadians heard 
Prime Minister  then campaigning, then not prime minister, 
but now Prime Minister  Jean Chrétien say, we’re going to 
scrap the GST; we’re going to axe the GST. Well their idea now 
of scrapping is: “Feds push provincial sales tax and goods and 
service tax merger”. 
 
Oh well, now this sounds like an idea right out of the third 
party. This sounds like a Conservative idea. Why do I say that, 
Mr. Speaker? You’ll remember very well in Gary Lane’s final 
budget, what did Gary Lane do? He said, we’re going to 
harmonize the Saskatchewan provincial sales tax with the 
federal, the Brian Mulroney goods and service tax, so that for 
evermore everybody in Saskatchewan can pay taxes on all of 
the things they pay PST on, but also all of the things they pay 
GST on, but at the combined rate. What does that mean? It 
means we would . . . where we exempt people for provincial 
sales tax on health supplies and medicines, on educational 
materials, on children’s clothing, on utility charges, and on 
services such as accountants, lawyers, or mechanics . . . if you 
get an oil change, you pay the GST on the labour part of the oil 
change. You don’t pay provincial sales tax on the labour part. 
 
Well if we’d harmonized, there’s one other thing that neither of 
the two old parties will talk about, Mr. Speaker. If we 
harmonized the PST with the GST . . . corporations have a 
flow-through that basically says they don’t have to pay any of 
the GST-PST  whatever you want to call it  value added 
tax. They’d get a flow-through. Who pays? The final consumer, 
Mr. Speaker, you and I as individuals. 
 
Now what does this mean? You can take your best guess, but 
every single projection I’ve heard from any Finance department, 
be it Ottawa or Saskatchewan, is $150-plus per family. That’s a 
tax increase on individuals, Mr. Speaker, and there’s no other 
way of slicing it. That’s what the federal Liberals want to do 
now. That’s what . . . the provincial Conservatives had passed 
legislation that would have come into effect January 1, 1991. 
Our first act on forming government was to repeal that. 
 
This budget carries on. This budget carries on the tradition of 
standing up for Saskatchewan people, standing up for the very 
people that I and all of my colleagues have been elected to 
stand up for  all of us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Mr. Speaker, I am more than a little bit delighted  

with this budget. It’s not a budget that is without hurt; it’s not a 
budget entirely without hurt. Budgets never are. It offers some 
tax relief  a further $150 reduction this year in the debt 
reduction surtax. I’m happy to see that trend line going down. 
I’m happy to see our government committed to continued tax 
decreases as we can afford them. 
 
But I’m also very happy, Mr. Speaker, with a chart that I have 
in front of me that shows the total debt of the province coming 
down  a Saskatchewan Finance chart that shows our total 
debt of the province in 1994 was $14.9 billion. In 1995 it was 
14.4 billion  some $500 million less. Then in ’96 it was $14.3 
billion. That’s a hundred million dollars less. Still going down. 
 
This budget that we are now discussing shows the total debt 
going from 14.3 to $13.4 billion, a reduction of some $900 
million, much of it coming from the sale of the Cameco shares. 
It’s a one-time sell-off of those shares, buy down the debt, 
thereby saving $40 million-plus in interest payments each and 
every year. 
 
So we’re planning for the future; we’re preparing for the future. 
We’re doing the very best we can to back-fill from the federal 
Liberal government. We’re doing the very best we can to try 
and manage with the limited resources and limited 
circumstances that the Devine Conservatives left us with. It’s 
the hand we’re forced to play, Mr. Speaker. In short, it’s not a 
bad hand, you know  this wonderful province of ours that 
you and I call home so proudly, that we all call home. 
 
This Saskatchewan has a strength; its people are phenomenally 
resourceful. We’ll make it. We will overcome together 
obstacles. We’ve done it before. We’re doing it now and I 
know, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to continue to overcome 
obstacles in the Saskatchewan way well into the future. I 
suspect, well after all of us are long gone from this place. 
 
I am very, very proud to take my place now and let others enter 
this debate, Mr. Speaker. I will be proudly standing and voting 
yes to this budget when the time comes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m glad that the opposition have received my intervention with 
so much enthusiasm. We’ll try and bring them up to date on 
what’s happening with respect to our universities, with respect 
to SIAST, with respect to the regional colleges, and with 
respect to a couple of other activities that have to take place in 
connection with some of the problems that they’re facing. 
 
Let me begin, Mr. Speaker, with the situation that the 
universities are facing. 
 
Both of our universities, Mr. Speaker, have been under 
considerable financial pressure for some years now. Through 
the 1980s, they were squeezed financially; and then of course 
following the election in 1991, with the enormous problem that 
all of Saskatchewan had in getting on top of its deficit 
problems, the universities have not faired well financially. 



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

And as a result, over the last 13, 14, 15 years, the universities 
have had to go through a whole series of cost reductions and 
cut-backs and economy measures of one sort or another to live 
within their budgets. They have done that, Mr. Speaker, with 
considerable success, but it’s been very, very difficult for them. 
 
Both of the universities adopted an approach that saw them 
trying to maintain their level of programing across the 
university but to squeeze those programs to try and realize cost 
efficiencies from wherever they could. This resulted in the 
cutting of vacant positions, in the laying off of support staff, 
and in the reduction of expenditures wherever they could find 
them. And that has gone on, as I mentioned, for some 13, 14, 15 
years. 
 
The presidents have said to me, Mr. Speaker, that looking back 
on it, they wished they had approached the problem somewhat 
differently. I think if they’d realized that the financial pressures 
were going to continue for as long as they have, they might 
have handled the questions of cut-backs in a different way and 
probably considered what program cuts could be made, what 
sort of vertical cuts could be made that would have enabled 
them to keep a large number of programs going at a good 
healthy clip and delete others completely. But rather than that 
 and I can understand their decision  they chose to keep 
their array of programs and try and squeeze those programs to 
realize efficiencies that would enable them to live within their 
budgets. 
 
Well that is clearly . . . the presidents tell me that is clearly not a 
tenable approach any longer. We’ve had the discussions about 
this, and it is clear that they have squeezed these programs for 
as long as they can, and now is the time when they have to 
consider what kind of structural changes and what kind of 
program changes they can make in their institutions in order to 
become financially viable in the long term. 
 
And this is a difficult process. It’s difficult for a number of 
reasons. First of all, all of Saskatchewan is proud, with the kind 
of programing that we find at each of the two universities. 
There are programs that are broad and rich; there are programs 
that are the envy of many universities in this country. 
 
You take, for example, the situation in the College of 
Engineering at the University of Saskatchewan., You find a 
very, very wide array of program choices that an engineering 
student has to choose from on entering the college. And that’s 
something to be proud of. And our engineers have graduated 
and taken their place all across Canada, and indeed the world, 
with a degree from the University of Saskatchewan to their 
credit which gives them entrance to the very highest level of 
jobs in this country. 
 
We are proud of that. At the same time, of course, it’s 
expensive. And the extent of that expense has become clearer as 
the years have gone by and the financial crunch has continued. 
I’m not singling out engineering for any particular treatment, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m simply using it as an example of the situation 
at the universities in Saskatchewan. 
 
There was a good deal of anxiety as the extent of the federal  

cuts to the CHST (Canada Health and Social Transfer) envelope 
became clear, as it seemed to the universities, and indeed 
seemed to us, that we would not be able to back-fill behind 
these cut-backs and that that may involve pretty severe cuts to 
the university funding; a great deal of concern and anxiety. 
 
As it turned out, we were able to back-fill, at least so far as our 
operating grant is concerned for this fiscal year, but we had to 
tell the two universities that the amount of money that this 
government is able to commit to university funding would have 
to be reduced by $5 million in the next year, ‘97-98, and by a 
further $5 million in ‘98-99. 
 
The universities can work with that, Mr. Speaker, and they are 
busily engaged now on two fronts in order to realize the cost 
savings and the efficiencies that they’re going to have to realize, 
given the information that I’ve just described to you. They’re 
not approaching it, Mr. Speaker, as a cost-cutting, expense 
reduction exercise. They’re taking the approach that they will 
positively review their programs and positively restructure their 
institutions with a view to positioning themself to be financially 
viable in the long-term. 
 
So it’s not just purely a negative, cost-cutting exercise so far as 
the universities are concerned, but an opportunity to review 
their programing and to make the kind of changes that can be 
made and ought to be made at the university so that they will be 
a relevant, viable, vibrant, renewed institutions serving the 
province of Saskatchewan and available for the students in this 
province to get a university education. 
 
One interesting perspective on this was given to me in a 
meeting that I had with the presidents and senior officials of the 
federated colleges. And one of them said, near the end of the 
meeting, that this situation with its financial limitations, this 
situation is normal. What was abnormal were the 1960s and the 
1970s when there seemed to be a lot of money for university 
expansion and for the development of universities. And that’s a 
different perspective. I personally hadn’t considered the 
situation in that light, but if you think about it carefully, there’s 
a great deal of truth to that. This may be normal. The heyday 
years, the big years, the ‘60s and ‘70s, may have been 
abnormal. 
 
But whatever the situation, they certainly created a programing 
that is extremely difficult to be able to finance in the 1990s. 
And looking down the road into the future, it is not clear to me 
how the situation will change to the point where that kind of 
programing is sustainable in this province or in any other of the 
western provinces at least, during the years to come. And so I 
think that we’re going to be seeing some pretty fundamental 
changes in the two universities as far as their programing is 
concerned. 
 
Now the government, of course, represents the public interest in 
education as it represents the public interest in many things. 
And the universities recognize the government’s concern that 
the universities emerge from this situation with the best quality 
system that we’re able to have; the best quality system that 
we’re able to afford; and that it be sustainable and viable in the 
long term. 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

And so the universities have, in spite of their tradition of 
autonomy and independence, agreed that the government 
should have a place at the discussions that will take place. 
Those discussions will take place at two levels. There will be 
discussions between the two universities to see what 
efficiencies and rationalizations can be worked, to try and find 
as many economies as possible in that situation and to try and 
make their programs complementary to each other and mutually 
supportive in order that there won’t be duplication or overlap or 
pointless expenditure of money. That’s one level. 
 
The second level is within the two universities themselves, and 
there the issue is the array of programs that I have described 
earlier in my remarks. 
 
(2200) 
 
The question then came before us as to how we should be 
represented during that exercise. And it is true, as members of 
the opposition have pointed out, that that could have been done 
at the level of the minister, or at the level of the deputy minister 
or an assistant deputy minister. 
 
And yet on reflection we thought that a more appropriate way 
for the government to be represented was by someone who was 
at arm’s length from the government, at least at partial arm’s 
length, and so we decided to not send a minister or a senior 
official but to be represented at those talks by someone who has 
our confidence, has the respect of the university communities, 
the respect of the business communities in the province, the 
respect of almost everybody in the province. Someone who 
could go, and while representing the government, still be at 
arm’s length from the government and not present any sort of 
threat to the autonomy of the universities or their independence. 
 
The concept of university autonomy is a long and highly 
regarded value in this province. It has a great tradition and it is 
one that we, on this side of the House, are anxious to respect 
and maintain. And we do not want to be seen in this exercise as 
throwing around our weight or presenting any undue pressure 
on the universities to make one decision or another. 
 
There is, however, a public interest and we want to understand 
what’s going on; we want to appreciate why it’s going on. We 
want to ensure that our representative, who is a Saskatchewan 
man, born and raised here, working here all his life, is able to 
bring to the university the knowledge that he has of the 
province of Saskatchewan and what Saskatchewan would 
expect from a university and those related kinds of questions. 
 
And so we were pleased to appoint Harold MacKay to that 
position and I think he is the logical person to do the job. I can 
think of no one better qualified or better able to represent the 
government and, in that way, the people of Saskatchewan, than 
Harold MacKay. 
 
Turning now, Mr. Speaker, to the situation at SIAST, you may 
have noticed in the budget that the SIAST funding is level for 
the ‘96-97 fiscal year, that is level compared to the year just 
ended. And we have committed to SIAST that that funding will 
remain level for the two following years. So they look forward  

to three years of level funding so far as the province is 
concerned. 
 
And the reason why we did that, Mr. Speaker, is because 
they’re already being hit quite hard by the changes to the 
Unemployment Insurance Act that were announced by Lloyd 
Axworthy last November. Now those changes impact on 
Saskatchewan to the tune of about $31 million. That includes 
the withdrawal of a number of training allowances and those 
sorts of supports for individual people, but it also impacts 
directly on SIAST to the extent of about $11.4 million. Well 
$11.4 million is a lot of pain for SIAST to have to cope with. 
 
A lot of adjustments that will be necessary there will put quite 
enough pressure on them as an institution to adjust to that 
particular drop in financing. And we simply had to maintain 
their funding on a level basis over the three-year period so that 
they can be secure in that funding and can turn their attention to 
how they’re going to cope with the changes to the 
Unemployment Insurance Act. 
 
I take exception to those changes to the UIC (Unemployment 
Insurance Commission) plan for the reason that the plan is in no 
difficulty. The plan, as I understand it, is in a surplus position 
and the changes that took place were not made in order to save 
any money or to prevent the fund from falling into a deficit 
position or to save the fund or wipe out a deficit or anything 
like that. It was done for other reasons and it has visited a great 
deal of harm to the training system in Saskatchewan. I say a 
word about that, Mr. Speaker, because it is very interesting. 
 
For the last three decades at least, in this province we have had 
a training strategy which is really an Ottawa training strategy. 
What we did in Saskatchewan was to take the federal 
programing for training and use it as the core of our approach to 
the training of our citizens. And we have added to and 
supplemented and built around that Ottawa core to give 
ourselves the training program that we’ve had here. Now we 
weren’t the only ones to do that. A number of other provinces 
did it. The closest example is Manitoba, which finds itself in 
precisely the same position as we’re in. 
 
We now have had the federal core withdrawn from us, snatched 
away, and we’re left with a vacuum that we have to fill and we 
have to fill quickly. And we have to fill it with a Saskatchewan 
training strategy. And the commitment from Lloyd Axworthy, 
while he was still the minister, is that Ottawa were prepared to 
supplement our strategy and add to our strategy and build 
around our strategy. In other words, the roles between the two 
levels of government would be exactly reversed. 
 
That’s a challenging thing, but it’s also I think a very positive 
thing. It’s probably something we should have done 30 years 
ago. The stark reality is that the approach to training in this 
province has not been built around an understanding of 
Saskatchewan needs. It hasn’t been built around an 
understanding of our labour market, or the needs of our 
youngsters, or the needs of people who are not young but who 
need retraining. And that has been a shortcoming in our 
approach to training in this province for at least the last 30 
years. 



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

And now with Ottawa having withdrawn, we have the 
opportunity to finally get at it and to build a training strategy in 
this province that meets the needs of our labour market; that 
meets the needs of our economy; and that meets the needs of 
our people. And it’s an opportunity that I and other members of 
the government welcome. 
 
We have to build this strategy with a great deal of care, a great 
deal of consultation. The government does not have all of the 
information necessary in order to put together that strategy, and 
we will need the help of the workers, the trade unions, and 
other organizations representing working people. We need the 
help of the employers and the experts in training, the people 
who deliver it. We need help from the whole community. But 
it’s an exciting challenge to think about finally establishing a 
made-in-Saskatchewan training strategy here. 
 
A word about the regional colleges. The regional colleges, a 
matter of interest to all of us, I think. They are a remarkably 
flexible and effective instrument in this province and have been 
for a long time. They’re able to put more training on the ground 
faster than any institution I think in the country. 
 
And it is that wonderful flexibility and responsiveness that 
makes them stand out above any other institution that I can 
think of. And that, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is worth preserving 
and it’s worth building on, and we plan to do that. We have told 
them that their funding is going to be level for this year and the 
next two years after that. 
 
At the same time, they have problems because the changes to 
the federal training approach  the UIC changes  will impact 
on community colleges to the tune of something like a total of 
$6 million. And that will chiefly be by the federal dollars not 
being there to buy training seats or to buy training from the 
regional colleges. We are not able to back-fill behind that. But 
there are a number of issues that have to worked through, and 
the community colleges will be central in dealing with those. 
 
Let me just describe one of those issues, Mr. Speaker, before I 
take my place. It concerns apprenticeship. The apprenticeship 
program in this province has been a federal-provincial program 
in the sense that we have shared the costs. And the division of 
costs has been worked out in negotiation and has up till now 
been that the feds have sponsored about 60 per cent plus of the 
program, and the province has sponsored about 40 per cent 
minus. 
 
Well the federal government has served notice last November 
with its UIC changes that it will be withdrawing its 
apprenticeship money over the next three years. We are now 
negotiating with them about the pace of that withdrawal, and 
we’re trying to put as much of that . . . hold as much of that 
money for as long as we can so that the withdrawal won’t take 
place until near the end of the three-year period. Those 
negotiations have not been completed, but when they are I’ll 
report on the matter to the House. 
 
But one thing is perfectly certain, and that is at the end of the 
three-year period the federal government will be out of the 
apprenticeship program. And that will leave us in a situation in  

Saskatchewan where we have to make some decisions about 
how we’re going to finance apprenticeship. One option is just 
simply to find somewhere the $4 million to throw into the 
apprenticeship program, and it’ll carry on just as it was with 
complete provincial funding. That’s tough for us to do. I need 
not say that to this House. Those points are made over and over 
again. It’s tough to do. 
 
It is our view that the federal government has here a program 
that it just ought not to walk away from. We train apprentices in 
this province who travel all over Canada and whose skills are 
used all over Canada. In many trades, most of the apprentices 
leave the province in order to advance their careers. So it seems 
to us unfair. But leave that argument aside because the federal 
government’s decision at this point appears to be firm. 
 
What are we going to do in order to keep apprenticeship 
training as a viable, workable concept in this province? I think 
we have to. I mean I think we have to devise a strategy here to 
save it. It is impossible to imagine that our province could have 
a training program without having apprenticeship as a major 
component of it. And yet the funding problems are a great 
concern. 
 
There’s also a good deal of interest in the program in the sense 
that it hasn’t been looked at for a long time. There hasn’t been a 
general review of the program in this province, as there has 
been in many other provinces, and there seems to be consensus 
in the community that we conduct a review, that we see that a 
review is conducted, at least, to sort out some of the 
fundamental questions and see whether our apprenticeship 
programs can be made more modern, more relevant, more 
efficient. 
 
(2215) 
 
But one thing is clear and that’s that work-based training is 
successful and we have to find ways in which we keep the 
apprenticeship approach to training alive and well in this 
province. But it’s a difficult question and a daunting one, again 
one that will require a good deal of consultation with the 
affected community in order to work out how we can proceed 
with apprenticeship training in the future. And just to repeat 
myself, the money part of the question is one of the major 
questions, but only one. There are many, many others. 
 
One thing that we are keeping our eye on throughout this whole 
process is the question of accessibility. It will be no answer to 
this problem for the universities merely to increase their tuition 
fees. That will be no major part of the answer at all. If you look 
at the level of tuition fees in this province, Mr. Speaker, you 
find they’re right up there near the top of the scale compared 
with other universities, particularly in western Canada. SIAST 
has long prided itself, and we’ve all been proud of the fact, that 
their tuition fees are as low as they are, and we don’t want that 
to change in any very material way. We are anxious that that 
question of accessibility be kept in mind by all parties to these 
reviews at all times. 
 
And as I take my place, Mr. Speaker, let me state the major 
objective that the government has that overshadows all the  



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 1996 

others, and that is that at the end of the day we have the highest 
quality post-secondary institutions that we can afford to have. 
We have to do the very best we can for our children, for their 
children, for all of the citizens of this province, and that is no 
light question. That is a very difficult, very challenging 
question, but I feel confident, as I speak tonight, that this is an 
objective shared by everyone, and that by working together as 
we are, we will find the way to accomplish that very worthy 
objective. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand here tonight to 
echo the sentiments of most of the people of Saskatchewan in 
offering my sincere congratulations to the Minister of Finance 
on a job well done, especially when one considers all the 
restraints placed on us by the federal government, the Liberals, 
who are bound and determined to emasculate our national 
health, education, and social assistance programs. Mr. Speaker, 
rather than follow the lead of the Liberals in Ottawa, our 
government has replaced dollar for dollar all of the slashes 
made in health, education, and social programs. 
 
Again the Liberals have demonstrated their willingness to attack 
the young, the sick, and the poor, the most vulnerable in our 
society. I strongly urge the MLAs on the other side to join with 
us and soundly condemn the Draconian cuts to the essential 
elements of our great province and country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has been guided by the enduring 
values that have stood the test of time — of community, 
compassion, and cooperation —values that are so representative 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the role of government in economic development 
is vital to our survival as a favoured province. There are simply 
some things that government must do that the market cannot or 
will not do. Rather than cross our fingers and hope everything 
will work out okay, as our federal Liberals and other right-wing 
parties do, we have identified the problems of the market and 
acted accordingly. 
 
We have ensured that there are incentives in place to encourage 
investment in the long term. An exclusive short-term focus have 
left the Canadians off worse. Government’s role must be to 
assist the people of Saskatchewan to prepare themselves to 
meet the challenges of a changing economy. 
 
Governments must focus on making the market work to provide 
opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan. And we should 
ensure the work, to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan 
have the skills, the infrastructure support, to take advantage of 
these opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, governments and people need to make a serious 
commitment to attainable targets on income levels, 
unemployment rates, job creation, and sustainable economic 
growth. Mr. Speaker, this government will act as a partner, a 
motivator, and an encourager of an economic climate which  

creates real opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right-wing policies have left us with a . . . left 
Canada with a faltering economy characterized by growing 
poverty, high levels of unemployment, and an ever-increasing 
gap between the rich and the poor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a short word about the climate which is 
developing in our nation. There are corporations who are 
realizing huge profits and in the meantime laying off thousands 
of workers. Just a few examples  General Motors, a 36 per 
cent increase in profits. That’s an increase, and they laid off 
2,500 workers. CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) 
 a 14 per cent increase, and they laid off over 1,000 people. 
 
The sad part is, as the member opposite is doing, they are being 
applauded for this act. And of course, this is a society which we 
cannot put up with. 
 
The Fraser Institute states that the only goal of corporations is 
to make a profit. This government strongly disagrees with this 
concept. Surely to goodness these corporations have some 
responsibility for social justice. They have a responsibility in 
terms of sustainable growth, skills upgrading and training, and 
job creation, not only for the workers, but also to ensure the 
long-term success of their own corporation and the economy in 
general. And if they are not willing to accept the responsibility, 
they need to be taken to task; not wined and dined as they are 
now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government proposes a different approach; not 
a confrontational mode but an approach which seeks long-term 
solutions in partnership with business to build a dynamic 
economy for all the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Easter and spring  surely both will come soon 
 are associated with rebirth and regeneration; a time to 
celebrate new life and new hope. And this is what I feel about 
the provincial budget. Some things must change. By planning 
and carefully building on our strengths, change can be positive 
and exciting. Your government has responded to the priorities 
of Saskatchewan people and is preparing the province for the 
new century. 
 
Saskatchewan people want the security that comes with jobs 
and opportunities. Building prosperity and creating jobs 
continues to be our number one priority. Our provincial 
economy is strong. This budget encourages further prosperity. 
 
We are keeping our promise of lower taxes for families, 
targeted tax incentives for local business, and a reduction of 
unnecessary red tape in regulations. We are investing in job 
creation and growth. Up to $238 million will be used to 
strengthen the agriculture and food industry. A Saskatchewan 
trade and export partnership centre will be created to assist 
businesses in exporting their products. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, regional economic development 
authorities will give communities greater local control over  



April 1, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

projects in their areas. Saskatchewan people have said they 
want the security of knowing that vital services will be there for 
them, their children, and their grandchildren when the need 
arises. The Romanow government has made a clear 
commitment . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. I want to remind the hon. 
member that he’s not to use the proper names of currently 
sitting members of the Assembly, and I know that he recognizes 
he did that and I’ll ask him to proceed in a parliamentary 
fashion. 
 
Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, we will defend and protect health, 
education, and social programs. This includes protecting 
essential services from the impact of those federal cuts. This 
year the Liberals in Ottawa are cutting $114 million from 
health, education, and social programs in Saskatchewan alone. 
In three years we will lose over $250 million. The very 
programs that are the most important are the ones that the 
Liberals in Ottawa have cut the most. Seventy-three per cent of 
all the cuts made by the federal government are coming out of 
vital services like health, education, and social services. We 
disagree with that approach and say that social programs should 
be protected. 
 
Your provincial government is providing $110 million of new 
funding this year to back-fill what Ottawa has taken away. In 
order to protect essential services for the future, government 
must find ways to deliver existing services more effectively. We 
have shielded our partners in education and local government 
from major cuts for this year, but we must all work to reduce 
costs and become more effective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial budget is about change and the 
freedom to deal with change according to our Saskatchewan 
values. We look forward to the 21st century with a sense of 
confidence and security. Saskatchewan will remain the best 
place in the world. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support this 
budget which protects the citizens of Saskatchewan and I will 
certainly support the motion at the proper time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 641 
Tchorzewski ................................................................................................................................................................................ 643 
Thomson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 646 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 648 
Murrell ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 651 
Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 652 
Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 654 
Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 655 
Stanger ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 656 
Murray ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 657 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 658 
Trew............................................................................................................................................................................................. 662 
Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 
Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 668 

 INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................. 644 
 

 


