


















































April 16, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 915 
 April 16, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of gravely concerned citizens over the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition are from Regina, from small towns in 
southern Saskatchewan adjacent to Regina. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The petition is signed by people from numerous communities 
throughout southern Saskatchewan and the city of Regina. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 
names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 
Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, Goodwater, Weyburn, and Estevan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to also present petitions of names from Saskatchewan 
residents regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Regina. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of people concerned about the future of the Plains Health 
Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. 
 
The people that have signed this are from pretty well across 
rural Saskatchewan in the south, and also the city of Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed it are from Regina, from McLean, 
from White City, Kayville, and Humboldt. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
from my constituency, from the towns of Pense and Rouleau. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
day 31 to present petitions along with people all throughout 
Saskatchewan and my colleagues in regards to saving the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
mainly from Preeceville, Gainsborough, Carnduff area, but also 
a few of the constituencies right here in Regina  Albert South 
and Elphinstone constituencies, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and all members of the House some 
folks who are sitting behind the bar here today. They are people 
who have met with us just recently regarding changes to the 
government’s SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to Independent  
  



916  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

Living) home oxygen program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the three folks sitting behind the bar are Mrs. 
Doreen Klassen of Regina here, and her attendants, Jeffrey Beer 
and Merle Natyshak from Medigas here in Regina as well. And 
I’d ask all members to please welcome them here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Holocaust Remembrance Day 
 
Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, today is Yom Hashoah or 
Holocaust Remembrance Day, the day set aside to formally 
remember the 6 million Jews murdered during the darkest days 
of an often black century; 6 million murdered along with Slavs, 
gypsies, homosexuals, mentally handicapped people, and 
others, quote, who were undesirable, all in the name of racial 
purification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago during a visit to Poland, I 
visited the Warsaw Ghetto Monument and the sites of the death 
camps at Auschwitz-Birkenau and Majdanek. I can tell you that 
the atmosphere of evil was still then overpowering. 
 
And today, 50 years later, there have been torrents of words 
attempting to explain why such an unspeakable crime by 
supposedly enlightened people could be allowed to happen in a 
supposedly enlightened age, and that torrent of words still is 
inadequate to describe the depraved power of that event. As one 
writer among many says, and I quote: 
 

The holocaust was so beyond the pale of previous human 
experience that it eludes language. In mounting the 
Holocaust, man turned his ferocious power on himself. In 
so doing, he deformed the image of man himself, turned 
morality into its opposite, and humanity into a effigy of 
death. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we turn our faces from the lessons of the 
Holocaust because the knowledge is too terrible. But one lesson 
of many that we, as legislators, must remember is that the event 
we recognize with horror today was an act of government 
policy carried out by government officials. That too we must 
never forget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my 
voice to those taking time today to remember those victims who 
lost their lives in the Nazi death camps during the Second 
World War. 
 
Millions were sent to their deaths at the hands of the worst mass 
murderers in the history of the world. Fifty years have passed, 
but the atrocities that took place in Europe so many years ago 
carry the same resonance with us today. 
 
That’s how it must be, Mr. Speaker. As has been stated by men  

greater than myself: if we don’t remember history, we are 
destined to repeat it. We must never forget or downplay the 
horror of those death camps. We must strive to remind our 
children and grandchildren of the evil that men can do. Only 
then can we be assured that these horrific acts will not be 
repeated. 
 
We must also remember the survivors of death camps. Those 
few fortunate souls who walked away from the camps have 
done their part in reminding the world of what took place there. 
Their stories are unimaginable, yet they are all too real. We 
must never stop listening to their stories, unpleasant as they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, never have the words “lest we forget” been more 
important as they are today as we mark Holocaust 
Remembrance Day. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Roy C Hill Award 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to congratulate a grade 8 industrial arts teacher at 
Victoria School in the city of Saskatoon  Victoria School is 
located in my constituency  a Mr. Slawko Kindrachuk. 
 
Mr. Kindrachuk was the recent recipient of the Roy C Hill 
Provincial Award presented to him at the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation annual spring council last week in Regina. 
 
The prestigious Roy C Hill Award is presented annually to 
recognize innovations in teaching by any certified teacher or a 
group of teachers working in elementary or secondary schools 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Kindrachuk, recognizing the need to modernize traditional 
industrial arts courses, initiated and started a project called 
“Exploring Technology.” The goal of his project was to provide 
an industrial arts course that met both female and male 
students’ needs and interests, took into account social and 
parental expectations, reflected the experience and research of 
industrial arts teachers, and emphasized technology literacy as a 
common essential learning. 
 
The result of Mr. Kindrachuk’s innovations has been the 
development of a course that moves students’ learning 
experience from an industrial model to a contemporary focus on 
technology, thereby better preparing our students for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Mr. Slawko 
Kindrachuk on his award and for his commitment to the young 
people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Passing of John Melvin Hill 

 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this House 
today to express my condolences on the passing of a great local 
sports hero. Sadly, last week, John Melvin Hill of the Fort 
Qu’Appelle area passed away. In the 1930s, Mr. Hill captured  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

the imagination and hearts of hockey fans across Canada when 
he played for the Boston Bruins. He gained the nickname Mel 
“Sudden Death” Hill after scoring three winning overtime goals 
in the 1939 play-off series against the Rangers. The Bruins went 
on to capture the cup. Mel’s feat is now hockey legend. He also 
played with the Toronto Maple Leafs when they won the 
Stanley Cup in 1945. 
 
After leaving hockey, Mel returned to his roots in 
Saskatchewan. He operated Mel Hill Beverages in Regina until 
1970, when he and his wife Jean retired on a farm near Fort 
Qu’Appelle. He is survived by his son, Roy, and his daughters, 
Peggy, Arleen, and Sandy, and their families. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in expressing my 
condolences to Mr. Hill’s family and friends. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Low Rental Housing Tenants Meet 
 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last Tuesday evening in Saskatoon I had the pleasure 
of attending a meeting of Gladmer Park and Edmund heights 
tenants, about 150 all together. These tenants are worried and 
concerned that their low income housing complex has been sold 
to private interests and the certainty that their rents are surely to 
rise. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the federal government no longer 
has a social housing program and I wish to commend these 
families and hope things work out for them. The meeting was 
well organized. There was a real sense of community, a real 
sense of empowerment and resolve and determination for these 
tenants to influence the decisions and take some control over 
their lives here, in this area. 
 
We all know the importance of quality and affordable housing 
to the health and well-being of her citizens. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
the residents well, and I thank them for inviting me to this 
important meeting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lake Lenore Lancers Win Basketball Championship 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
congratulate the Lake Lenore Lancers who won their fourth 
consecutive provincial 1A girls basketball championship, and in 
the process made history. No other team in the 1A division has 
achieved so many gold medal wins in a row. Following the final 
game, the Lancers were also named the recipient of the 
Canadian Olympic Association’s banner for fair play and 
sportsmanship. Congratulations to the coaches, Wade and Val 
Weseen, and congratulations to the Lake Lenore Lancers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Soil Conservation Week Activities 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I  

recognize the outstanding and commendable work done by a 
constituent of mine, Mr. Doug McKell. Doug is the executive 
manager of the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association 
which is headquartered in Indian Head. 
 
This is National Soil Conservation Week in Canada from April 
15 to 21. During this week, various organizations will be 
conducting activities to increase the awareness of necessary soil 
conservation efforts in Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1995, the United Nations issued a report citing soil erosion as 
the number one threat to our planet. Despite this warning, the 
report received little or no immediate coverage. Doug and many 
other members of the SSCA (Saskatchewan Soil Conservation 
Association) are focusing their attention on agriculture 
diversification in Saskatchewan which is essentially dependent 
on the quality and productivity of our soil resources. 
 
Government agrologists, industry, and producer organizations 
like the SSCA, work together in developing agriculture systems 
that ensures the protection of our soil. A tremendous amount of 
innovative information and technology has been introduced to 
assist farmers and others in developing new practices. These 
successful efforts continue to be developed by Saskatchewan 
people for the benefit of all of us. 
 
No other province can top Saskatchewan in the area of soil 
conservation. Let’s take time to encourage and support these 
efforts so this valuable Saskatchewan resource is protected for 
our future generations. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Minister of Municipal Government made some 
amazingly contradictory statements to the media. She said some 
municipalities are telling her to tie revenue sharing into 
municipal agreements. Mr. Speaker, she is obviously not 
listening. Not one municipality in this province that I have 
talked to wants revenue sharing tied into amalgamation and 
shared services. 
 
Will the minister now admit she has made a mistake by trying 
to force shared services and then force amalgamation on 
municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t sure whether 
that was a member’s statement or a question. But I did . . . 
we’ve been having some discussions, interesting discussions, 
with municipal organizations, Mr. Speaker, about the fate of 
The Service Districts Act and how municipalities can cooperate 
further than they are now to provide services to the people that 
they’re elected to serve in a more efficient manner. 
 
I was commenting on some suggestions that were made to me  
  



918  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

by municipal organizations, that it was possible that 
cooperation, intermunicipal cooperative agreements, could be 
tied to revenue sharing. I think that the municipal organizations 
have had some very innovative ideas and we’ll continue 
discussing them in the next round table, which is scheduled for 
April 26. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, my purpose was to be 
provocative and I see that I have succeeded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, it seems completely 
backwards that we would go to round-table discussions after 
legislation has already been brought to the Table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities have repeated over the last number 
of months that the service district legislation is not needed. 
Then the minister stated yesterday that municipal officials don’t 
believe her. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, why would they? The minister does not 
consult with them, then brings forward a very flawed piece of 
legislation and wonders why there’s so much distrust. The 
government’s record on health care  now education  and 
broken promises, are good examples why no one in rural 
Saskatchewan believes a word they say. 
 
Will the minister now admit that this is a poor piece of 
legislation that wasn’t wanted and was not needed and should 
not have been brought forward in the first place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we have had a number 
of discussions with the municipal organizations about the status 
and intent of The Service Districts Act, which we introduced 
into this House earlier in the session. We’re very good listeners, 
Mr. Speaker, and their arguments with respect to this proposed 
legislation are beginning to have some resonance with me. 
 
And I think this shows that we are flexible. We’re prepared to 
listen. We’re prepared to work with them to reach cooperatives 
ends. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have a very good, open, 
honest, and frank relationship with the municipalities and their 
organizations. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would say that if the 
minister is listening, she’s just not hearing. Mr. Speaker, with 
The Service Districts Act the municipalities are getting mixed 
messages. 
 
At SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
the Premier stated, one way or another amalgamation will 
happen. The Finance minister stated at the budget briefing to 
the media that cooperation, coordination, and amalgamation 
were a must. 
 
Now the municipal minister stated that amalgamation is not the  

be-all and end-all. Then she says municipal officials do not 
believe her. Who should they believe? They are getting mixed 
messages. She also stated, if municipalities are not going to use 
this Act, why would you do it? I guess she’s saying, why bring 
it forward? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems the minister does not believe in her own 
legislation. Yesterday she also stated this legislation cannot be 
withdrawn without the consent of caucus. Will she now take 
this very poorly designed piece of legislation to her caucus and 
have it withdrawn once and for all? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the service districts 
legislation has already been introduced into this House and had 
first reading. And you can hardly tell that that happened 
because the members opposite haven’t read it. They think that 
it’s about amalgamation. The Service Districts Act is not about 
amalgamation. So I suggest before the members opposite make 
comments upon the virtue or lack thereof of a piece of 
legislation, that they should read it and understand it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I also think that in our work with the municipal 
organizations, we have heard again and again that any moves to 
coordinate, cooperate, amalgamate, whatever, those decisions 
should be made at the local level. We agree, but we can’t wait 
for years and years and years for this voluntary action to take 
place. 
 
So we are opening up the debate; we are bringing it out of the 
closet, and we are talking openly about how these ends can be 
achieved. And they want to get to the same place, Mr. Speaker, 
as we do. And we’re cooperating with the organizations, unlike 
the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Local Government Funding 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An editorial 
appeared in the April 8 edition of The Northeast Booster which 
members of the NDP (New Democratic Party) government may 
wish to look at. I’d like to provide copies for them. This article 
states: 
 

Like the premier and his colleagues in Cabinet, (the 
member for Carrot River Valley) . . . vigorously denies that 
the provincial government is downloading on to 
municipalities and school boards. 
 
He says, instead, that the provincial New Democrats are 
“challenging” the lower levels of government to come up 
with changes that will make things happen more 
economically. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government continually whines and cries the 
blues when met with federal transfer payment reductions. Will 
the member from Carrot River Valley explain why, when this 
government turns around and shafts towns, villages, and RMs  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

(rural municipalities) in rural Saskatchewan, it’s not 
downloading, it’s challenging? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, all members on this side 
of the House have the utmost of respect for those people who 
are elected at the local level to form the governments that serve 
the people that they’re closest to. And we believe that they have 
the intelligence to make the decisions that will affect them. We 
know that they appreciate that there’s fiscal pressure, starting in 
Ottawa with the federal Liberals and their downloading onto the 
provincial government. 
 
They know that Saskatchewan is a community, Mr. Speaker  
Saskatchewan is a community. We need a collective response to 
the kind of assault that we’re having from the federal 
government. And those levels of government are working 
together with us to meet those challenges. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this editorial goes on to 
indicate that no politicians are more masterful at the art of the 
double-speak than Saskatchewan’s New Democrats. And here 
we have a perfect example. The fact is the net difference in 
transfers over the next three years is $106 million  only 1.5 
per cent of the provincial government’s annual revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this editorial goes on to state that the member 
from Carrot River Valley in the NDP government can, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . take their challenge and shove it. 
 
Because what they are doing is throwing the onus for 
providing services deserved by taxpayers on to levels of 
government much less capable of raising funds than the 
province. 

 
Will the member explain when this government will begin 
concentrating on ways to make Saskatchewan’s economy grow 
and prosper instead of blaming Ottawa for everything from 
education and health cuts to April flooding, dandelions, and 
mosquitoes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I welcome the opportunity to answer the member’s question. 
 
The members opposite refuse to focus on the one central 
argument we’re making about the federal government, and it is 
this: there is a budget called the federal budget ’96-97 in which 
three-quarters of all the cuts made are to health, education, and 
social programs. What we say is these are the wrong priorities. 
These are not the priorities of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have also noted that the members opposite are willing to 
support, either silently or vocally, a budget in which the  

majority of cuts are to health, education, and social programs. 
And we won’t let the people of this province forget that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Home Oxygen Program 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Health. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, a couple of weeks ago we asked 
you about your department’s plans to change the home oxygen 
system offered by the SAIL program. At the time, you said no 
one who needs oxygen is going to be deprived of oxygen and 
let there be no doubt about that. 
 
However, what is in doubt is the quality of life that the 
recipients will have under your system. The restrictions that 
have been put on the oxygen supply of low income recipients 
forces them to do little but to stay at home quietly in a chair. 
 
Mr. Minister, your changes to the SAIL program will restrict 
recipients to 10 non-refillable tanks a month  tanks that are 
much heavier and more awkward then the small canisters 
currently used by most oxygen users. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you making this change which will 
restrict oxygen users to be confined to their homes most of the 
time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I see today we have, along 
with Mrs. Klassen who I welcome to the Chamber, some 
representatives of the oxygen industry. And I want to say that 
there are some things that the oxygen industry can do. And I 
want to say to the industry, I expect them to do them. Namely, 
to come up with smaller aluminium cylinders; to come up with 
oxygen concentrators to make the oxygen go further; and, Mr. 
Speaker, to come up with dual packages for people so that they 
can have oxygen concentrators in the home and mobility 
packages to be mobile. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the choice to be made here is between the 
biggest profit to be made off oxygen and coming up with 
packages that meet the needs of the people. And I expect the 
industry, by June 1, to come up with proposals  not to 
maximize profit, but to help the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe that there is a 
solution, and that solution is to use that which is already 
available, and that’s the system that Mrs. Klassen is currently 
using. I don’t think she agrees with your rosy assessment of the 
system that you are proposing. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I just want to remind the  
  



920  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

member that it is not appropriate to involve guests in the 
Assembly in the debate, and I’ll just ask him to . . . I’ll ask all 
members to phrase their questions and answers with respect to 
that tradition. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Here are some of the thoughts on 
your new oxygen system: 
 

It’s heartbreaking because I’m a person who must get out. 
While I was in hospital they gave me a cylinder and I could 
hardly manage it. When I first came home from the 
hospital I was depressed as I thought I was going to be a 
shut-in. 

 
Mr. Minister, those who can afford additional tanks will be able 
to remain mobile, while people like Mrs. Klassen and others 
will remain confined to their own homes. Mr. Minister, why are 
you creating a two-tiered system for oxygen users? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve discussed this matter on 
a few occasions with the Saskatchewan Lung Association, and 
the Saskatchewan Lung Association takes a very big interest in 
this matter. And what they say is that: 
 

The SAIL Working Group has attempted to develop 
practical guidelines (and we have to) . . . find a fine 
balance between ensuring that home oxygen is accessible 
to every patient who needs it, while at the same time 
eliminating the excessive costs incurred by inappropriate 
program usage. 
 
The program is an expensive one. 
 

This is what the lung association says. 
 
And they go on to say, Mr. Speaker, they’re quoted in the 
Leader-Post February 29: 
 

There is new technology in Alberta that uses light 
aluminium cylinders and a device called an oxygen 
conserver that SAIL should look into acquiring, he said. 
 

And what I am saying to the House, Mr. Speaker, and to the 
third party, is that there are options available that do not involve 
simply charging the highest amount of money, but provide 
mobility to people. And I expect the industry to find ways  
and there are ways  where mobility will be provided to 
Saskatchewan people at a lower cost to them, at a lower cost to 
the taxpayer, and allowing everyone to have the access to 
oxygen that they need. But this should not be a question of 
profit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Right-to-work Legislation 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, the 
SaskTel strike appears to be turning into a long drawn out  

affair. No doubt this is going to place a lot of financial hardship 
on many of the striking workers and there may be some who are 
going to start thinking about laying down their picket signs and 
coming back to work. However, that would be extremely 
difficult to do because of the threat of retaliation from the 
unions under our present system. 
 
Mr. Minister, later today I will be moving a motion in support 
of right-to-work legislation in order to protect any workers who 
wish to cross the picket lines and return to work. Will you 
support this motion, Mr. Minister. Do you support the right to 
work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I will tell the member 
flat out that this government does not believe in an attack on the 
principle of free collective bargaining. Free collective 
bargaining is comprised of three characteristics: the right to 
associate, the right to negotiate, and the right to withdraw one’s 
labour  the only thing that a person has to sell. 
 
Those three mean free collective bargaining. What the third 
party is suggesting, the Conservative caucus party is suggesting, 
is the destruction of free collective bargaining by the removal of 
a third important component, namely the right to withdraw 
one’s labour, and to introduce Alabama North right-to-work 
legislation, so-called. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that puts us back to the 19th century and earlier. 
That’s maybe for the Conservative Party; it’s not for us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Municipal Government. Mr. Speaker, I guess the 
municipalities don’t like the carrot that the minister was 
offering and now she’s pulling out the stick. Yesterday she said 
sharing may be tied to intermunicipal agreements, and if 
municipalities don’t want to participate in the NDP’s forced 
amalgamation scheme, they will loose their revenue-sharing 
grants, according to the minister. 
 
Madam Minister, could you outline how your little blackmail 
scheme is going to work exactly; exactly what hoops will 
municipalities have to jump through; and if they don’t jump 
through those hoops, what will the financial penalties be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
been reading the newspaper or having somebody read it to him. 
And he has taken some words out of context, in that I didn’t say 
that the government intended to do that; I said that it had been 
suggested to me by some municipal organizations that this 
might be one way to encourage cooperation. 
 
So I think it was thinking out-loud, it was putting out ideas, 
options, and I think we need to continue to bring this subject out 
of the closet and continue talking about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, thank you for the 
recognition that we were thinking and that it was out-loud; it’s 
better than some of the statements that were picked up about 
cutting back the funding yesterday, which was short of at least 
one of those two characteristics. 
 
We have received numerous letters from towns and villages and 
RM councils who are opposed to your service districts. And you 
mentioned a little earlier on that you’d been talking to them; I 
guess you haven’t been talking to very many of them because 
they see it as nothing more than a plan to force amalgamation 
against their will. 
 
And as one of the letters we received said, municipalities are 
responsible enough to initiate change when it is required. They 
do not need it imposed on them by a bloated senior government. 
 
Another RM writes that your proposed amalgamation scheme is 
going to turn into another health reform fiasco. 
 
And people should recognize, and this one I quote, “the 
dictatorial, uncaring, selfish, heartless, and idiotic actions of 
this regime”. 
 
Madam Minister, will you listen to what local governments are 
telling you? Be flexible like you said you were going to be; 
withdraw your service district Act; and withdraw your threat of 
financial penalties; and leave local governments alone to decide 
the best way to deliver services to their own local ratepayers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, we have been not talking 
to local governments; we have been listening, Mr. Speaker, to 
local governments . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and there is a 
difference, yes. And they’re anxious for us to work with them to 
develop some options for how they can deliver services more 
efficiently. 
 
And again, again there’s a reference to The Service Districts 
Act as an Act which will lead to amalgamation. Mr. Speaker, 
for anybody who has paid any attention to the wording of that 
legislation, it has nothing to do with governance, nothing to do 
with amalgamation. 
 
So please, Mr. Speaker, could I ask the opposition, before they 
raise concerns in this House about the nature of legislation, 
could I ask that first they read it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Executive Salaries 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
people of this province were shocked to learn that SaskTel 
managers are receiving $50 for each hour of overtime 
performed during the current labour dispute. 
 
Taxpayers were also shocked to learn recently that Don Ching 
was hired as the Crown’s new president at an annual salary of  

$167,000 in addition to untold bonuses. And it doesn’t end 
there. Garry Simons, a former president of the New Democratic 
Party, when hired by this government as a vice-president of 
SaskTel, was taking home an annual salary of $105,000. Today 
his wage is $117,000 or 12 per cent more than he was earning 
three years ago. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SaskTel explain why a 12 per 
cent raise is warranted for her NDP friend at SaskTel, while 
offering the average working person much less? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, let me say 
that one credential that the member opposite forgot to mention 
was that Garry Simons has 18 years of service in the company 
of SaskTel as an employee previously, so he is more than 
eminently qualified to hold that position. 
 
I also want to address the question about the overtime. When a 
repair and install person goes out on overtime  this is 
after-hour pay that we’re talking about  the regular rate of 
pay for that person after the eight hours is $44 an hour, Mr. 
Speaker. And so there is not this huge differential for 
management compensation during the current labour impasse 
that they try to make out. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the main thing, the important thing, is that we 
are wanting collective bargaining to work. We have, as the 
Premier outlined in his answer earlier, respect for those three 
pillars that affect working people in organized labour. Their 
solution is replacement workers  replacement workers, 
back-to-work legislation. Mr. Speaker, that’s not what this 
government is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I did forget to mention 
something in my earlier question about Mr. Simons. And one of 
the things is with respect to his initial benefit package which 
included a leased vehicle, a club membership, and SaskTel 
discounts. Can the minister confirm if these aspects of Mr. 
Simons’s initial contract are still in place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the only comment I will 
make with respect to executive remuneration in SaskTel or any 
Crown or any company in this province is that it is probably 
considerably less than executive compensation in the private 
sector or in the Crown sector elsewhere in Canada. The 
remuneration to our executives in the Crowns by comparison, 
Mr. Speaker, is extremely modest. 
 
And I think rather than criticizing the levels, that the members 
opposite should do some of those industry comparisons; should 
make some of those comparisons within and without the 
province with executives of different companies. And I think 
they will realize that their concerns are without merit, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
  



922  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have another 
question for the minister. And I would just caution her that I do 
have constituents who are concerned about their telephone 
exchange and when they may expect it to be digitalized. So I 
would ask that she take care in her answer and take that into 
consideration. There are people who are waiting for that very 
thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know there’s another government document 
that notes that Garry Simons served as a director of LCL 
(Leicester Communications Limited) cable. This subsidiary to 
SaskTel paid the Crown company $50,000 for providing Mr. 
Simons to its board as a director. 
 
Will the minister explain how much of this money ended up in 
the hands of Garry Simons, and how many free trips and other 
perks he received for serving as a director on the board of LCL 
cable? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve reached a 
new low in this House when we criticize individuals. I think 
what’s important to remember is that the LCL venture was 
initially a fairly modest investment on the part of the people of 
Saskatchewan; that it returned last year, according to the 
financial statements just tabled, a $114 million capital gain to 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course there were some costs incurred in making 
investments and in dedicating personnel to do the work which 
resulted in that gain which accrued to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I think that we should be 
grateful to those people who made those efforts, who brought 
that profit into the province, rather than critical, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Property Tax Assessment 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in this 
House later today, the government is expected to introduce 
legislation which will revamp the property tax assessment 
system. These changes will affect almost every property owner 
in Saskatchewan. Yesterday the Minister of Municipal 
Government admitted that some people living in older 
neighbourhoods maybe in for a bit of a surprise in expecting a 
reduction and that they may not receive any reduction at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my concern is for the seniors living on fixed 
incomes. Many of them live in these older neighbourhoods, and 
at the end of the month their money has already been used to 
pay for their mortgage, food, heat, and power. There is nothing 
left over. 
 
Will the Minister of Municipal Government tell the seniors of 
this province what she will do to help ease the burden on their 
already strained finances when she forces through this property 
tax reassessment? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all the legislation 
that we will introduce is enabling legislation. It’s the local 
municipalities that set their mill rate. 
 
Again . . . If the members opposite would care to hear the 
answer. Again it’s a question of not reading the whole article in 
the newspaper, Mr. Speaker. What we were commenting on 
was that age alone was not the single factor, that the assessment 
system is moving towards market value. And in an older 
neighbourhood where there have been renovations and where 
perhaps there is trendy shops and so on, that the age of the 
district or the house alone will not be the only factor because 
those things accrue to market value. 
 
What’s important, Mr. Speaker, to those senior citizens living in 
older homes in the rural and urban Saskatchewan is the fear that 
they have, is what the federal Liberal government is going to do 
to their pensions. That is how the ability to pay their taxes is 
going to be tied to their future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 70  An Act to amend 
The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 

and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. I’ll ask members on both sides 
of the House to come to order, please. And we’re not looking 
for advice. Order. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 and to make a consequential amendment to 
The Municipal Board Act 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a 
consequential amendment to The Municipal Board Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 72  An Act to amend 
The Northern Municipalities Act and to make a 

consequential amendment to another Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Northern Municipalities Act and to make a 
consequential amendment to another Act be now introduced  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 73  An Act to amend  
The Planning and Development Act, 1983 

 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I recognize the . . . 
why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce a friend of mine from the Yellowquill 
Reserve, Mr. Robert Whitehead. He’s here with some other 
residents of Yellowquill for an audience with FSIN (Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations). Please welcome my guest. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member for Cannington on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the House, I would like to introduce a past 
member of this Assembly, Ms. Anita Bergman, sitting up in the 
east gallery. I would like to welcome her here today and hope 
she enjoys the procedures. And I would like everyone to 
welcome her here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the member to my 
left beat me to it that time, but none the less we are very pleased 
to have with us a former member of this Assembly, Anita 
Bergman. And I too would like to welcome her along with my 
caucus . . . or our caucus, and ask the Assembly to do the same. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table the answer to no. 68, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 68 is tabled. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table the answer to no. 69, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 69 is tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table the answer to no. 70, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 70 is tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Effects of Provincial Budget on Rural Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do intend to 
introduce a motion for debate and it is my pleasure to initiate 
this this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan is taking it 
on the chin once again. This urban-dominated government 
could care less about what happens to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
As the details of this budget have come to light, it all becomes 
readily apparent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was built by hundreds of thousands 
of people who flocked to our rural communities and wanted to 
build better lives for themselves. Since that time, pressures from 
economic and technological change have altered rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Most people in rural Saskatchewan can accept those changes. 
They can accept the changes that altered their communities 
because we all know that change is inevitable. Change might be 
inevitable, but the very destruction of these communities does 
not have to be inevitable. 
 
While economic and technological factors are forcing people in 
rural areas to change, this government is making cuts to rural 
programs that are denying rural people a fighting chance. Rural 
people are adapting to new times and new challenges. With all 
things, however, this takes time. 
 
In recent years we’ve seen rural communities make some 
significant moves forward. We’ve seen an incredible adaptation 
to new crops and new production techniques as well as new 
livestock enterprises. Diversification by creating small 
processing plants is also taking place. These new crops and 
livestock and new techniques have led to the development and 
manufacture of new products right here in rural Saskatchewan. 
  



924  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

This is the spirit of conquering challenges that has always been 
the proud mark of rural Saskatchewan and is an inseparable part 
of the fabric of this province. Even though rural people 
demonstrate a great capacity for change, they need time to 
properly adapt. The few years that they get here and there 
provide them with a fighting chance to adapt and survive and 
build a prosperous, thriving community that is the backbone of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this government hacks services in rural 
Saskatchewan or alters programs so that they disadvantage rural 
Saskatchewan, they are robbing these people of their 
opportunity to adapt. We all know what happens when towns 
lose their essential services. If a government hacks at a 
program, then a family or two moves out. A few customers are 
lost from the local store, the local café, and it goes on and on, 
and pretty soon someone else closes up shop, and so the process 
continues. 
 
When towns lose an essential service or a government facility, 
often the whole town becomes a less attractive place to live. 
The value of the property drops and people quit building or 
renovating homes because they know they will be hard-pressed 
to recover their investment at a later point in time. 
 
The whole community is slowly eaten up by what is in effect a 
cancer. Just when things start turning around with higher grain 
prices, however, rural people have come to expect government 
to return again and take something else. 
 
Government cuts even more services because there are fewer 
people left in the area. The highways fall into a greater state of 
disrepair, and it gets even more difficult for the locals to keep 
their rink open or keep their community service clubs. The brief 
remission gives way to the relapse and the cancer continues to 
eat at the very fabric of our towns and communities. 
 
When this happens, Mr. Speaker, it eats away at the very fabric 
of our province and it destroys the very thing that makes 
Saskatchewan the best place in the world to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last budget we saw the government put rural 
Saskatchewan back into relapse. And slowly but surely cuts are 
once again eating away at the infrastructure that helps bind and 
sustain our many small communities. 
 
In the last budget, the members opposite continued the course. 
A few years ago, this government introduced health reforms or 
wellness. It’s the oldest political trick in the book. If you want 
to cut a program you rename it or remodel it. You take and try 
and pass it off to the public as an improvement. 
 
That’s what this government did with health care. It cut health 
care funding, closing some 52 rural hospitals, and promised us 
all that we would have a better health care program because we 
would be worrying about staying well rather than treating 
illness — a new slogan, but the same old thing that this 
government continues to dish out to rural people who don’t 
think they count at the ballot box. Cuts and more cuts by 
another name will always just be that, Mr. Speaker; they’re 
cuts. 

In the last couple of weeks we’ve seen just how the budget 
decisions of the wellness reform are affecting our province. 
Recently in this House we had the Minister of Finance quoting 
from a letter from the Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek Health 
District. While the Minister was glad to quote from the health 
district then because she found a line in their letter that fit into 
her blame the feds theme, I wonder whether she would be 
willing to listen to their plight today. 
 
That district, thanks to this government’s health reform, is 
going to be getting 3.3 per cent less in funding from the 
provincial government. Depending on what happens, a board 
that avoided getting into a deficit may in fact be forced into one 
or into another round of scaling back services. 
 
All this, Mr. Speaker, is the result of a nice, nifty part of this 
government’s wellness reforms. The part I refer to is the 
needs-based funding. It’s sort of a system of funding districts 
that allows the governments to gut rural Saskatchewan without 
having to be accountable for it; they don’t even have to make a 
decision, they just set up a funding formula that will stay in 
place for who knows how many years. And this system will 
continue to cut funding to most rural areas and reduce services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, basically what this needs-based funding system 
means is that if rural people need health care, then it’s going to 
need to go to the city. They’ll need to go to the city to get it 
because this government doesn’t need rural votes to get elected. 
The only part of this needs-based system that the government 
hasn’t figured out yet is that rural people don’t need these New 
Democrats either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while health care will continue to be gutted, 
thanks to this budget, there are a couple of other disturbing 
problems. This government introduced an Alabama-style 
highways snow removal system. It shut down 26 rural depots in 
the Department of Highways, taking away service in much of 
rural Saskatchewan. Last winter was a terribly icy cold winter, 
and I’m sure the members opposite would agree with that. 
 
Without these highways depots, people are just going to have to 
wait until the sun comes out  from that new day dawning, I 
should say  and that’s the promised snow removal system, of 
course. It is just like Alabama. 
 
The poor service that will result from this aside, I think the 
members opposite haven’t given some of their decisions much 
consideration. In my own constituency two of these depots will 
be closed  one at Mossbank and another at Hodgeville. The 
highways across much of Thunder Creek are in a sorry state. 
 
Just west of Moose Jaw, for example, we now have a little 
orange sign  some people are starting to dub them the New 
Democratic election road signs  but it is a marker on the 
Trans-Canada and it marks just another one of those terrible 
spots in the highway. And it is a shame that this is on the 
Trans-Canada Highway, which stretches, you know, across our 
country. And just imagine other highways in my constituency, 
like No. 363 and No. 19, which are even worse. 
 
While the government cuts the depot without care or concern  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

for the safety of rural people, it also is not considering what 
effect it will have on some of the employees. Some employees, 
for example, don’t live in town where the depot was closed; 
some live further away in neighbouring towns. 
 
(1430) 
 
This government closes a depot in Hodgeville, then expects 
these staff members to work out of one in Gravelbourg, which 
is 40 kilometres away. Unfortunately for the workers living out 
at Hodgeville, the commute isn’t 40 kilometres; it can be like 
70 or 80 if you live in Morse, or Herbert. Given that this 
government is abandoning towns, like some of the banks are, 
while other essential services are scaled back, it gets a lot more 
difficult for a person to sell their house and relocate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government also cut the Energy Conservation 
and Development Authority. Speaking about the town of 
Hodgeville did remind me of that cut. The Authority did good 
work in helping that town and many others save money on the 
power bills for their local rinks. With fewer government 
services and declining populations and activity in some towns, a 
service like that was incredibly useful in preserving local rinks, 
which are often the heart and soul of many small towns in long 
winters like this past one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen the perilous situation this 
government is putting people in rural Saskatchewan in with its 
announced cuts to municipal revenue-sharing grants. We all 
know that amalgamation will not affect the larger centres. They 
already have a large enough economy of scale that they don’t 
have to worry. Cutting their grants will certainly cause them 
hardship, but it will not force them to amalgamate further. 
 
But that is what this government has planned for rural 
Saskatchewan. If you can’t force them to amalgamate by 
legislation, then just cut their grants and it’ll do the same job. 
That is what the government has done. Tell the towns, RMs and 
villages that you will cut their grants by 25 per cent next year 
and force them to amalgamate on their own. 
 
Those strong-arm tactics not being enough however, this 
government took it another step yesterday by suggesting that 
they might cut grants back to municipalities who don’t start on 
this slippery slope towards amalgamation. If they don’t 
cooperate with the members opposite, then they’ll be forced to 
cooperate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an administrator in my constituency had put it this 
way to me. He had said we already operate an efficient show. If 
I have to cut something else, what is it going to be  my arm? 
Many municipalities already have the administrator doing quite 
a few jobs and are often sharing these officials with other RMs. 
 
The members opposite will say that the member from Thunder 
Creek wants smaller government, but he complains every time 
there are cuts. That, Mr. Speaker, is once again a case of the 
members opposite twisting the facts to suit their own ends. 
 
Yes, we want a government that is more efficient, but at the 
same time we want one that remains fair to all people in this  

province. The rural people should not be targeted for the bulk of 
cuts by budget decisions or by funding formulas like the health 
care needs-based funding that continually attacked the things 
that they value. 
 
Smaller centres should not have jobs yanked out of their 
community and centralized for no reason, as was the case with 
the community living division that moved from Moose Jaw to 
Regina. 
 
People deserve fairness and this government’s attacks on GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program), on highway spending, on 
rural hospitals, on Crop Insurance and municipal grants, as well 
as other programs, are unfair attacks on rural Saskatchewan. 
While this government attacks rural Saskatchewan, it thinks 
nothing of continuing to reward its own friends with patronage. 
 
If the members opposite would travel to Gravelbourg they 
would notice that there’s a beautiful court-house building that is 
a local heritage site. The Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation wants to board up the windows on that facility. 
While the government boards up one heritage site in rural 
Saskatchewan, it thinks nothing of pumping in $37 million to 
turn one in Regina into a casino. I would ask the members 
opposite if they consider that to be fair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want more efficient government. And I say to 
the members opposite, if they want to cut to get us there, then 
just assure the people of this province that the cuts you’ve made 
are fair to everyone. Make sure that the cuts to essential services 
and front-line workers are the very last resort. These should 
only come after this government has gotten rid of all of its 
waste and patronage. Get rid of the fancy Manhattan hotel stays 
and cushy jobs and raises for NDP patronage appointees, before 
you cut any more services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, this government should take some pointers 
from its own employees. Before you let managers decide to lay 
off people and cut things, this government should be taking a 
more positive course of action at reducing government 
spending. Instead of making the public servants victims, make 
them partners in reducing costs. 
 
Do like municipalities like Ajax, Ontario have done; get your 
employees to deliver the same level of services at less cost, by 
having them share in the savings that are produced. Give them 
an incentive and the authority to cut costs. Don’t just behave 
like Conrad Black, laying people off even though the bottom 
line for the province continues to improve. There are better 
ways of saving money and reducing the tax burden. 
 
And just in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would at this point in time 
like to introduce this motion, seconded by the member from 
Wood River: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government concerning 
the budget decisions made in the 1996-97 provincial 
budget as it will seriously devastate the essential services 
in rural Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to add  
  



926  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

my voice to this debate because I think it is a matter that goes 
directly to the heart of what is wrong with the government we 
have in place in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have always rallied around 
one another during difficult times. Citizens helping citizens; 
everyone sharing the burden equally — at least that’s how it 
used to be. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve now had to endure two successive 
governments that have sought to divide our province, pitting 
urban versus rural. During the 1980s, the Devine government 
thought it politically expedient to curry the favour of rural 
Saskatchewan, because that’s where the Tories’ political 
strength then lie. In doing so they turned their backs on the 
urban centres. 
 
Now we see the exact opposite occurring. The NDP is seeking 
to completely divorce itself from rural Saskatchewan because 
their political strength lies in the cities. The provincial budget is 
only one of a number of policy initiatives this government has 
brought in that has shown the complete urban mind-set cabinet 
ministers opposite are in, Mr. Speaker. Each and every day 
services are being ripped out of rural areas and sent to the cities. 
 
We’ve seen the loss of Crop Insurance offices. Rural services 
centres have been shuttered. SaskPower offices are disappearing 
in rural areas. And of course, who can ever forget how this 
government continues to chip away at what’s left of health care 
services in rural Saskatchewan. It goes on and on and on. 
 
By rural Saskatchewan I don’t mean just our small towns and 
villages and the farms that surround them. I’m talking about our 
smaller cities as well, such as Melville. Since 1991, Melville 
has seen government service after government service, job after 
job after job, transferred out of the city. Four or five jobs here 
and there might not seem like a lot to the cabinet, these people 
from the larger cities, but in a community like Melville every 
job that is ripped away has devastating impact. 
 
But the government opposite simply refuses to see this. They 
are so convinced that rural Saskatchewan is a dead issue, they 
are determined to make it a self-fulfilling prophecy. Through its 
actions, this government has put many of our smaller 
communities on death row. Through their determination not to 
anger city voters, the hard axe of government cuts has fallen 
almost completely on rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it may be politically expedient for the NDP 
to act in this brutal manner, but they have to know it’s simply 
not right. It was not right when urban Saskatchewan was 
unfairly targeted by Grant Devine and it’s not right for the 
current Premier to target rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This government was elected for all the people of 
Saskatchewan, not simply for those who chose to support the 
NDP. As I stated previously in this House, I find it absolutely 
astounding that those few rural members that the NDP has, let 
this go on without a word of protest. 
 

I recently received a copy of a letter that Mayor Paul Elder of 
Swift Current sent to the Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 
like to table that. 
 
Swift Current took a big, big hit in the budget, losing about 90 
jobs due to these cuts. As Mayor Elder points out, a cut like this 
in a city the size of Swift Current is the equivalent to cutting 
1,000 jobs in Regina. Of course a move such as that would be 
unacceptable to this government, yet they think nothing of 
wreaking that kind of havoc on smaller centres. 
 
We on this side of the House all feel for the devastation the 
people of Swift Current must be feeling, but do we hear a peep 
of protest from the NDP MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) from Swift Current? Of course not, Mr. Speaker. 
But we can’t unfairly blame that member because we know 
back-benchers on that side of the House are not listened to. 
They are not heard. I don’t think many members of the cabinet 
even have much say in the decisions that are being made. But I 
would hate to think the rural members on that side of the House 
aren’t even trying to fight for their communities. 
 
We hear the constant chirping from the member from 
Lloydminster in this House, yet has she tried to draw the 
concerns of rural areas to the Premier’s attention? I doubt it. I 
doubt it. Member after member on that side of the House appear 
to be muzzled. I can’t believe they are willing to put up with 
such treatment  utter contempt. I can’t believe that they are 
willing to abandon the voters that sent them to this place. 
 
Yes, the government can get re-elected on its strength in the 
cities, at least for now, but don’t the rural-based NDP members 
care about how the policies of their government are hurting 
their own communities? Are they willing to sit there in the back 
benches and not do anything? I can’t believe they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this government seems to forget is that our 
larger urban centres are fed economically by a vibrant rural 
economy. When rural Saskatchewan prospers, urban 
Saskatchewan benefits. Unfortunately this does not work in 
reverse. By cutting rural Saskatchewan adrift, this government 
is harming the entire province. Their politically motivated 
policies that curry favour with city voters are harming the future 
of rural Saskatchewan and therefore harming the cities as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they have their blinders on. I don’t know if 
they can see the effects of their wrongdoings and their 
wrong-headed policies, or they simply don’t care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House do care. We 
care about both rural and urban residents. The time for playing 
these two sides against one another passed a long time ago. It 
didn’t work for Grant Devine and it won’t work for this 
government. The people of Saskatchewan, both urban and rural, 
aren’t motivated by political expediency like this government 
is. They know everyone has to cooperate in this province in 
order that we all succeed. This government should be ashamed 
of itself for its blatant disregard for half this province. 
 
They may have forgotten the voters outside the cities, but they 
can rest assured the voters won’t forget their action. And after  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

the next election, the rural members on that side of the House 
can return to their communities full time to see the devastation 
their policies created. And they can always remember their 
silence helped contribute to that devastation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to enter into this debate and to speak against this 
motion  as a rural member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Battleford-Cut Knife represent fairly 
well the blend of the Saskatchewan population: farm families, 
young people, seniors, working men and women, business 
people, and first nations. I represent people who are 
enterprising, creative and resilient. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people are determined people. They are 
determined to maintain their farms, their businesses, and their 
communities. I can walk through our local cemetery and on the 
headstones read the names of the families that founded our local 
village, and their descendants still farm there: the Forbes’s, the 
Coopers, the Murrells. Our forefathers withstood prairie fires, 
the Dirty Thirties, and hauled their wheat to the millers by 
wagon. 
 
This was determination, and this determination will enable this 
generation to adapt and cope with circumstances we can’t 
control. The closure of elevators has encouraged community 
leaders to plan and prepare for the 21st century. Inland 
terminals are being built by both larger grain companies and by 
community people. 
 
(1445) 
 
And what about the federal Liberals abolishing the Crow? Is 
this not an attack on rural services? What about the deregulation 
of the railways by the federal government? Does this not affect 
rural areas? What about the funding the federal government has 
removed from farm programs? Did Ottawa listen to the rural 
people? No. 
 
But our government responded with a balanced budget, and our 
government is working with farmers to find solutions to deal 
with the federal dismantling of rural areas — alternatives such 
as farmer-owned grain cars, short line railways — and our 
government is consulting and listening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murrell:  And our farmers are preparing, preparing for 
seeding and planning, planning to grow crops that will become 
a finished product here in Saskatchewan. Trucking companies 
are preparing to haul wheat, canola, and barley to local plants 
for processing. And grain cleaning plants  many farmer 
owned  are opening their doors as a service to their 
neighbours. 
 
When the federal government cut our local post offices, did we 
stop writing letters and mailing parcels? No. We had to adjust. 
 

Now let’s for a moment reflect on what the member opposite is 
doing. He is condemning this government’s budget decisions 
concerning essential services to rural Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan told us their top priority 
was jobs and opportunities, and the 1996 budget responds to 
that message. 
 
Partnership For Growth is for Saskatchewan people, all of our 
people, building on our strengths in exports and world trade. 
The Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership will enable 
business, industry, and government, in cooperation, to find and 
develop new markets and trade opportunities for Saskatchewan 
products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for the movie Field of Dreams was, if 
you build it, they will come. And that is a vision that I see for 
Saskatchewan. It will not matter whether it is a business or a 
product that was created by our REDAs (regional economic 
development authority) in our local communities or if it was 
developed by a major company. The market-place will support 
it if there is a need for it. And this vision will promote and 
expand our export and trade business and create jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
For example, Saskatchewan people and now North America 
have access to the E-ZEE WRAP dispenser, a product, Mr. 
Speaker, that was developed by a farmer at Perdue and now 
sold in major stores. A vision, a need — a farmer who saw an 
opportunity and built on it. 
 
That’s what this budget does. It allows businesses to grow. We 
are using targeted tax incentives and cutting red tape. And we 
are continuing support for regional economic development 
authorities and northern Saskatchewan community-based 
regional economic development organizations. 
 
Our opportunities for growth are there and this government is 
doing what it should do, cultivating a positive business 
environment which will allow all partners to build on their 
economic strengths. 
 
This budget supports another major strength of Saskatchewan 
 agriculture. It invests up to 238 million in agriculture to 
diversify and strengthen this vital part of our economy. It 
provides a 125 million to upgrade and maintain our highways 
so farmers can get their products to market. 
 
Let’s be more positive in our outlook and look at the good 
things that are happening in rural Saskatchewan. In early 
December over 2,500 people attended the first ever elk breeders 
sale in Lloydminster — 120 elk were sold via video totalling 
sales of almost 1.5 million. An 11-year-old bull elk sold for 
$130,000 to a Kansas buyer. 
 
This is a reality about vision  people planning for their future 
and investing in rural Saskatchewan. Agriculture biotechnology 
is experiencing rapid growth and we will all benefit through it. 
 
We have seen our services change, but we must cooperate and 
work with the people of this province to redesign and 
streamline programs and delivery. Years ago we could not have  
  



928  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

a heart transplant nor a hip replacement. And yet we, the people 
of Saskatchewan, both rural and urban residents, have access to 
this now. Our local health districts are building strong, 
community-based services with new services  physiotherapy, 
cataract removals in Battleford and a youth counsellor in Unity. 
These are new initiatives to service rural residents. 
 
Our education system is being affected by depopulation in rural 
areas, but we must be flexible and work to maintain the core of 
this system so that our children will be the priority. This budget 
enables school boards to plan and prepare for change and 
back-fills the federal cuts 100 per cent. 
 
Social services is being redesigned to benefit all people in need, 
protecting our children, helping people to move off welfare into 
work and independence, and ensuring our young people receive 
training. 
 
We must also look at the reason we are faced with the loss of 
services and the restructuring and building of our systems. First 
of all, the debt. Never let us forget the former government’s 
spending spree. Secondly, federal cutbacks because of their 
debt. And thirdly, our ever-changing world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, are we wearing rose-tinted glasses that we cannot 
accept change nor plan for it? The opportunities are here. This 
budget provides us with a sense of confidence and security and 
a vision. And this budget is forward-looking. But it is based on 
the realities of the present and the future and guided by the 
values of the past  compassion, community, and cooperation. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would much prefer to live in rural 
Saskatchewan where we know and greet our neighbours by 
name, seldom lock our doors, and where I can look out my 
window and watch the sun set on a field of golden grain. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members opposite to take a 
look at the headlines from the Citizen of Kipling and the 
Davidson Leader, rural newspapers expounding support for our 
budget and agriculture. 
 
I and all rural residents who are positive, progressive, and 
adaptable to change will work to maintain and improve our 
quality of life with a vision for the future. We will build it so 
that future generations will come and stay in rural areas, the 
best place in Saskatchewan to live. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, because I believe in rural 
Saskatchewan, I would like to move an amendment as follows: 
 

Delete all the words after “Assembly” and substitute the 
following therewith: 
 
“commend the Government of Saskatchewan for arranging 
its budget to preserve essential services available to all 
Saskatchewan residents, including those in rural 
Saskatchewan.” 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to rise in this House and speak in favour of the 
amendment so eloquently stated by the member from 
Battleford-Cut Knife. I would like to commend the Minister of 
Finance and her astuteness in presenting a budget which will 
help us move into the 21st century, both urban and rural, and 
with optimism and hope, not the doom and gloom that we hear 
from our opposite side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, our government has been guided by 
the enduring values that have stood the test of time  
community, cooperation, and compassion  that are so 
representative of most of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, rather than slash the educational, health and social 
programs, as has been done in other jurisdictions  especially 
by the federal Liberals in emasculating our national health, 
education, and social assistance programs  this government 
made every effort to back-fill these areas which the people of 
Saskatchewan said was the most important in the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite the members opposite to join with 
us in condemning the federal government in their misplaced 
priorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall:  We agree that the national government must 
balance its budget, but we disagree wholeheartedly in their 
prioritization; 73 per cent of their downsizing  that’s 73 of the 
downsizing  occur in health, education, and social services. 
 
Where were those Liberals across from us when this was going 
on? Where did their cries of protest come? Nowhere could they 
be heard. Where were their tax reforms? Where were the taxes 
on the corporations? How about Senate reform? No vision, no 
vision for the future at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our four-year plan in the 1996-97 budget 
safeguards the health, education, and social services; the 
cornerstones of our quality of life will be preserved. 
 
I’m not sure where the opposition leader comes from. At one 
time, he demands that we have less taxes. Then he says he 
wants more services. Then he wants to protect jobs which there 
are no need for. Of course, coming from Swift Current, I do not 
like the idea of all of these jobs being downsized, but it had to 
be. And so as a result of that, that happened. 
 
Would the opposition have retained those jobs at Agriculture 
Credit when they are no longer needed? Perhaps they could 
have looked out of the west window in the afternoon and the 
east window in the morning. 
 
Mr. Chairman, preparing for the new century means preparing 
for change. It means adjusting to new fiscal realities and 
competing in a global market-place with new and changing 
technologies. 
 
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

Mr. Speaker, we are fortunate in Saskatchewan. Our province is 
in an excellent position to welcome the future and to build a 
thriving economy for the new century. The economic outlook 
shows economic growth for the province of 2.5 per cent, a 
growth driven by exports and investment. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re planning for tomorrow today. And 
Saskatchewan’s updated economic blueprint, the Partnership 
for Growth, points the way to continued success. 
 
The business community was an important factor in writing this 
plan. The word partnership appears quite often these days and 
frankly it only makes common sense to include all the sectors in 
decision making of this amplitude. Partnership identifies and 
builds upon our strengths  agriculture and biotechnology, 
natural resources, information technology, cultural industry, 
tourism and trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take just a few moments to speak 
about some of the things which this government has done and 
has planned to do in the next four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, we did not slaughter the social 
programs but brought a great deal of financial stability and 
confidence to the financial interest. Heaven above, even Dale 
Botting, who lauded this government’s initiatives . . . Mr. 
Speaker, the gloom and doom from the members opposite is out 
of sync with reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small businesses create the vast number of jobs. A 
major concern of small business was the amount of government 
red tape. Our government is committed to reduce the number of 
regulations which impact on small businesses. We will present 
a plan which will review all government regulations, thus 
reducing the regulation burden. We will also educate young 
people about the option of going into business for themselves 
and make regional economic development authorities the focal 
point for developments in our communities. 
 
I’m excited about the entrepreneurial centres being developed 
across the province with a partnership of the chamber of 
commerce, educational leaders, business leaders, agricultural 
entrepreneurs, credit union representatives, and government 
representatives. And these centres are being organized to 
encourage and provide young people particularly an opportunity 
to focus their ambitions on creating new business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the establishment of the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership corporation will also help increase trade. 
This is a major source of where Saskatchewan economic growth 
will take place in the 21st century. Saskatchewan economy 
relies heavily on exports, as exports account for about 40 per 
cent of our total income. 
 
Another potential area for growth is the tourism sector. To 
create growth and increase job prospects through Partnership 
for Growth, we will be developing a provincial tourism 
strategy. We as a province have so much to offer. The crystal 
clear water of the northern lakes, the vast expanse of the  

prairies, and the warm, friendly people of Saskatchewan will 
attract many visitors to our province. 
 
But as the new tourism executive stated, we are our worst 
enemy. We do not talk about the space we have. We do not talk 
about the security we have in Saskatchewan. And it’s time we 
did these things to attract these people to our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is reason to be optimistic about the job 
situation across Saskatchewan. A recent survey by Manpower 
Temporary Services shows that 22 per cent of the local firms 
surveyed plan on hiring workers this spring. This percentage 
has increased compared to three months ago and demonstrates 
the optimism in the economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has a strong commitment in 
creating meaningful jobs for Saskatchewan people and 
providing training for jobs of tomorrow. Our economy is 
growing; we’re creating jobs by diversifying into new products 
and new technologies. 
 
I feel rather concerned about some of the opposition members 
who believe that the government does not have any interest in 
agriculture. I ask them, where were they when their federal 
cousins did away with the Crow rate? Where were they when 
the railroads were being deregulated? 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is and remains the mainstay of 
Saskatchewan economy and a source of optimism for the future. 
Mr. Speaker, more than 200 million will be made available over 
the next four years through agri-food innovation, agriculture 
development, and agri-food equity funds to encourage research, 
development, and diversification in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the role of government in economic development 
is vital to our survival as a favoured province. This government 
realizes that it must accept responsibility for things that the 
market cannot or will not do and is prepared to accept this 
responsibility. We are prepared to ensure that incentives are in 
place to encourage investments for the long term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is prepared to assist the people of 
Saskatchewan to meet the challenges of the changing economy. 
We will work to ensure that the people have the skills and the 
infrastructure support necessary to enter the 21st century. I’ll be 
most pleased and proud to vote for the amendment and oppose 
the motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was hoping to 
give more time today to some of the newer members that would 
perhaps like to get into the debate and get their feet wet and 
learn about some of the debate that could happen here in the 
legislature. But after hearing a few of the comments from the 
members from Battleford-Cut Knife, and the member from 
Swift Current, I felt it was only appropriate that I say a few 
words. 
 
Because I come from a perspective, Mr. Speaker, as you well 
know having been here for some five years, and I’ve seen what  
  



930  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

in fact the government has done. And so then I think that it’s 
only fitting that some of the new members actually hear where 
this has gone in the last few years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I recall something that the member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife spoke of just moments ago. And that was the fact that, 
you know, how they’re bringing in change and the change is 
positive, and in fact so many have opposed change as though 
that they’re for something good and positive and the rest of us 
aren’t. 
 
The fact of the matter is, I think, Mr. Speaker, that people 
across this province are for change. If it wasn’t for the people 
out in . . . you know, outside of this building making a lot of 
change, I don’t think there would be very much done at all. 
 
But see, what people are opposed is not change, but it’s change 
when in fact it’s not done in a positive way. You can say, well 
change is doing, you know, changing highways from pavement 
to gravel  that’s change. And you wonder why people are 
opposed. Well because it’s not a positive change. That’s the 
whole point. If you would get out of the building sometimes 
and go out and talk to people and listen to what they’re saying, 
it’s not change they’re opposed to, it’s when change is the buzz 
word of the day used to have in fact more cuts to their services. 
 
And I listened to the member from Swift Current and he made a 
few comments, Mr. Speaker, about I think it was institutions 
and policies, but mainly institutions having stand the test of 
time. And I felt that was rather interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
Because when we talk about the test of time, what has really 
became apparent to the people in this province was the way 
over the 1940s, ‘50s, ‘60s, what in fact a lot of the institutions 
of this province  your schools, and your hospitals, your 
highway system, your infrastructure of the communities  
that’s when these things were built up. 
 
And you know a lot of times those were what I think even the 
elderly people, they would say were tougher times. I don’t think 
we’re living the tough times. I think you’re perhaps bringing us 
into some rougher times  certain people, certain sectors, 
certain areas of the province, you’re really pulling down. 
 
But how is it then, Mr. Member from Swift Current, over the 
. . . if you want to talk about the test of time, it was over those 
years that we built up these great institutions . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well sure it was. And I realize, Mr. Speaker, 
that he spoke once, but he’d like to heckle from his seat, but the 
fact of the matter is, he was talking about the test of time. And 
I’m not going to guess at the age of the member, but I’m sure 
he’s old enough to know full well — full well — that I’m 
correct. 
 
And that’s when these values and institutions and policies were 
developed. And only in a few short years they’re being ripped 
apart. So I would just ask that member to give a little 
consideration, when he’s getting up to speak in the House, of 
perhaps coming from a base of knowledge or fact, and he will 
find that his first term in the House will be much more eventful 
and fulfilling. 
 

Well let’s take a look for a moment at what this government has 
done. And you know when we look at the . . . we talk about 
essential services, and the best thing to do is in fact to look 
where we’ve come in the last few years. And I’m just going to 
run through a few of the essential services that the people of 
this province rely on so heavily, those being . . . Take the first 
thing, you know, that the government, in 1992, in the winter of 
1992, attacked, and that was the member from Rosetown, and 
was then the Highways minister, I believe, and he was the one 
that came out with the announcement that they‘re going to 
revert hundreds and hundreds and thousands of miles of 
provincial highway system  paved highway  back to 
gravel. 
 
Now for the new members who talk about positive change, I 
would have to ask you  do you think that’s positive change? 
Because the people of the province were completely up in arms, 
if you will remember, Mr. Speaker. It was in the headlines of 
the paper. I recall having a group of farmers in the south-west 
myself that gave the government a rather rough time and 
actually convinced them to re-look at this. 
 
I’m going to stick with highways just for a moment, because it 
is such an essential service in the rural areas. And we take a 
look at already how far apart these rural highway depots were, 
but yet only a few years ago the new Minister of Highways  I 
think he’s from Carrot River, or whatever the constituency is, 
Mr. Speaker  his department was going to close down quite a 
few of the rural highway depots throughout the province. And I 
recall the RM and the town of Val Marie inviting him down to a 
meeting at Val Marie at which they also invited myself to have 
a bit of a debate, and through embarrassment the minister 
actually stood up in the hall in Val Marie that night and 
admitted that a horrible mistake had been made, instructed his 
deputy to reverse the decision. And I publicly gave him a lot of 
credit. 
 
But obviously in this upcoming budget, the minister from 
Carrot River, the Minister of Highways, was overruled by the 
Premier, the Deputy Premier from Elphinstone, and the Finance 
minister. Because highways does not mean a lot to the people 
that do not have to go out through rural Saskatchewan and drive 
them, if in fact you have to. If the closest you get to rural 
Saskatchewan is to fly over it in a government jet on the way to 
Europe or South America, hey, well I can see why in fact 
they’re out of touch. 
 
And I recall, Mr. Speaker, it was a few years ago, whether it 
was the last budget or the budget before, when in fact there 
were some news releases that came across my desk where in 
fact they were talking about some of the new pavement 
projects, highway projects, in rural Saskatchewan. And they 
really emphasized this — rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I don’t read all the government news releases, but these I 
just happened to wonder, well do you suppose that they’re in 
the south-west part of the province. So I went through the news 
release and what I read was . . . well I don’t know if it was . . . 
to say it was funny or sickening. They referred to rural 
Saskatchewan as the Ring Road and Circle Drive around the 
two major centres. That was a rural paving project through the  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

eyes of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
And now it sort of brings it all home to the people of 
Saskatchewan why it is you’re cutting so much out of these 
small towns when in fact if you think rural Saskatchewan is 
Ring Road or Circle Drive; if that’s the parameters, you know, 
of your life, well I guess that says a lot. 
 
And you know, it really showed itself again the other day, Mr. 
Speaker. I was up to a meeting in Liberty. And that highway  
I guess it’s Highway No. 2 that we drove on  it was so filled 
with holes . . . well it’s not that I speed at all, Mr. Speaker, but 
in fact no one could have. It had all these . . . and I thought they 
were small New Democrat lawn signs, little orange ones, but in 
fact they were actually for highways, to warn people of these 
potholes. 
 
You know, and I’m going to move along because one of the 
other members  I guess it was from Swift Current  talked 
about agriculture and all the things they’ve done for agriculture. 
Well since I’ve been a member  and I would like the new 
member to listen up  since I’ve been a member I watched the 
Department of Agriculture get cut almost 50 per cent each and 
every year. It’s right down to bare bones at this point, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, the members across, I’m sure that they 
thought the only seed money that was out there that the farmers 
are talking about, was this $100 that you could pick up to go 
and gamble at the casino. 
 
That’s not what they meant by seed money, Mr. Member. What 
they’re talking about is to ensure that they have the finances 
available to them to plant their crops. And you remember 
they’re doing it without a lot of the programs because it was the 
government across that cancelled programs using retroactive 
legislation to in fact cancel the GRIP program, leaving us with 
just, well a real unworkable crop insurance program. And it 
became evident by the people not taking the program out, 
because now of course your government is closing those Crop 
Insurance offices. That can only send the message I guess that 
in fact you have no intention of improving the program at all. 
 
So I see, Mr. Speaker, my time is pretty much up, and I’ve 
barely got into some of the things I wanted to touch on. And of 
course the main one would be health care  the devastation 
they’ve created in health care. The education cuts, the rural 
government . . . 
 
(1515) 
 
The Speaker:  Order. The member’s time has expired. 
Debate will continue. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
be able to join in the debate on this issue. It was instructive for 
me to listen to the members of the opposition in the points 
they’re trying to make. I must say that some were made better 
than others. Certainly the last speaker rambled on a great deal 
and did not intersperse his ramblings with very many relevant 
points. But be that as it may, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be  

able to enter into debate. 
 
As I listened to the speakers, I tried to think of what is it that 
they’re trying to do here with this motion. What is it that they’re 
trying to do here with their remarks? And it’s very obvious that 
the Liberal opposition is trying to establish for themselves a 
stronger presence in rural Saskatchewan because some of their 
thunder has been stolen by the Progressive Conservative caucus 
which is also strongly based in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So the Liberal members are now thinking about the next 
provincial election and trying to decide where is it that they can 
get their support from in the next provincial election. So they 
have to make some choices about who it is that they’re going to 
speak to, who it is that they’re going to try to stand up for, what 
kinds of issues it is that they’re going to be raising here on the 
floor of the legislature. 
 
And obviously they’ve taken a position that they need to exert 
themselves more strongly on behalf of rural Saskatchewan so as 
to, if you like, steal some of the thunder that has been displayed 
by the Conservative third party in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I must say upon reflection, that they’re sounding more and 
more like Progressive Conservatives every day. The basic tenet 
of conservatism  the basic tenet of conservatism is that you 
don’t change anything, is that you never change a thing. 
 
And as I listen to the speeches from the Liberal opposition it’s 
clear that they don’t want to change anything. What they’re 
saying is that you should kind of ignore what’s happening in 
rural Saskatchewan; you should ignore what’s happening in 
rural Saskatchewan and don’t change a thing. 
 
It’s ironic that the Progressive Conservatives are now more like 
Reformers. They seem to be wanting to change everything, with 
the exception of course the things that are happening in rural 
Saskatchewan. There they don’t want to change a thing, you 
know. 
 
So it was especially interesting to listen to the Leader of the 
Opposition who seemed to have some notion and expressing in 
some way one of the criticisms that was levelled by the 
previous PC (Progressive Conservative) opposition from ‘91 to 
’95, and obviously didn’t sort of take hold very well in the 
election campaign. 
 
But that opposition charged that there was some sort of rural 
revenge on the part of the NDP government with respect to 
rural Saskatchewan. And obviously that didn’t work very well 
because now they have five members as opposed to ten 
members, and their argument really didn’t seem to hold a lot of 
water. 
 
But the Leader of the Opposition picked up on this argument, 
somehow painting some picture that the NDP government has 
got it in for rural Saskatchewan and that’s what’s kind of 
driving NDP policies provincially in this province, and that 
those policies are kind of geared to the detriment of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
  



932  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

Well I can tell you, we sit around in our caucus and we don’t sit 
around and talk about how is it that we can get rural 
Saskatchewan. We don’t have much of that kind of talk. No, we 
do talk about how is it that we can put forward policies and 
programs that can maintain Saskatchewan in the market-place 
that we have; that can maintain Saskatchewan in a 
fast-changing federation of Canadian provinces — how can we 
maintain that, how can we put forward programs and services 
for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know it’s not as if we can ignore what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan; we can’t ignore the massive changes that are 
sweeping across the countryside in Saskatchewan. And we 
can’t, like the opposition want us to do, subject it to some kind 
of cyrogenic experiment — that is, you know, freeze it and so 
that you never have to change a thing. We can’t do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the things that we have to recognize is that there have 
been massive changes in Saskatchewan  massive changes. 
What was it in the early part of the century when Saskatchewan 
was homesteaded? What was the basic farm size? Didn’t they 
talk about that the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Home quarter. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Was it the home quarter? That the basic 
farm unit was one quarter section of land, one quarter section. 
That was when Saskatchewan was initially homesteaded and 
the basic quarter served us through into the 1920s or so. What is 
the basic farm size now? What is it now? Is it more like five or 
six quarters . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Five or six quarters. 
 
So that when you have . . . where in the early part of the century 
you might have had one family per quarter, now you’ve got one 
family for five or six quarters. So that suggests to me that there 
has been a massive change in Saskatchewan since 
Saskatchewan was first populated  massive changes. 
 
Now I think it’s evident to everyone why these changes have 
occurred, why these changes have occurred, and partly the 
changes have occurred because of technology. I mean you can 
have far better farm machinery; you’ve got far better fertilizers; 
you’ve got far better everything to be able to produce products 
on the land. You can now . . . one farmer and one farm family 
can do this on five or six quarters, where in the past you might 
have had one family and probably needed help in that family 
from the kids in the family to be able to do one quarter. 
 
So you’ve got fewer farmers. You’ve got far fewer consumers 
for the small towns in rural Saskatchewan, although we really 
haven’t changed the basic government structure in rural 
Saskatchewan because we still have the same rural municipal 
structure in rural Saskatchewan even though we had these 
massive changes occur in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve also had, in addition to technology, we’ve had far better 
roads for people in rural Saskatchewan to be able to access 
regional centres. And I guess if there’s anything that you can go 
back and blame governments for, it’s better roads because it’s  

the better roads that have meant the demise of many a small 
town as individuals, as individuals made the freedom of choice 
to not shop in their local town, to not shop at the local store but 
to go to the regional centre instead. Those are decisions by 
individuals; freedom of choice for individuals. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, the changes in rural Saskatchewan have been 
massive, and those are changes that I think will continue and 
that have nothing to do with the government  nothing to do 
with the government. The fact that a farmer buys a bigger and 
bigger tractor so that they can farm bigger and bigger parcels of 
land, what has that got to do with the provincial government? 
 
No, that’s a recognition and a reality of the market-place, and 
that will continue. And that’s not something that you can 
change, I can change, or that the provincial government is going 
to change. Let’s recognize the reality of what’s happening in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But the Liberals and PCs (Progressive Conservative) say no, we 
should ignore reality. They support the right of the individual to 
not shop in their small town, to go to the regional centre 
because it’s more convenient, because it’s cheaper. They 
support that. 
 
They support the right of their friends and businesses to close 
down the businesses in their small town and to relocate to the 
regional centres. That’s okay. 
 
They support — no, they encourage — they encourage the 
federal government to make massive changes in terms of the 
Crow rate that have a massive and devastating effect on rural 
Saskatchewan. They support that. 
 
But when it comes to the provincial government changing one 
thing, they say, don’t change anything. We want the provincial 
government to ignore the reality  not everyone else. We want 
the provincial government to ignore the reality. Don’t change a 
thing. You know it’s one standard for everyone, and then it’s a 
different standard for the provincial government. They say, 
don’t change a thing. 
 
And it’s interesting; they point to two relevant examples. One is 
health care. One is health care. As I read or listen to their 
comments, they say in health care, don’t change a thing. Don’t 
even think about, you know, changing the previous system and 
the costs that implied for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. They 
say don’t change a thing. Keep the old system that you had: a 
hospital in every small town, whether you needed a hospital or 
not. Don’t change a thing. 
 
Does anybody remember the W5 program where they 
interviewed the people at the hospital  I think it was in 
Coronach  where they had a beautiful 10-bed hospital and not 
one patient? Oh no, sorry, they did have a patient. They had a 
person in there recovering from a hip injury and had been there 
for I don’t know how many months. He thought it was . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The member’s time has expired, 
and debate continues. 
 
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the decisions made by this 
government that laid the groundwork for the ‘96-97 budget 
document will have a dramatic effect . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. The 65 minutes has now expired. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. With the first 65 minutes under 
rule 17 having expired, we’ll now proceed to 10 minutes for 
questions and comments by members related to the debate. So 
questions and comments for 10 minutes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
put the question to the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. And 
the question that I would have for that member is, one, why in 
fact as a rural member and being as far from the larger centres 
that she is, is she’s so supportive of in fact the kind of cutbacks 
in health and education to the Department of Highways as she 
is. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that she would have a number of 
people in her area that in fact need those health services. And 
could she give a response as to how, as a member of this House 
and a rural member of this House, she could take such a stand 
as she has done? 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 
question. I guess my problem is I’m very realistic, and it’s very 
tough, you know, to have to respond to such a negative question 
when you live in a positive area such I do. We understand that 
you need people to maintain these services, and that because we 
do not have 50 people in every location to maintain one patrol 
. . . so we’re trying to make sure that our systems are delivered 
efficiently and that we can maintain the services that we have, 
plus that we can expand on the services that we have and make 
the delivery much more efficient. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
member of Thunder Creek because he raised it first. This is the 
question of highways and spending on highways. And he leaves 
some kind of an implication that there’s less money being spent 
on highways maintenance than the previous year. Yet I look at 
the Estimates booklet and I see that this year for preservation 
and maintenance, the expenditure is 108 million as opposed to 
last year’s 107 million. And for construction, this year it’s 43 
million as opposed to last year’s 41 million. Where does he 
come to this conclusion that somehow less money is being 
spent on maintenance of Saskatchewan highways? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can only assume 
that the member from Elphinstone must be referring to the fact 
that probably we’re going to be seeing some rather larger NDP 
campaign signs on the sides of the highway warning for the 
potholes that people daily fall into. So I’m sure there is some 
contingencies with that respect. 
 
And also there is the very fact that what are we going to with 
relocating all of these individuals and with the closures of  

highway depots and certainly a great deal of that will 
undoubtedly be used up for that very thing. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask a 
question of the member for Kelvington-Wadena. And I’d like to 
ask her to briefly summarize her speech. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m here to tell you, in a brief summation, that 
everything that I saw in the budget, whether it was health care 
or education or highways or economic development, did 
nothing for rural Saskatchewan. I can tell you that honestly and 
truly. And when I’m standing here, I really believe that if you 
had any part in this budget discussion, that you don’t care about 
rural Saskatchewan either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the member from Swift Current, and it is just this. Has the 
member from Swift Current undertaken to make contact with 
any families that are being affected by government cutbacks 
and closures in his own centre, and will he undertake to do his 
best to try and lessen the worries and anxieties that no doubt are 
amongst their families at this point in time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, thank you for the question. In 
response to this part here, our government has a great program 
for severance. It has relocation. It has a much better program 
than private industry would ever have with regards to relocation 
of jobs and so forth. 
 
Of those people who are involved, very few of them will be 
losing their jobs. They will be either relocated or they will find 
employment in another department. So I’ve talked to some of 
them. Yes, I have. I’ve talked to some of the Highway 
employees and so forth. 
 
I haven’t talked to anyone with ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) because that’s going to be an 
ongoing concern for four years. Those 90 jobs that the mayor 
talks about does not occur in this year, as the hon. member 
stated. It’s not going to be this year. Yes, it’s going to be over a 
period of four years, but there is no reason why Agricultural 
Credit should continue because there are other organizations 
which will do a much better job than they do. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena, since she was at great pains in 
her answer to say that everything that’s happened in this budget 
strikes at the heart of rural folk, what she is prepared to do in 
terms of meeting with her federal counterparts to reverse some 
of these situations. 
 
And if she is unable to answer that question or unwilling to 
answer that question, I would like to ask any of the members 
opposite who represent rural ridings if they have looked at the 
statistics of population in their RMs in the ‘30s and compared  
  



934  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

them with the statistics of populations in the ‘90s. And if they 
would tell us to what extent they feel those changes and those 
declines are related to federal Liberal policies, particularly with 
respect to the Crow . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I have to remind the 
member that in questions in rule 17 debate, the question can’t 
be directed to anyone; it has to be directed to a specific 
member, and it has to be directed to a member who participated 
in the 65-minute debate. And to whom are you directing the 
question? 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Well I was directing my question to the member 
from Kelvington-Wadena, but I would certainly encourage the 
member for Wood River to answer the question. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell 
you, I don’t need a lot of encouragement, but the fact that the 
member asked the question to another member knowing full 
well they just nicely stepped out of the House shows . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order. The 
hon. member knows that the rules of the House don’t allow him 
to refer to either the presence or the absence of another hon. 
member. And I’ll ask him to put his question directly . . . or his 
response directly. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh well thank you, Mr. Speaker. But to 
answer the question . . . Because obviously there we have a 
New Democrat member who lives in the heart of Saskatoon, 
doesn’t get out in the rural areas very much. And so we’re not 
surprised on this side of the House why in fact she has so little 
knowledge and understanding of rural Saskatchewan. But you 
know the concern is that you have so little care of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But even when we hear the member from Swift Current, in his 
response to what’s going to happen with 90 jobs lost in the 
community of Swift Current, his response . . . and I’m sure the 
chamber of commerce in Swift Current and the town of Swift 
Current, the city of Swift Current are going to enjoy hearing 
that, well we have a program for severance. 
 
You’re missing the point. You’re missing the point. The fact of 
the matter is, the fact of the matter is, it’s not programs for 
severance. And the motion is dealing with whether we . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 
Further questions or comments? 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve heard some 
comments about our concerns about what’s happening in rural 
Saskatchewan. And it just brings to my mind once again 
something that’s unforgivable, that this government refused to 
allow private enterprise to initiate a project near the city of 
Melville which would have accommodated upwards of 120 jobs 
without any taxpayers’ funding and without the need for any 
guarantees of loans. 
 
And I can recall and I want to reiterate the Finance minister of 
the day who said, when heard about the project, this is a  

Finance minister’s dream. Lots of jobs and no government 
money invested. 
 
And yet this government allowed Mr. Jack Messer to disallow 
that particular project to go ahead, which would have reduced 
the need for landfill sites which are in desperate need 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. It would have gotten rid of all 
kinds of garbage . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It was not tires. 
And if members would pay attention . . . It had nothing to do 
with tires; it had to do with the . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. If the member is making a 
comment, his time has expired. If he’s putting a question, I ask 
him to put it directly. Is he putting a question? 
 
An Hon. Member:  It was a comment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Okay. Then we have time for one more 
question or comment. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time we did a 
little reality check here and recognized that there had been 
massive cuts by the federal government in the areas of health, 
education, and social services. Everyone knows this. Everyone 
knows this and knows that the cuts are going to be deeper next 
year. 
 
We should recognize that the provincial government has 
back-filled, that is, made up for the loss of money in those areas 
of health, education, and social services to the benefit not of 
rural Saskatchewan, not of urban Saskatchewan, but for all of 
Saskatchewan, and no thanks to the federal government or the 
Liberal members opposite who continue to stick up for the 
federal government and their harmful cuts to all Canadians. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Time for questions and 
comments has expired. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 01  An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital  
(Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon, being An Act to Amend and 
Consolidate An Act to incorporate St. Paul’s Hospital  

(Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 01, 
An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of 
Saskatoon, being An Act to Amend and Consolidate An Act to 
incorporate St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon be 
now read a second time and referred to the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 02  An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity 
(Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan, being An Act to Amend and 

Consolidate An Act to incorporate the Sisters of Charity 
(Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan 

  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 935 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 02, 
An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of 
Saskatchewan, being An Act to Amend and Consolidate An Act 
to incorporate the Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 04  An Act to Amend 
An Act incorporating Luther College, Regina 

 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion 
of a very few remarks, I will move the motion with respect to 
Bill No. 04, An Act to Amend An Act incorporating Luther 
College, Regina. 
 
I just wanted to point out to the Assembly that the Bill before us 
is very non-controversial in the nature of its amendments, 
which are twofold. The first is to update the language in the 
legislation to be consistent with and reflect and accommodate a 
church merger that happened in 1987, which was after the Act 
had originally been passed. 
 
Secondly, to extend membership to the Luther College Board of 
Regents to those outside of the Lutheran faith. That will extend 
arms out to the community that Luther College serves and 
allows for a wider reflection, the towns of the community. 
 
Those in essence embody the nature of the amendments that are 
presented. 
 
And I now would move Bill No. 04, An Act to Amend An Act 
incorporating Luther College, Regina, be now read a second 
time and referred to the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4  Saskatchewan Workers’ Right to Work 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to have the opportunity to make a 
motion which I will allude to so that folks will understand what 
we are attempting to do here. And it will read as follows, and I 
will move the motion when I complete my remarks: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to support any 
initiatives allowing Saskatchewan workers the right to 
work under any circumstances including crossing picket 
lines with no penalties; and further, in order to maximize 
individual freedoms of choice in the pursuit of 
employment, that the right to work shall not be subject to 
undue restraint or coercion; that the right to work shall not 
be infringed upon or restricted by membership in affiliation 
with financial support or a labour organization or a refusal 
to join, affiliate with, or financially or  

otherwise support a labour organization. 
 

That, Mr. Speaker, is very quickly going to explain why we are 
here. And we want to add to that some comments that will clear 
up some misconceptions about the concept that we are talking 
about. 
 
We are pleased today to be able to talk about the rights of 
Saskatchewan workers and the freedoms that they deserve to 
have. Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about it, this government 
has no idea how to create positive economic climates so that 
business will move here, or that investors will have confidence 
to invest in our province. 
 
I would think that given the NDP’s job record and job creation 
record  or should I say the lack of a job creation record  
any good ideas that have worked in other areas or in other 
places in the world would be welcomed here and the 
government would be happy to consider them and to understand 
them. You would hardly think that though, when you see the 
reaction of the Premier this morning in question period. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, before any government members get up and 
start to waving their arms and saying that right-to-work 
legislations means anti-union legislation, let’s stop and examine 
exactly what right to work really means. Because I really don’t 
think that the members opposite have any understanding or 
concept of what is happening in the world around them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not an anti-union legislation. Instead, 
right-to-work laws bring about fair and equitable rights for all 
workers  union and non-union. The point, Mr. Speaker, is 
that each and every worker has the right to choose what is best 
for them  individual rights, individual choices. We even 
thought that the NDP stood for those kind of things. But 
obviously not. 
 
Take right now for instance. We have SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, 
employees picketing in front of this legislature every day. I’m 
not so sure that it amounts to a real picket any more; it looks 
more like a picnic out there with hot dogs and coffee and all the 
rest. But we have workers, we have workers who have been 
burning the Premier and the Finance minister in effigy in front 
of the building, because these workers are on strike. 
 
I’m certain that there are people  single mothers, young 
families that have mortgages to pay  that are concerned about 
the SaskTel strike and how they’re going to keep themselves 
afloat. In fact we have talked to some of these people who in 
fact fit that description exactly, and they do have some of these 
very real concerns. 
 
(1545) 
 
Or how about these employees that don’t believe going on 
strike is the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker, but have no choice 
in the matter and are forced to strike anyway. What about those 
folks that don’t believe in the system that they have been forced 
into. If one of these individuals crosses the picket line, as things 
are now, and works, what happens to them? Let’s ask ourselves  
  



936  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

that very real question. And from past history, let’s be honest 
about the answer. What can the unions do to them? 
 
Well they will be chastised, fined. Their names would be 
printed in the union newspaper and so on. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the members opposite have made it easier for unions to force 
such moves onto workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe it’s fair that employees, because of 
the labour laws that this government has put into place, really 
have no choice in the matter. They cannot cross picket lines 
even if they want to for fear of retribution from the unions. And 
it’s just not fair. And unfortunately it gets carried too far. It’s 
like the old problem that we had in our high schools at one 
point, where we had initiations, and each year the people who 
became the new class to initiate the ones below them thought, 
I’ll get even and we’ll do even more. That kind of philosophy 
and concept creeps into the union retribution process against 
workers. 
 
Now Dave Somerville, the president of the National Citizens 
Coalition, said recently, when speaking to the North Saskatoon 
Business Association, that he was delighted to be in a province 
that has been the source of so many of Alberta’s outstanding 
entrepreneurs  Star-Phoenix, September 9, 1995, in case 
anybody wants to check it. He said high taxes and a pro-union 
attitude from governments are hurting Saskatchewan’s business 
prospects and accused the NDP of cutting deals with the unions 
on its Crown tendering policies and changes to The Labour 
Standards Act. 
 
I believe Mr. Somerville is on the right track, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it is time to be fair to everyone  workers, 
employers, and taxpayers alike. I believe Mr. Somerville is on 
the right track, and we need to consider what he has said. That 
is why it is imperative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our province 
should study the benefits of right-to-work legislation and what 
it has done for many jurisdictions to date. 
 
And the members opposite will want to take particular note of 
what has happened in the world around us. Mr. Minister, 
right-to-work legislation or RTW, as we refer to it in short 
form, would allow individuals the freedom to choose to work at 
any given time without having to worry about fines or penalties 
and the like. 
 
Now we have been studying the benefits of such legislation. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government, with their sorry job 
of job creation and their sorry record, ought to be doing the 
same thing. Quite frankly we believe that they should be 
studying it and implementing something along this line. 
 
In the United States, for example, 21 out of 50 states have some 
form of right-to-work legislation, and it has been to the benefit 
of all of the people of those areas. Now according to Site 
Selection magazine, 7 out of the top 10 states in which to do 
business in 1994 had right-to-work legislation laws in place. 
 
Now let’s take a look at some straight facts, some inarguable 
facts that the members opposite can’t really take issue with 
because they are recorded facts. Florida was the first state in the  

United States to pass some form of right-to-work legislation 
back in 1944  way back when. The latest state to enact 
similar legislation is Idaho, which implemented right-to-work 
legislation in 1986. Mr. Speaker, the economic impact through 
investment, growth, job creation, and income growth has been 
impressive in right-to-work states in comparison to 
non-right-to-work states. 
 
The appropriate comparisons across city, states, or regions in 
measuring economic well-being is the purchasing power of 
after-tax annual income. That is the way you want to measure it. 
In other words, the relevant question is, is money income 
adjusted for taxes and the cost of living higher in the 
non-right-to-work areas than in the right-to-work jurisdictions? 
 
Research conducted by Professor James Bennett suggests that 
in 1993 after adjusting for the cost of living and the local tax 
burden, the average after-tax annual income is $36,540 in 
right-to-work areas versus only 33,688 in non-right-to-work 
areas. In other words, a typical urban family in a right-to-work 
state has close to $3,000 more in after tax purchasing power 
than a similar family in a non-right-to-work state. 
 
Now I don’t have to tell you what such a boost would mean to 
Saskatchewan families. It is a much needed boost that they 
desperately need. 
 
You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone benefits with 
right-to-work laws. Businesses create more jobs. More people 
are employed. Workers have the right to join or not to join an 
organized union, and the economy and the families of the area 
benefit and prosper  proven by time, history and facts. 
 
It should be noted that the gap in living standards between the 
right-to-work areas and the non-right-to-work areas is growing 
larger by the month, Mr. Speaker. Over the past six years, the 
gap between the average families after-tax purchasing power 
has grown by $1,500 per family. That’s about double, Mr. 
Speaker. In addition, 77 per cent of all new high-paying 
manufacturing jobs in the U.S. (United States) were created in 
21 right-to-work states even though these states have less than 
35 per cent of the U.S. population. 
 
Now again, Mr. Speaker, this could be the case for 
Saskatchewan. Right-to-work states also attract 57 per cent of 
new and expanded corporate facilities. And as well, they create 
over 98,000 more non-agricultural jobs than the 
non-right-to-work states during the same six-year period. Now 
there’s the fact. There’s the proof. I could go on with more 
statistics, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The hard facts regarding the 
benefits of right-to-work legislation, Mr. Speaker, are there for 
people to consider and to work on and to understand. 
 
But the bottom line, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that while 
economic numbers speak for themselves, passing right-to-work 
legislation allows workers to speak for themselves. It forces 
unions to be more responsive and responsible to their members 
as well. Instead of using coercion, union leaders have to 
persuade and please their members or possibly lose them. And 
that’s fair ball. If you can’t win your membership over with 
common sense and logic, then you really shouldn’t be able to  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 937 

force them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the right to work is in place and has proven very 
successful in other countries as well. We will cite you some 
other examples. Between 1984 and 1991, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
New Zealand enacted what is called the ECA or the 
Employment Contracts Act. Among its key features were the 
reintroduction of the voluntary union membership, turning 
unions into strictly private associations without legal privileges. 
Opponents at the time said, as I am sure the members across the 
way will say, the Bill will cause real wages to fall, creating 
low-paying jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just the opposite has in fact 
happened. An econometric analysis found that a good deal of 
New Zealand’s employment growth rate can be attributed to the 
ECA or, in our terms, what we would call the right-to-work 
legislation. 
 
Further, in the first four years of the right-to-work laws in New 
Zealand, 150,000 jobs were created which is the entire 
workforce of Christchurch or Wellington. Unemployment prior 
to the right-to-work legislation in New Zealand was 11 per cent 
 11 per cent unemployment, Mr. Speaker. And within a few 
short years, it fell to 6.6 per cent. Further, it should be noted 
that the wages and the salaries per employee in the business 
sector rose after the right-to-work legislation. 
 
So when opponents of giving workers freedom of choice stand 
here today and try to dispute these facts based on ideology and 
idealism, the facts speak for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have had virtually no job creation in 
Saskatchewan since 1991, and again the numbers speak for 
themselves. Further, our families are in desperate need of 
something that will help them to survive after the members 
opposite have taken an extra $5,300 from the average family 
over the last few years in taxes, fees, and utility rates. 
 
I’m not saying that passing the right-to-work legislation would 
be the answer to all of the province’s problems, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It would certainly be a big step in the right direction 
though. And that is what we have to do . . . is to start 
somewhere. Our province’s economy desperately needs 
initiative. Saskatchewan employers and small-business owners 
need the right-to-work legislation. But most of all, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our province’s workers and their families need the 
right-to-work legislation, the right to be able to work, free 
choice for them to decide on. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is why I move the following motion today. 
And I move: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to support any 
initiatives allowing Saskatchewan workers the right to 
work under any circumstances, including crossing picket 
lines with no penalties; and further, in order to maximize 
individual freedom of choice in the pursuit of employment, 
that the right to work shall not be subject to undue restraint 
or coercion, and that the right to work shall not be 
infringed upon or restricted by membership affiliation with  

financial support of a labour organization or a refusal to 
join, affiliate with, or financially or otherwise support a 
labour organization. 

 
It is seconded by the member from Cannington. And I so move. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today to speak in favour of this motion. There is 
a misconception among the members on the government side 
are fostering that says that this motion and indeed our caucus 
are anti-union. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not the case, 
and I’m glad that the members opposite have finally recognized 
that fact. Our caucus believes firmly in the rights of individuals 
to work together collectively for their joint interests, and 
obviously this applies to the rights of workers to engage in 
collective bargaining. 
 
However the other side of that coin is the individual’s right not 
to participate in that process. Our democratic society is founded 
on the liberty of individuals, and this is a difficult value to argue 
against. And yet that is exactly what those opposite in 
opposition to this motion are and will be doing. 
 
The member from Regina Albert South mentioned Mexico 
when my colleague was mentioning a number of U.S. states as 
an example of an area where unionism is not prevalent and 
points to that third-world country’s lack of income for its 
citizens. And he’s correct that that area does not have a high 
income for its citizens, but it is progressing, and it is growing. 
 
But maybe we need to look at an area that has had virtual 
unanimous union activity for the entire workforce of the nation, 
and that is the former Soviet Union. And while they followed 
that collective bargaining system throughout their 75 years of 
history, we saw the net result of that philosophy was the 
ultimate and utter destruction of their entire economy. In fact, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that whole area of the world today is in 
utter chaos because of the philosophies that they followed 
previously. 
 
What do unions do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They represent the 
workers that have been joined with that union in wage and 
benefit negotiations and in grievance procedures. They also 
become involved in a wide range of other activities, other 
causes, such as foreign aid, research projects, etc. 
 
And let us not forget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, partisan political 
action for a particular political party, a party which does not 
necessarily represent the interests of all union members, but 
nevertheless their union dues go to support a particular political 
party. And the rank-and-file union member does not have the 
choice, does not have the opportunity to say whether or not they 
wish their hard-earned money to support any political party. 
This decision is made by an elite of party bosses without any 
consideration given to the fact that they are supposed to be 
representing the people and their membership in a wide range 
of views, not a single partisan entity. 
 
 (1600) 
 
  



938  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we view with some disgust the old days 
when preachers unfairly used their moral influence by standing 
up in their pulpit and telling people how to vote. And I 
remember that happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I remember that 
happening in church on a Sunday morning when the minister 
stood up and said, you will vote this way, and he had no right to 
do so. It was for the official opposition, Mr. Member, from 
some place in Regina. And that was wrong. That was absolutely 
wrong. 
 
It’s wrong if an employer stands up and says, you will vote this 
way if you want to maintain a job, and it’s wrong for the union 
to do exactly the same thing to its members. How is union 
activity any different from the church pulpit? It goes completely 
against the grain of our society to have any kind of elite using 
their position to force  to force political contributions or 
political views on individuals or workers. 
 
This phenomena doesn’t stop at political matters, however. 
How often have we seen strikes start over labour and 
management quibbles about a quarter per cent difference in 
wages? The workers sometimes lose more in the strike than 
they ever get out of a settlement. But hey! at least the union 
representative got to save face. 
 
Another major objection that our caucus has, and I think most 
decent people have to current union practices, is their militant 
and inflexible attitudes towards strike situations. Pick up any 
union pamphlet describing so-called scabs, and this may very 
well be people that are going back to work in their position that 
they left to go on strike. 
 
The language used is often so appalling that in any context it 
would be considered illegal hate literature, language which calls 
for the physical harm and indeed the destruction of a group of 
people who only want to work. These attitudes show no sense 
of humanity or compassion for people who are caught in the 
middle of a strike situation, a situation once again that they may 
very well never have agreed with in the first place. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that there are picketers 
outside who are wondering how they’re going to meet their rent 
payments. They may well be single mothers wondering how 
they’re going to feed their children. But these humane and 
compassionate situations do not matter to the modern union 
ideologues. If any of these people dare to go back to work, they 
are branded for life as scabs. 
 
So in summary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me repeat that we are 
not opposing the concept of unions of collective bargaining 
through this motion. What we are opposing is a mentality and 
an ideology and a system of propaganda created by the union 
elite for their own benefit, not for the benefit of workers. 
 
The acceptance of this motion would allow workers the 
freedom to assess their own best interest, the freedom from 
having to accept partisan political views forced on them, and 
more importantly, the freedom from being judged by a rigid, 
impractical, and inhumane ideology. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
start out by congratulating both the member for Cannington and 
the member for Cypress Hills because they have managed in 15 
or 20 short minutes to do what Grant Devine failed to do after 9 
years of profligate fiscal mismanagement. What they have 
managed to do is state very succinctly the fact that the 
Conservative Party is not a party fit for governance. It is not a 
party of moderation. It is not a party that cares about either 
individuals or collections of individuals. 
 
Rather, it is a party of hatred that wishes to pit worker against 
worker, individual against the collective, man against woman, 
and even, if you would believe the member from Cannington, 
the pulpit against politics. He asks how pronouncements from 
the pulpit differ from pronouncements made by trade unionists. 
 
I would say this to you, Mr. Member, pronouncements from the 
pulpit are  I’m told by my religious friends  divinely 
inspired. Decisions made by trade unions are democratically 
inspired. And there is the difference. 
 
And, Mr. Member from Cannington, you betray an extreme 
lack of understanding and knowledge of what trade unions are 
all about. Trade unions are free, fair collectives where people 
democratically make decisions about the kinds of things that 
they will bargain for with their employers. I had thought for a 
brief little while that perhaps the Tory Party, having seen the 
error of their ways in terms of adding on over $1 billion of 
public debt for each year that they were in office, when they 
recognized that fiscally they were total failures, that perhaps 
they were going to learn something and perhaps they were 
going to learn how to be a party of moderation. 
 
I am sorry  watching this performance by the two members 
opposite over the last few minutes, I have clearly recognized 
that not only are they not moderate, they are not even respectful 
of human beings’ rights to associate, to gather collectively. The 
member for Cypress Hills has just launched an absolutely 
unnecessary and reprehensible attack on organized labour, all 
through the guise of so-called right-to-work legislation. 
 
Of course people want the right to work. Work, as we all know, 
is the sure means to enhance human dignity and to ensure that 
all of us have the ability to participate in all the fruits of this 
wondrous Canadian society. But right-to-work legislation, no 
matter how you might want to tart it up and no matter what 
fancy phrases you use, right-to-work legislation is an entirely 
different matter. 
 
The member from Cypress Hills wants to attack free and fair 
collective bargaining. He does this by saying, well perhaps what 
this will do if we can get rid of this fact that people have this 
so-called compulsive union membership and the fact that we do 
not want scab labour in this province, he says that this will 
somehow magically allow us to encourage entrepreneurship. I 
would suggest to the member opposite that he perhaps has more 
knowledge of the farming situation than a business situation. 
Because quite frankly, what is required for entrepreneurship is 
flexibility, risk taking, and independence. It  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 939 

is not necessary to trample the rights of workers to collectively 
bargain in order to have entrepreneurship in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation being proposed by the member for 
Cypress Hills strikes at the very core of what it means to be a 
Canadian. Indeed, it strikes at the very core of the 
Saskatchewan sense of community. We are justifiably proud in 
this province of doing things differently  collectively. We are 
justifiably proud of continuously striving for the greatest good 
for all people rather than being mere petty apologists like the 
members opposite, mere petty apologists for grubby 
individualism. 
 
Yes, we care about individuals. Yes, we care about the rights of 
individuals, but  and this is crucial in Canada  in Canada 
we do not elevate the rights of individuals to such an esoteric 
position that they circumvent all the rights and responsibilities, 
needs and expectations of the greater community. 
 
I notice that the heckling from the members opposite stopped 
momentarily. If you need to, I could send you over a dictionary 
so that you would understand the meaning of esoteric and 
circumvention. 
 
The rights of individuals, as expressed by the members 
opposite, as expressed particularly by the member from Cypress 
Hills in his right-to-work proposal, that is really just shorthand 
for Alabama North and I’m not having any of it. It’s shorthand 
for a general devolution of Canadian and Saskatchewan society. 
 
An Hon. Member:  They’re wondering what that means. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Now again, they don’t know what devolution 
means. Definitely they are in need of a good Canadian 
dictionary. 
 
Now I would like to suggest that not only are free and fair 
collective bargaining rights important in Saskatchewan; they’re 
also important in Canada. And even more importantly, the 
United Nations has recognized the moral and economic 
imperative of free, collective bargaining rights. They’ve 
recognized it in their Universal Declaration of Human Rights. I 
quote here from section 23. They say: 
 

Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of 
employment, to just and favourable conditions of work, 
and to protection against unemployment. And more 
importantly, everyone has the right to form and to join 
trade unions for the protection of their interests. 

 
The United Nations has recognized the moral and economic 
imperative of free collective bargaining rights. The country of 
Canada has recognized the moral and economic imperative of 
free collective bargaining rights. Over 125 years ago in Canada, 
we had the sorry state where unions were termed, quote “illegal 
combinations in restraint of trade”. Union members could be 
charged with an offence simply by conducting union business in 
the open. 
 
Canadian citizens, decent folk concerned about the collective 
rights of our society, were nauseated at this state of affairs, and  

justifiably so. They acted and they reacted in various forms, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to change this sorry, sorry condition. 
 
I think of the Masons with their proud tradition of collective 
gathering to enhance the rights of workers. I think of the 
workers of the mid-1800s who were tired of having to have 
their unions operate underground simply because the robber 
barons of the time wanted to make sure they could maximize 
profit by minimizing worker safety and compensation. 
 
Canadians quite rightly rebelled against this situation and 
insisted that their politicians reverse the odious abuse of power 
by greedy owners. Consequently, labour legislation was 
introduced to allow for workers to have solid rights to associate, 
to negotiate, and to withdraw their labour if necessary. 
 
I am very proud, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Saskatchewan under 
Tommy Douglas was the first jurisdiction in Canada to 
introduce a Trade Union Act way back in the ‘40s. It is the 
framework for our current legislation, and I’m very proud of 
that. 
 
And we on this side of the House will not stand idly by and let 
the right-wing reactionary members opposite us, under the guise 
of a twisty propaganda phrase like right to work, we will not let 
them roll back the clock. 
 
At this point I would like to remind the member from Cypress 
Hills that if he is truly concerned about a national Conservative 
agenda  and I admit that this is somewhat in dispute, given 
the provincial PCs weakened repudiation and snubbing of their 
federal leader, Jean Charest  but if he truly wants to represent 
Conservative opinion in Saskatchewan and Canada, as opposed 
to reactionary right-wing opinion, he ought to learn a lesson 
from his Conservative counterparts in Alberta. 
 
Last year, they set up a legislative committee to study 
right-to-work legislation, and what were their conclusions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Conservative Alberta studied it and they said, 
phew, no thanks. We are not enacting right-to-work legislation. 
 
That committee legitimately rejected the idea, the odious notion 
put forward by the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
(1615) 
 
But let’s not limit ourselves to comparisons with Alberta. What 
about states in the United States where right-to-work legislation 
has actually been stuffed down the throats of ordinary, decent, 
hard-working men and women. Has it achieved the panacea that 
the member from Cypress Hills says? No it has not. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are lies, there are bigger lies, and 
then there are statistics. And I would suggest that the statistics 
quoted by the member from Cypress Hill are grievously in 
error. When he talks about average incomes for people in 
right-to-work states, he is very conveniently ignoring the fact 
that what has been created in those right-to-work states is an 
extreme skewing of income distribution. So there are very few 
millionaires making gobs and gobs of money, but there are  
  



940  Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 1996 

many, many hard-working people who can barely eke out a 
living because of the right-to-work legislation stuffed down 
their throats. 
 
Indeed, in those 21 states in America that have this legislation, 
if you take a look at the list, they’re generally acknowledged to 
be the backwaters, economically and culturally, of that 
supposed great first world power. I’m thinking here of states 
like Mississippi, Alabama, South Carolina, and so on  great 
music, great food, but not great economies. 
 
These were the same states that had to be forced through a civil 
war to abandon slavery. They have the lowest minimum wages. 
They scoff at occupational health and safety and they are the 
bastions of rugged individualism. 
 
And let’s look closely at this concept of individualism, 
members. Stripped of the blinkered romanticism with which 
Americans and the member from Cypress Hill view it, 
individualism for workers simply means weakness. It means 
one person against the corporation. It means Joe Smith saying 
to Imperial Oil, this is what I believe my wage should be. It is 
Jane Jones saying to Xerox corporation, this is what I believe 
my working conditions should be. 
 
To which we all say, Mr. Speaker, sure, let’s hear it for the 
glory of the individual. We’re dealing here not with a myth, 
because a myth suggests something wondrous and uplifting. 
No, with this kind of individualism, we’re dealing with a lie, 
and the member from Cypress knows it. But given the . . . 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, a point of order. I 
believe that you can’t say indirectly what you can’t say directly 
in this House, and I’d like you to point that out to the member, 
please, in her statement. 
 
The Deputy Speaker:  Order. I take the member’s point of 
order. It is well taken, and I will ask the member to refrain from 
that kind of wrong language. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, I withdraw that 
remark, and I apologize to the member opposite for making that 
kind of statement. I realize that he is simply misguided in his 
notion of what will help us to achieve nirvana in this society. 
 
We have a particular point of view, and that happens to be that 
together we’re all stronger. We do not glorify the rights of the 
individuals, because quite frankly, the rugged individualism that 
he is proposing could lead to the situation where any jerk with a 
grievance can say, I don’t like this. I won’t do it. And if you 
don’t believe me, just remember Waco and Oklahoma City and 
the Unabomber. 
 
It’s a situation where we could have a society that is dealt with 
by threats of violence. That’s not far-fetched, Mr. Speaker. If 
you admire that country to the south and want to imitate it in 
part, you have to recognize in reality you’ll probably get the 
whole ball of wax. You buy the squeal; you buy the whole pig. 
You buy into individualism, and you buy into Oklahoma City. 
 
Most of us prefer Canada to Oklahoma City. When worker’s  

collective rights to bargain, to work with their employer for 
improvements in working conditions and wages, are thwarted, 
this can unfortunately lead to violence. We’ve seen it 
historically in Canada. We see it still today in the United States. 
Allowing legitimate union activities is a much better way. 
Emphasizing free and fair collective bargaining rights is a better 
way. 
 
Together we are all stronger than the darkness cast by our own 
individual shadow. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to be very brief 
in this intervention for a couple of reasons, but the biggest 
single reason is this is such a pole . . . from so far in ancient 
history that it really . . . this regressive motion really doesn’t 
warrant serious debate in the Legislative Assembly in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The facts don’t bear out that this motion should take place, but I 
can appreciate the motion being right-to-work legislation, being 
anti-union legislation right from the third party, right-wing 
legislation which simply follows from the opposition or Liberal 
red book in the last election where I just want to quote their 
policy: 
 

Liberals believe in a fair employment environment for all 
workers in Saskatchewan in which individuals cannot be 
compelled to join or pay dues to unions as a specific 
condition of employment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, simply put, this means right to work. That’s the 
Liberal belief, that’s the Conservative belief, that’s the 
right-wing belief. And it is a grievous mistake if workers get 
caught up in words like freedom and right to work. 
 
Of course we all want employment, Mr. Speaker, but let’s  
this is not a new idea  let’s acknowledge that in the good old 
U.S. of A (United States of America) they’ve had right-to-work 
legislation for some considerable time now. And I simply want 
to point out, using as a source the U.S. Department of 
Commerce State and Metropolitan Data Book of 1988 — now I 
don’t think even either of the two opposition parties would 
accuse the U.S. Department of Commerce as being a blatant 
union organization — but between 1982 and 1988, there was 
four states that experienced an increase in unemployment. 
Three of them were right-to-work states, one was not  three 
were right-to-work states, one was not. 
 
Some other interesting things, the average rate of decrease in 
the unemployment rates from 1982 to ’88 in the right-to-work 
states, that average decrease was 2.9 per cent; in other states, 
4.1 per cent. Clearly a better decrease in the unemployment 
rates in the other states. 
 
In terms of percentage increase of jobs. Again using the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, in the right-to-work states, the 
percentage increase in jobs per thousand citizens . . . or hundred 
thousand citizens, pardon me, in the right-to-work states, that 
rate of increase was 5.1 as opposed to 6.4 per cent in the other  
  



April 16, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 941 

states. 
 
It just doesn’t matter how you slice it, whether you’re talking 
total numbers, whether you’re talking percentages, the U.S. 
experience, where they’ve been way out in front on this one . . . 
so far out in front that they very much deserve to stay there 
because the results of it are clearly bad. Right-to-work states 
have a terrible ratio of job creation. 
 
There is a difference, Mr. Speaker. I just want to point out one 
final thing, that is average pay. I know the members opposite 
talked about average pay. Don’t get confused with average pay 
and average income. Because as the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast pointed out, average income includes the millionaires 
that are just abusing workers badly, paying them horrendously 
low. 
 
The average annual pay in right-to-work states  this 
according to the U.S. Department of Labour, average annual 
pay by state and industry, 1993 news release, September 23, 
1994 when it was released  right-to-work states average 
annual pay, $23,549. The other states, $27,892. 
 
Now you don’t need to be a genius to know that that means 
more than $4,000 per year into the pockets of working people 
as opposed to in the pockets of abusive Luddites, abusive, 
abusive employers that have nothing in mind other than to get 
the lowest possible rate of pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said I was going to be brief because this motion 
clearly deserves simply to disappear, and I’m going to urge all 
members to vote this down. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 4:27 p.m. until 4:47 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  4 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Heppner 
Goohsen   
 

Nays  37 
 
Romanow Van Mulligen Mitchell 
Wiens MacKinnon Lingenfelter 
Shillington Anguish Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Lautermilch 
Renaud Pringle Koenker 
Trew Bradley Lorje 
Stanger Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Jess 
Flavel Murrell Thomson 
Osika Aldridge Draude 
McPherson Bjornerud Julé 
Krawetz   
 

The Speaker:  Order. I’ll ask all members to come to order, 
please. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:52 p.m. 
 
 





   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 915 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 915 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 915 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 915 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 915 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 915 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 915 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 915 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 915 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 915 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 923 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 923 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 923 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
Holocaust Remembrance Day 

Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................... 916 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 916 

Roy C Hill Award 
Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 916 

Passing of John Melvin Hill  
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 916 

Low Rental Housing Tenants Meet 
Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 917 

Lake Lenore Lancers Win Basketball Championship 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 917 

National Soil Conservation Week Activities 
Scott ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 917 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
Municipal Government Amalgamation 

Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 917 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 917 

Local Government Funding 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 918 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 919 
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 919 

Home Oxygen Program  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 920 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 920 

Right-to-work Legislation  
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 920 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 920 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 920 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 920 

SaskTel Executive Salaries  
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 

Property Tax Assessment 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 922 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 922 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
Bill No. 70  An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 922 
Bill No. 71  An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 and to make a consequential amendment to The 
Municipal Board Act  

Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 922 
Bill No. 72  An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act and to make a consequential amendment to another Act 

Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 922 
Bill No. 73  An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983  

Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 923 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 923 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 923 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE  
Effects of Provincial Budget on Rural Saskatchewan  

Aldridge ............................................................................................................................................................................... 923, 933 
Osika .................................................................................................................................................................................... 925, 934 
Murrell ................................................................................................................................................................................ 927, 933 
Wall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 928, 933 
McPherson .......................................................................................................................................................................... 929, 933 
Van Mulligen ...................................................................................................................................................................... 931, 933 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 933 
Koenker ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 933 
Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 933 

PRIVATE BILLS  
SECOND READINGS 

Bill No. 01  An Act Respecting St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon, being An Act to Amend and Consolidate 
An Act to incorporate St. Paul’s Hospital (Grey Nuns) of Saskatoon  

Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 934 
Bill No. 02  An Act Respecting Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan, being An Act to Amend and 
Consolidate An Act to incorporate the Sisters of Charity (Grey Nuns) of Saskatchewan  

Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 935 
Bill No. 04  An Act to Amend An Act incorporating Luther College, Regina  

Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 935 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

Motion No. 4  Saskatchewan Workers’ Right to Work 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 935 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 937 
Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 938 
Trew............................................................................................................................................................................................. 940 

Recorded division .......................................................................................................................................................................... 941 
 


