


















































April 29, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1229 
 April 29, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce any new 
officials that she has joining her tonight. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. On my right is 
Gerry Kraus who is the Provincial Comptroller. And at the 
back, we also have Brian Smith, executive director, Public 
Employees Benefits Agency; Sheldon Schwartz, assistant 
deputy minister, treasury and debt management; and Larry 
Spannier, executive director, treasury board branch; Doug 
Lambert, director, revenue programs branch, revenue division. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And also a 
welcome this evening to the officials from the Finance 
department. 
 
When we had left off earlier, we were speaking of annual 
reports, and I asked the Minister of Finance with respect to an 
annual report for her department. I know a number of points 
that were made by the minister. One was that a lot of the 
information are tabled from time to time by her department 
anyway, but I would just point out though that an annual report 
would be one means of tying all of these information together 
in an effective manner. 
 
But on the topic, on the matter of annual reports, I do have 
another question or request. Most provincial annual reports 
provide an organization chart, and I wonder if the minister 
would provide an organization chart complete with the names 
of people employed in various out-of-scope positions within her 
department. And then secondly, realizing that the minister may 
not have such a thing available at the moment, would you just 
be able to provide a brief overview for us here this evening of 
how your department is organized and who some of the key 
people are. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, yes, obviously such documents are available and 
there’s no problem in ensuring that the member opposite gets 
this information. I mean you have the people here actually, 
essentially. You’ve got Bill Jones, who is the deputy minister. 
You have Gerry Kraus, who’s the comptroller. You have the 
heads of the basic divisions are represented here. 
 
But certainly that information is available. And I’m not even 
sure exactly what it is that you’re after because, as I say, we 
have one division which is the assistant deputy minister of 
revenue, and we have the admin. division, Bill Van Sickle. So 
yes, we have such information; we can provide it to you. I can 
get this xeroxed and sent across to you. 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I see you do 
have a chart there and I would appreciate if I could get a copy 
of that, please. 
 
In the estimates provided here, there is a branch in the 
department which is known as the budget analysis branch. And 
I would trust that the branch analyses departmental spending 
proposals and other issues that will impact financially upon the 
province. Given that, I would like to return to the matter of 
equalization payments which I had brought up earlier. 
 
This budget analysis branch costs the taxpayer almost $4 
million every year. Last year the minister came to the public and 
said that there was an unexpected 240 million some-odd dollar 
cut to federal equalization payments. Many people in this 
province found that a little hard to believe. The province had 
growing tax revenues and also resource windfalls. These 
windfalls were in fact the reason why the equalization transfers 
were reduced. More importantly, everyone in the province knew 
of them but yet somehow the province said that it was all a 
surprise. 
 
Madam Minister, I would like to know how you could not have 
known about these impending reductions in the equalization 
program; and secondly, did your department actually fail to 
inform you of this? I would like to know what sort of steps you 
would be taking this year to ensure that that very thing might 
not ever happen again. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the members 
opposite, once again I wish the members would get the facts 
before they start making allegations. The problem in the 
estimates was with the federal government. It’s the federal 
government who does the estimates for equalization. And as I 
said to the member opposite before, I’m not blaming them; it’s 
a complex formula. But again, please, if you want to be a 
credible opposition, get the facts about who compiles the 
numbers before you start alleging that something was done 
wrong by these people. Nothing was done wrong by these 
people. 
 
What happens in equalization is this. The amount of money you 
get from equalization depends on two things: one, you should 
know how well your economy is doing. These people gave us 
very accurate estimates about how our economy was doing. But 
the other thing that equalization depends on is how well 
everybody else is doing, particularly the big provinces like 
Ontario. If we’re doing very well and Ontario’s doing very well, 
we don’t lose any money in equalization. Everybody’s exactly 
the same level  no problem. The problem occurs if 
Saskatchewan is doing very well and other provinces like 
Ontario is doing very poorly. Now what I would say to the 
member opposite, and that’s why he really should flush out 
facts before he goes making allegations again about civil 
servants. I don’t know what the members opposite have against 
civil servants who are working hard to do their jobs. 
 
There’s only one government in Canada that can know how 
every province is doing. That’s the federal government. The 
federal Department of Finance can know how all the other nine  



1230  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

are doing and how Saskatchewan stacks up. 
 
So sure, we do our own individual estimates, but what we can 
be held responsible for is Saskatchewan. Only the federal 
government can be held accountable for Saskatchewan relative 
to every other government in Canada, every other province. 
 
It’s the federal government whose estimates were wrong. It’s 
the federal government whose estimates were off. And we’re 
not blaming them because, as I say, it’s very complicated. Some 
of this information goes back two and three years. And it’s 
revised again and again as new information comes in from the 
provinces. It’s complicated. 
 
But once again, to say to the Department of Finance, how are 
you going to fix something that isn’t broken, what was broken, 
in that anything was broken, was what the federal government 
was doing with their own estimates. 
 
And I would say as well that the timing was incredible and I 
mentioned this when I was answering another question from the 
members opposite. February 1995, in the federal budget, the 
federal government says Saskatchewan will get about $650 
million in equalization. They go right through April, say very 
similar estimates. In October there’s signals that there is a 
problem. But even in December at the Finance ministers’ 
meeting, when we asked the federal government for the 
estimates and transfers, they’ve still got their old estimate from 
the February budget involved. So they didn’t change their 
numbers until December. 
 
Now unofficially they had changed them with us in October. 
And then again when they came back in January, they’d revised 
them even further downward so that we were losing not over 
200 million but over $400 million in equalization. 
 
But again, where does the problem lie? The problem lies in the 
complexity of the formula. If there is a problem it’s a federal 
problem and you need to be asking them if they’re going to do 
anything to ensure their estimates are more accurate. I’m not 
upset. I don’t blame them for this one because it’s complicated. 
But please, Mr. Member, be a credible opposition. Don’t make 
allegations against public servants until you have the basic 
facts. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to 
the minister’s comments, would it not seem to make sense that 
when you’re attending Finance ministers’ conferences, if you’re 
not receiving what you would consider to be accurate estimates 
from the federal government with respect to these equalization 
payments components, that you not converse with the other 
provincial Finance ministers. And that you find out in fact that 
Ontario isn’t doing as well as the federal government may have 
expected so that your own budget analysis people can in turn 
make some sort of a more accurate estimate in those respects. 
 
So I would just throw that out for a comment from the Finance 
minister, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Again, Mr. Member, the federal 
government has a responsibility, which is the responsibility to  

collect all the data and to measure it against the formula. Now I 
don’t know whether it’s this incredible desire to defend at every 
possible turn the federal government. The equalization formula 
is very complicated, very technical. There’s simply no way that 
I would sit there from the minister from Ontario and say, now 
do you have a couple of hours because I’d like to know exactly 
what your oil production under category X is. 
 
I’m not running the Department of Finance. And those kinds of 
discussions should not be occurring at that level. What should 
be happening is each province sends its information into the 
federal government. They are still the government for all the 10 
provinces. The federal government should analyse the data, give 
us regular reports on how they think we’re stacking up relative 
to the rest. That’s the way the system should work; that’s the 
way the system does work. 
 
The federal government was not accurate in its assessment. It 
was way off in its assessment of how Saskatchewan was doing 
relative to the rest. But it happens because it’s a very 
complicated formula. I’m not blaming anybody. Why do the 
members opposite feel they need to blame somebody? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, it would seem to me that, 
as you’re suggesting, if you don’t have all the pieces of a puzzle 
 and in this respect the federal government is not providing 
them to you  that you might go to some of the others and in 
fact find a way of assembling that puzzle in a more accurate 
fashion. However I’ll get onto a different issue here. 
 
I’d like to ask the minister something about the job creation 
targets that she laid out in the budget. The creation targets were 
laid out last year at .9 per cent job growth over the next two 
years. And that works out to about 4,000 jobs. Regardless of the 
number, the unemployment rate in this province recently went 
up. 
 
Given these circumstances, I have a couple of questions for 
you. And I wonder if the minister could tell us whether the 
budget analysis branch advises her that this sort of paltry job 
growth will be enough to help provide the revenues that this 
government needs to meet all its targets. And secondly, the G-7 
countries are saying that unemployment rates are now at crisis 
proportions. And given this, I wonder if the minister could tell 
us whether her budget analysts also consider the situation in 
Saskatchewan as a crisis. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I do want to answer the first part of the member’s 
comment because it deserves comment here. The member 
opposite says . . . I say to the member opposite, the job of the 
federal government is to collect data from all the provinces, to 
analyse it, and then to basically funnel that information back to 
the provinces. 
 
Essentially the member opposite says to me, but why wouldn’t 
you, in case their revenue estimates are off, why wouldn’t we 
be duplicating their efforts here and checking up on them? Mr. 
Member, what more and more taxpayers are telling us is they 
don’t want duplication of activities. The Department of Finance  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

in the federal government has that particular function. They do 
it reasonably well. Of course they’re off sometimes; they were 
off this time. Why in the world would we want to be spending 
tax dollars to try to duplicate a function that is clearly within 
their jurisdiction. We don’t want to do that. 
 
Now with respect to the jobs numbers. We believe these job 
numbers are extremely accurate. We don’t just rely on our own 
analysis, we look at forecasts from other, independent external 
agencies. And I would mention to the member opposite, 
recently the Conference Board of Canada came out with its 
estimate of what Saskatchewan’s job creation would look like 
right out to the end of the century, and their estimate is more 
optimistic than ours. 
 
So we stand by the estimate. We feel that it is a very reasonable, 
reliable estimate and there are private estimates out there which 
are actually more optimistic. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, 
under the administration portion of the estimates here, the 
minister made a cut of just over $100,000 and I see that the vast 
majority of the cuts involved a reduction of staff. I wonder if 
the minister could tell us what staff were removed, and what 
sort of rules . . . or roles, I’m sorry, that they played in the 
department. Specifically, could the minister give us the details 
of how many jobs are gone; how many are full or part time? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Member, I would say to you 
through the Chairman, which page are you talking about? 
Which vote are you talking about? That’ll help us in answering 
your question here. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  This is under the administration portion of 
the Estimates, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. One of the main reasons for the decline is there is no 
longer an Associate Minister of Finance. There are no costs 
associated with that particular position. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  With respect to that, could the minister make 
a point of telling us just how that move will make the 
department more efficient or more effective. And could you 
explain why the efficiencies were not introduced much earlier 
then, if it was something that was necessary? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. Ensuring that the government remains efficient and 
well run is an ongoing process and so never at any one 
particular point are you going to say here we have the 
government, it’s absolutely efficient, and now we are going to 
stop changing it. 
 
I mean, what people expect is an ongoing process where you 
look each and every year for efficiencies. And I would say this 
year, despite all the reductions from ’91-95, we managed to find 
across government $50 million in efficiencies of one kind or 
another to help back-fill the cuts from the federal  

government. If we hadn’t had that, we would have been passing 
that $50 million cut onto health boards, or school boards, or 
whatever. So it’s an ongoing process and there isn’t a day in 
which you declare victory. You continue to work at it. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I know we hear that it’s 
important to, on an ongoing basis, make government more 
efficient; and administrative burden is an important aspect, of 
course, to be looking at in that regard. But I wonder if the 
minister could tell us whether there are other places in your 
department which might be top heavy. 
 
For example, if the department was top heavy in administration, 
could it not also be true that it might be top heavy when it 
comes to personnel in the department who write speaking or 
briefing notes for the minister? Could you tell us how many 
people there are that are involved in that and why you need 
such individuals? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the member opposite is falling into the member from 
Wood River’s style  or the former Tories, not this group  
taking words and twisting them. The member says that 
somebody was top heavy. Didn’t say anything was top heavy at 
all. What I said to the member opposite is that each and every 
year, you look over your whole operation. You see, is there a 
way to tighten it up. Can you tighten it up? And so you do, and 
you take action to do that. 
 
So this will be an ongoing process, and I can assure you that 
each and every year we will ask the appropriate questions about 
is there a way to save money on the administrative side of 
government and direct it at services? And this last budget was 
an excellent example of that, where across the piece, we saved 
money on administration and directed it to front-line services. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Looking under 
the treasury and debt management section of the Estimates, I 
see the department is going to spend some $2 million-plus on 
managing the provincial debt and providing investment 
management services to several funds managed by the 
government and its Crown corporations and other agencies. 
Could the minister provide a list of the agencies involved, as 
well as the Crown corporations, and the names of the funds that 
are to be managed, thanks to this subvote? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, what I would say to 
the member opposite, this particular agency manages all of the 
funding requirements of all aspects of government. It includes, 
for example, borrowing for all agencies including Crown 
corporations, and it includes managing all of any surpluses that 
might exist. And it includes dealing with bond rating agencies 
and ensuring that Saskatchewan’s fiscal position is presented as 
positively as possible outside the province. So the agencies that 
this particular unit deals with is every agency in government. 
Anybody who requires funding, which they all do, that has to be 
borrowed, this agency would be dealing with them. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. When it comes 
to investment management and the debt management services 
that we’re referring to here, I wonder would you be able to tell  



1232  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

us whether the Crown corporations provide revenues to the 
Department of Finance to pay for this service. And secondly, 
does the Minister of Finance ever use the services of Crown 
corporations for investments as is done in a similar way under 
this subvote of the estimates? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, one of the ways this province got into difficulty in the 
1980s was that everybody was allowed to go off and borrow 
their own money so that you could have the Crown corporations 
off borrowing money. You could have subsidiaries of Crown 
corporations that weren’t even basically on the books of the 
province going off and borrowing their own money. 
 
One of the actions that the government took, this particular 
government, after the Financial Management Review 
Commission reviewed the finances of the province, one of the 
actions that we took was to centralize borrowing in the 
Department of Finance so that every agency of government had 
to borrow through the Department of Finance, and the 
Department of Finance had some overall control of the level of 
debt that is incurred in the province so that we cannot return to 
the 1980s where you didn’t . . . probably the auditor at that time 
legitimately did not know what the level of debt was because it 
was borrowing here and borrowing there and borrowing 
everywhere. It’s centralized borrowing for all of the Crown 
agencies, all of the government agencies, as part of the function 
and services of the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, could you tell the House 
whether any contracting out would be done with regard to debt 
management advice or investment advice? I know you’ve just 
stated otherwise, but I do think from time to time there might be 
some contracting out done, and in particular whether the 
department would hire any firms, and what sort of projects 
these firms might be hired for. 
 
I know, for example, there’s been some, recently, investment 
dealers made mention of. And could I just have some comment 
with that regard. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, from time to time we will engage outside agencies to 
provide us with advice on particular questions or issues that we 
want dealt with, and to organize a particular activity. But 
generally, most of the work is done within the department. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well on a similar issue, Madam Minister, in 
the last year I’ve looked over quite a few documents that refer 
to transactions made by your government, and I’ve repeatedly 
noticed that certain firms can be used by the government in a 
variety of roles. The only common tie to these firms is that they 
are providing some services. 
 
I’d just like to provide an example and maybe the minister 
might elaborate on it. I noticed that Goldman Sachs has 
provided services to the government in a variety of fashions. 
For example, it provided some advice to the government about 
the Crown Life deal. 
 
Secondly, it provided services as a broker when it came to  

selling of the Cameco stocks, or at least a significant part of 
those. 
 
Fairly recently, Goldman Sachs was also the whole owner of a 
company that purchased LCL (Leicester Communications 
Limited) Cable, or the East Midlands Cable Group, from this 
government. 
 
Madam Minister, there are undoubtedly more cases where 
Goldman Sachs has provided consulting services or has 
interacted with this government on either the Crown side or the 
government-proper side. Obviously these interactions, where 
you have a company providing services for profit and on buying 
government assets, offer a wide variety of opportunities for 
conflict of interest. 
 
Could the minister tell us what sort of means the department 
takes to ensure that consultants hired are not in a situation 
where they could be in a potential conflict of interest. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the kinds of activities that such firms would engage in 
are the following. When the Government of Saskatchewan goes 
out to borrow money to finance the activities of the 
Government of Saskatchewan  all the programs and services 
that we provide  somebody has to underwrite that issue. That 
is, somebody basically has to go out and sell it and ensure that 
you get the lowest possible interest rate that you can with your 
credit rating. So those are the sorts of activities that you pay 
other agencies to perform for you, and all governments do this 
all across Canada. 
 
Now with respect to conflict of interest, I’m not at all sure what 
the member’s talking about. Obviously we have conflict of 
interest legislation. We have conflict of interest forms. We have 
a Conflict of Interest Commissioner who looks at the members 
of the government and what their interests are to ensure that 
there isn’t a conflict. And you know, from the point of view of 
the taxpayer, that’s what they have to be concerned about. 
 
And I think we’ve covered that base very well because our 
process for defining a conflict of interest is very rigorous so that 
I have to disclose every interest I possibly have or anybody in 
my family has, so that we can be sure that they don’t have any 
interest in Goldman Sachs or anybody else doing business with 
the government. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister, but I believe 
the conflict of interest situation that I had in mind was 
something more where, for example, Goldman Sachs, being 
majority owner of Diamond Cable Company who bought the 
LCL Cable group, and then in turn they’re doing other 
investment services for the government. That is actually the 
type of conflict of interest situation that I was trying to convey 
to you. 
 
And if you might just make some comment about that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I would say that this industry is one of the most 
regulated in terms of that sort of conflict, so that there are  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

agencies well beyond the Government of Saskatchewan that 
would be concerned about some agency of the stature of the 
agencies you’re talking about having a conflict. And they would 
be very, very scrupulous themselves to be sure that they would 
never be put in that position. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Well thank you, Madam Minister. In the 
economic development strategy that your government promised 
. . . to undertake a number of measures to support the goals of 
the strategy. A number of those will imaginably take place 
during the next year. The most important of those, I would 
gather, is your review of the tax system. 
 
Many people, I think, find it’s quite ironic actually, because 
here we have a government that campaigned on how awful the 
Tory tax system was; it complained about the flat tax, increases 
to the sales tax. Then it goes on to do nothing about the flat tax 
and then increase the sales tax and broaden it to all sorts of 
items. 
 
To make matters worse, you’ve added to your own new taxes. 
One of them is the deficit reduction surtax and the other, 
although not called a tax, is SaskPower’s reconstruction charge 
 or reconstruction tax, I would refer to it. 
 
We also have a whole host of utility rate increases and it looks 
as though this coming year we can expect one from SaskEnergy 
again. 
 
And I would wonder if the minister could take the opportunity 
to tell us plainly, without blaming anyone else, I wonder if you 
could explain to us how you just started to notice now that 
maybe these high taxes are killing jobs in this province. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, once again, you’re putting words into my mouth that 
were never there and I’m going to have to take a moment to 
respond to what you’ve said. 
 
We’ve been waiting for the federal government to try to review 
its tax system. From the day that this federal government was 
elected, we said to them, stop fiddling around with the GST 
(goods and services tax); look at your whole tax system and 
overhaul the whole tax system. We made a commitment to them 
that if they did that, we would cooperate on the provincial level. 
 
So we’ve actually only now realized that the federal 
government is not going to do anything with its GST promise 
except break it, and so therefore we’re going to have to do a 
review by ourselves. 
 
But, Mr. Member, you have to have a sense of humour to have 
Liberals who so regularly defend the federal Liberals standing 
up in this legislature at this particular time talking about tax 
promises. I mean, across this country people are pointing to the 
fact that in 1993 the Liberals ran on a scrap-the-GST platform. 
Their answer to it is to come, spread it further to provinces, and 
then to get rid of, to force out of their own caucus, John  

Nunziata, one of the few people who said we should stick to 
our principles and our promise. As one of the programs on the 
weekend said humorously, obviously John Nunziata has far too 
much integrity for the Liberal caucus. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam 
Minister, I guess more than a question, I’ll put a statement to 
you. There was prepared . . . a prepared package sent to your 
House Leader some weeks ago, and I was firstly wondering 
when you’re going to have that prepared for the official 
opposition. In fact when you come to estimates the next time, I 
would ask that you bring that prepared package and the answers 
with you. Also a package on an issue that you answered 
moments ago regarding consultants, I would like to see firstly, 
consultants and lawyers, any projects  the list of projects; 
monies paid out; to whom; for what; the whole ball of wax. 
And you might as well bring that. 
 
Our caucus has had a difficult time with you in the last few 
days, Madam Minister. You’re avoiding the answers in interim 
supply and again tonight. It’s politics  from your point of 
view it’s politics from the word go, and if we can’t get past that 
in estimates then I’m asking you to bring the prepared packages 
with you. Otherwise you’re going to have a long time in this 
session, Madam Minister. 
 
So I would ask that you do that and that would help us get a 
little better understanding of just the amount of patronage that 
you, Madam Minister, you get involved with. And we’ve seen 
so many of the strong patronage jobs that have come through, 
whether it’s Mark Stobbe or Craig Dotson, people that you have 
relied on and it’s a very . . . you’re running a very political 
show. So if you want to play those games, that’s fine. That’s 
fine, Madam Minister, because that’s, I guess that’s where you 
think it’s at. But I’m just telling you, bring those prepared 
packages and then perhaps we don’t have to listen to all your 
rhetoric. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. We will provide some basic information at some 
point, but I would say to the member opposite, I have no 
problem being here as long as they want to be here. 
 
I enjoy this. I think this is a very good forum for the public to 
understand what’s happening with the province’s finances. So I 
am not in any sense trying to get out of here quickly. I’m 
prepared to stay here just as long as you’re prepared to stay 
here. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Sorry I had to beat you up there. Thank 
you, Mr. Chair. Well I am actually glad to hear that, Madam 
Minister, because I’m sure the public would like to see you in a 
more open forum where you could explain then some of the 
comments that you had as far back as a year or two ago where 
in fact you’re telling people along the west side of the province 
that you can’t give them tax relief, can’t give them a tax break, 
because you’d rather have Saskatchewan in a welfare position. 
 
And I’m sure that they’d be concerned or would like to hear 
some of the comments that you’ve had about tax since that time 
where in fact you’re talking about people never approaching  



1234  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

you to ask for any tax relief. Well I don’t know who all you 
invited to your round of meetings, but I’ll tell you what the 
public think out there. They think it was a charade from your 
department from the word go. You’re running a political 
department, a political show. People have no faith in you, 
Madam Minister. They don’t. So bring your prepared packages 
when we ask for them. And I guess in your department that’s 
how we’ll operate. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. Of course I think it’s highly amusing that he believes 
the people of Saskatchewan believe that the Department of 
Finance is a political operation. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this is a department that has been in place in the 
1970s under the Blakeney administration, the 80s under the 
Tories, and we even have people, I’m sure, who go back to the 
Liberals. 
 
But I would say to the member opposite, if he wants to stand 
here and debate, we will have lots of time to debate and we will 
talk about the tax increases that the member opposite voted for 
when he was on this side of the House. And we will ask him 
why he has changed his position. Why one day he thought it 
was appropriate to be on this side of the House, standing up for 
a budget to increase taxes. Then a little while later, moves over 
to the other side of the House to talk about why taxes have to be 
cut. 
 
And I honestly believe my closing piece of advice would be, I 
think it’s the Conservative’s turn. Everybody needs to share. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. Beside me is 
Greg Marchildon, the deputy minister. To my left is Paul 
Osborne, who is director of international relations. Bob Hersche 
sits behind him; he is head of the telecommunications division. 
And right behind me is Ms. Gorrill; she is director of 
administration. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to first 
of all welcome your officials. I have been introduced to least 
one of them for sure at one point, and I very much appreciated 
our association. I learned an awful lot. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Which one. 
 
Mr. Osika:  I’m not going to tell you. Anyway I just wonder, 
Mr. Minister, if in advance of asking some questions 
concerning your department, could I ask if you in fact might 
have a package of completed documents. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, we have not got it done. There’s 
a fair amount of work involved in this. We actually only settled 
the contents of it, I think, a week, 10 days ago, a little more than 
that, because we got a much longer package. And then I think 
we agreed to a somewhat abbreviated package, so I don’t have 
them ready. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I just thought I’d ask in advance of 
going ahead with this. We’re dealing with Intergovernmental 
Affairs, and as I mentioned to you earlier, I got a little confused. 
I was looking for the provincial secretariat but I say that in jest 
really. 
 
I wonder if, Mr. Minister, you could give us just a brief 
description and a mandate of the Intergovernmental Affairs 
department, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. The mandate 
is to manage the province’s intergovernmental affairs, this 
being in some ways regional, federal-provincial, and 
international. The department coordinates, develops, and 
implements policies and programs having to do with our 
relationships with other governments in Canada and other 
governments elsewhere. It also manages protocol, French 
language services, information technology and 
telecommunications, and the Office of the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
It houses the following branches: administration, quite 
obviously, and I mentioned the protocol office. I think most 
members are familiar with this. They organized the reserve day 
and so. Federal-provincial relations has become a major one in 
the last couple of years or so with the election of the Péquiste 
government. This has become a major chore. 
 
International relations. We coordinate, develop, and implement 
polices and programs with respect to other jurisdictions. Things 
such as trade agreements and trade disputes generally fall 
within our purview. 
 
Constitutional relations. This department provides advice to the 
government on constitutional relations. 
 
Information technology and telecommunications. We establish 
policies with respect to information technology, 
telecommunications, and we advise the government. 
 
There is, as I said . . . the Office of the Lieutenant Governor is 
in this department. And there’s also the office of French 
language coordination as well. Those are the main branches. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. How does that compare, how do 
those responsibilities compare, to the previous Provincial 
Secretary’s department and staffing components and 
relationship to that department and to the department as it exists 
today? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There’s been a gradual evolution of 
this department. It has accumulated, not new duties, but over 
the years it has accumulated additional duties from other  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

departments. 
 
I believe when the former administration was in office, this was 
a branch of the Executive Council. It was really handled, I 
think, by the premier of the day. With this administration a 
separate department was, in due course, set up and gradually 
there evolved additional responsibilities until it’s taken its 
present form. 
 
I don’t think there’s any real change in duties from the day 
when the former minister was there in 1995 to today. But over 
the last five years, certainly the department has grown from 
being a branch of Executive Council, and a relatively small one, 
to a larger one. As I say, no new responsibilities to government, 
but it has collected responsibilities from other departments. 
 
Mr. Osika:  The number of employees within the 
department, how does that compare from the time that your 
department was initiated, created, until now? Has there been 
any fluctuation, changes, additions, or deletions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In ’92, it would have had 
approximately half the number of employees which it now has. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay. With all this constitutional wrangling then 
that’s going on in this country in this last three years, has your 
department taken on greater importance, would you say? Is that 
perhaps the need for the additional people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, I think that’s a fair assumption 
on your part. Whether or not the department has taken on new 
importance, the issue certainly has taken on a new importance. 
And while I don’t think there’s an enormous number of new 
staff, they’ve been given an enormous number of new jobs and 
responsibilities in the . . . to some extent we’ve worked the staff 
all the harder. And while I’m on my feet, I want to pay tribute 
to a staff of which an enormous amount has been asked and 
which are very dedicated. In this department the work they do 
really is a labour of love, and if it weren’t, the government 
wouldn’t be getting anywhere near the quality of service it is. 
So I want to pay tribute to a very dedicated and hard-working 
staff. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can’t argue with 
acknowledging dedicated staff. I too can appreciate that. Can 
the minister provide us, perhaps, with the cost Saskatchewan 
has incurred because of the continual constitutional 
negotiations in the last four years. Would you have a 
breakdown of those costs? And a breakdown annually and 
perhaps what those costs actually went for  what the money 
was spent on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s not an easy question to 
answer. Your question is, what has all the constitutional 
wrangling cost us. That is not an easy question to answer 
because it has touched upon several branches of this 
department. I can tell the member opposite that one of the 
results of the wrangling was the establishment of the 
constitutional relations section. You’ll see in your Estimates 
191,000 budgeted for this section. Probably, oh, perhaps half of 
that relates in a very direct way to the escalation of the  

wrangling as you, I think, aptly describe it. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Minister, do you envision these costs 
increasing over the next couple of years as we near, once again, 
perhaps another referendum, and an approximate cost that you 
might project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We certainly hope not. I think there’s 
a renewed kind of optimism; I’m not sure what it’s based on. 
I’m not sure whether it’s well-founded or not, that perhaps the 
Government of Quebec may be on a different agenda. No one 
knows for sure, but I think we hope there’s no escalation. But it 
could happen without warning, and there’s not much you can 
do but meet the challenge when it comes. So I think the only 
honest answer I can give the member is I don’t know. We hope 
not, but we will meet whatever challenges come our way. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Does the federal government pick up any of 
Saskatchewan’s costs when it comes to these types of things? 
Do they contribute anything at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, the answer is no. They do 
contribute directly to the office of French language 
coordination, but that is a responsibility which pre-dates the 
constitutional problems of 1995. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. What about things like first 
ministers’ conferences and other meetings with Canadian 
ministers? Is this . . . how much does the province spend 
annually on these types of meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There is a service which the federal 
government . . . which has been established by the provinces 
and the federal government called the Canadian 
Intergovernmental Conference Secretariat. It provides 
secretarial and translation services to the first ministers’ 
conferences and when premiers or ministers meet as well. Our 
share of that is, this year, $46,000 in the upcoming budget year. 
 
The balance of the cost is travel. That’s really the only cost of 
these conferences to us, is the travel. First ministers’ 
conferences, the federal government, I understand, picks up the 
cost of the meeting rooms and so on if there is any additional 
cost. But the cost to us is almost exclusively the travel. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Under the first subvote in 
administration, there appears to be some decrease. What is that 
decrease . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Under the first subvote, 
administration, there has been a decrease in the operating 
budget. Could you account, please, for this decrease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The motivation for it was that all 
departments were asked to find economies with the reduction in 
the transfer payments from Ottawa and our determination that 
we would back-fill all of the cuts in Health. All departments 
were asked to find economies and find ways of cutting back. 
This department was no exception. The reduction is mainly due 
to reduction in system consulting services and travel expenses 
and contractual services. So there’s just an effort to economize. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Could you please, Mr. Minister,  



1236  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

explain to the House the role and the purpose of the 
accommodation and the central service section of the 
department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That is basically the deputy 
minister’s office and the office and the facilities provided to 
Melinda Gorrill, who I introduced as being directly behind me. 
That’s basically the office and facilities provided for them. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. And under the section of protocol 
office, can you just give us an idea of what the mandate of that 
particular office is, please, just in a nutshell. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They arrange for . . . protocol 
arranges for visits from . . . arranges for visits of distinguished 
visitors, and they arranged for the Armed Forces Reserve Day 
here. Perhaps it would be most succinctly put if I simply read 
the following: plans, organizes, and supervises visits of foreign 
diplomats, heads of state, and government delegations. It also 
oversees state ceremonials and symbols and provides protocol 
consulting services and policy and organization of provincial 
honours programs. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. So I take it from that, that when we 
have an important visitor at any time to Saskatchewan, such as a 
head of state or a member of the royal family, the costs for 
those trips come out of this protocol budget. And if it does, 
does the budget then fluctuate from year to year in anticipation 
or is there some projections that are made in order to 
accommodate costs of those visits? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The costs of royal visits is borne by 
the province, the federal government. It’s borne by the visiting 
jurisdiction. It will vary enormously depending on the length of 
the . . . what a royal visit would cost would vary enormously 
depending on the length of the visit and the particular member 
of the royal family who came. We’ve a policy of not hosting 
more than one royal visit every couple of years, basically for 
reasons of economy. 
 
As for diplomats and so on who come, of which Qiao Shi 
would be one example, generally we do not pay for 
accommodation, although there may be rare exceptions to that. 
The costs of such visits is normally confined to banquets and so 
on put on in their honour. That’s normally the only expense to 
which we’re put. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Can you share any secrets with us, Mr. Minister, 
and let us know if there are any important guests coming to 
Saskatchewan during this coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There is a number of diplomats 
coming. I don’t think you’re asking about individual diplomats. 
There’s one, for instance, coming some time this week. I will 
spend a half an hour with him and that’s the sole extent of it. 
 
Really as a result of my visit to China, there are a couple. One is 
Vice-president Gu, who is basically head of the agricultural 
cooperatives which distribute the potash. And so it’s a key 
figure for us. 
 

The governor of . . . or representative at that level, the governor 
of Jilin province, Governor Wang, will be . . . we expect to have 
him coming in September, and that’s a province . . . 
 
We have had a number of twinning agreements. They’re 
beginning to bear some solid fruit, and so we’re anxious to 
develop a good relationship and turn his visit into one he’ll 
remember with fond memories. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. How long has the protocol office 
been in existence, as we know it today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We believe it was created in the late 
‘70s. I think it’s fair to say I’m the only one here that can go 
back that far, and my memory isn’t that great. I know it was 
around during the Blakeney years. I could not give you a more 
precise date than to simply say we think it was around in the 
late ‘70s. I know it was in existence during the Blakeney years. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. You didn’t have to really reveal your 
age, Mr. Minister. But I appreciate that. 
 
I notice that the budget for the protocol office has really been 
hacked up for this coming year. And first of all, under salaries, 
over half of this budget item is gone. Has anybody actually been 
let go from the protocol office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The primary saving here is that there 
is . . . Last year’s budget reflected the 90th anniversary 
celebrations, and this is where the funding was. The difference 
is primarily that. 
 
Again in an effort to economize, we eliminated some media 
advertising for the honours program, and I think there’s one less 
position in the area as well. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay, thank you. That would also probably 
explain the reason for the drastic cut in the operating budget as 
well. Okay, thank you. 
 
If we could just jump ahead to international relations, Mr. 
Minister, can you tell us how long this office has been around 
and what the duties of that particular office are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again with respect to the length of 
time it’s been around, the function has been around for awhile. 
And many of these officials have, Mr. Osborne being one, have 
worked with this government in a professional capacity over 
many years. 
 
As a separate branch though, the separate branch was created 
last year, but the function has been around for some time. Let 
me just again give you a summary of the function. It 
coordinates, develops, and implements policies and programs of 
the Government of Saskatchewan in its relations with the 
governments of foreign jurisdictions and the governing bodies 
of international organizations and their institutions. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. I believe that the federal  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

government also has a department of international relations. 
Does the minister see this perhaps as an unnecessary overlap 
here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The federal government has the 
Department of External Affairs which advises the federal 
government on a wide range of matters relating to its relations 
with foreign countries and foreign jurisdictions. And we 
certainly make use of that. 
 
It is a foreign service of worldwide renown, one of the finest, 
most professional in the world, and we make good use of their 
assistance. This is not a duplication in that Saskatchewan has 
separate relations with foreign jurisdictions which require a 
Saskatchewan perspective and Saskatchewan policy. 
 
And I could give you a number of instances of such areas where 
we have, if you like, a competitive advantage, and where we 
want to exploit that. That has to be generated internally and in 
many ways that’s what this jurisdiction does. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Does that mean then that this 
department covers the costs of overseas trade missions and trips 
by ministers to other countries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It would cover any trips by public 
servants in this department or the minister, but not otherwise. 
The majority of trade missions are trade promotion and trade 
promotion falls within the jurisdiction of the Department of 
Economic Development. The vast majority of trade missions 
are trade promotion. 
 
And the number of overseas visits by this department is much, 
much smaller. But yes, where public servants from this 
department travel overseas or when I did in January, it’s 
covered by this department. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Is it possible to get a list of all the trips taken in 
the past year and the costs attached, including anyone or 
everyone who went on these trips, minister’s staff and anyone 
else that perhaps is paid by the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m not sure entirely what the 
member asked for. I can give you the . . . yes, I’m not sure this 
is . . . what I have before me is my own. What you asked for 
was the officials as well. I think what I’ll have to do, I say to the 
member from Melville, I think what I’ll have to do is to send it 
to you. I was looking at this as I was standing up. It does not 
include the officials who . . . the travel of officials. I didn’t 
quite anticipate that question. We will undertake to provide it to 
you as early as possible. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Perhaps, Mr. Minister, would you 
not agree with nearly all departments conducting trips and that 
your department again is simply perhaps a source of overlap 
and perhaps maybe some waste involved here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No. The functions of the departments 
are different. Economic Development handles those matters 
which relate to trade promotion. Generally speaking, our 
department handles matters relating to trade disputes or trade  

agreements or other relations. No, I don’t think there’s any 
overlap nor do I think there’s any waste. 
 
I’ve not seen a precise comparison done, but I would venture to 
say that overseas travel by this government would be modest by 
comparison to almost any other government in Canada. This 
government has a very austere travel regime. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Just one more question along those lines, Mr. 
Minister. What about the overlap perhaps with Executive 
Council. I know that the Premier and the cabinet do much 
international travel. What department handles those trips? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Executive Council in this 
government does not keep in Executive Council staff which 
could advise and support him on all these sort of trips. Those 
are drawn from the departments. Thus when the Premier 
travelled to the Ukraine it was . . . his advice and support came 
in part from members of this department. So there is no overlap. 
Certainly members of this department are expected to give 
advice and support to anyone travelling overseas if it is relevant 
and proper for us to do so, if it relates to areas in our 
jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’m 
sorry I had to step out for a few minutes. Did I hear you say that 
it’s your department that will look after delegations from other 
countries when they’re in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s correct. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you then tell 
me possibly the importance of these missions and the meetings 
of their politicians with politicians from your government when 
they come to Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It depends entirely on the country 
involved and the person involved. I was explaining to the 
member from Melville  the Leader of the Opposition actually, 
I should describe him  the Leader of the Opposition that I 
meet relatively often with ambassadors. 
 
Some of them, we have only a very narrow and small 
relationship with. Our trade would be very small. But some of 
the people I meet with, it’s done as a courtesy to them and 
because I know that they’ll extend the same courtesy if I happen 
to be travelling in Austria or something. I just picked that 
country right out of the air. 
 
Some of them are of the most profound importance. I 
mentioned a prospective visit of Vice-President Gu. It is his 
organization that distributes potash throughout China. That is 
one of the most profound importance, and I felt the visit of 
Qiao Shi to be in the same category. It depends entirely on the 
person and the country, and it’s very hard to generalize. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you referring to 
the delegation from China that was just here recently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes. 



1238  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

Mr. McLane:  Right. I guess could you tell us how many 
people were in that delegation that came with him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There was, we understand, 150 to 
200 on the aircraft; only about 75 got off. And I should point 
out that there was no expense to the province by reason of that 
visit except the noon luncheon. I think that was the only 
exception. The balance of the expenses were picked up by the 
Government of China. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well thank you, Minister. So the only 
expense was the luncheon. Could you tell me what day that 
was, and where it was held, and who was invited to the 
luncheon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  My officials point out that there were 
a few other expenses, and perhaps I should give you an 
exhaustive list. Gifts were $672; luncheon was $2,634; 
photography, $373; translation, $650; the total cost was $4,329. 
 
Who was invited to the luncheon? We tried to invite people 
who have an important relationship with China. Thus we would 
invite private sector people . . . there were some private sector 
people who have major dealings with China. Wheat Pool is one, 
by way of example. And I think one or two of the potash 
companies were invited as well. We invited the dean of the 
College of Agriculture from Saskatoon, because the Chinese are 
very interested in agricultural training. And so on and so forth. 
 
The list was certainly not made up of party people or anything 
like that, believe me. We went through the list, tried to pick 
people who would have an interest in hearing what Qiao Shi 
had to say, and who in turn he would be interested in seeing. So 
we tried to match the guest list to the individual involved. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m happy to hear 
that the list was quite extensive and certainly not party people in 
your view. 
 
The question also, part of that question, Mr. Minister, was 
where the luncheon was held and who from the Chinese 
delegation was invited? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I don’t have a guest list here. I do 
have a guest list if the member . . . of the Chinese people. We 
do have it and we could send it to if you’re interested in it. Let 
me summarize by saying there was the Chairman Qiao, who 
was a member of politburo, as I think you know. There were a 
number of ministers, I would think six to eight, and some 
supporting staff. There were a number of people from the 
Chinese Embassy in Ottawa, a number that I wouldn’t want to 
estimate. Those are the basic people who came. The chairman, 
ministers, and supporting staff from the embassy in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I guess I’m interested about the 75 that got 
off the plane. Was there a criteria that was used as to . . . were 
all 75 invited, or were 50, and what criteria was used in 
deciding who would be invited? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There were the people whom I 
mentioned earlier  Chairman Qiao. There was the ministers,  

the supporting staff, Chinese Embassy people, their supporting 
staff. There were about 20 members of the Chinese media who 
got off to cover the visit. And there were about 20 security 
people. That is a rough description of the folks who debarked in 
Regina. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. McLane:  I guess back to my question. You seem to be 
skirting around the criteria, Mr. Minister. Can you tell me what 
criteria was used picking and choosing from the 75? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m sorry. I missed that question 
entirely. I wasn’t skirting it; I didn’t hear it. I can only guess. 
It’s not our criteria. Nor was it shared with us. Nor are they 
under any obligation to tell us. They just told us who’s getting 
off and didn’t bother to explain themselves, nor are they under 
any obligation to do so. I can only assume they did the same 
thing. They went through the people who were there. They said 
these are the people who have an interest in our relationship 
with Saskatchewan, and these are the people that are getting off. 
So I assume they went through the same process, trying to 
match people with the province, but I can only guess at it. They 
didn’t . . . under no obligation to tell us. 
 
Mr. McLane:  No, Mr. Minister, the question was, of the 75 
people who got off the plane, how many of them were invited 
to the dinner at the Ramada and what criteria was used in 
choosing from the 75? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We’re going to have to give you a 
more precise accounting. This is an estimate only, more of a 
guestimate than an estimate. We think about 20 were invited to 
the dinner . . . to the luncheon rather. And again it was on the 
basis of relevance. Was their job relevant to our relationship 
with the People’s Republic of China? None of the media and 
none of the security people, so far as I’m aware, came to the 
luncheon at all. It was the Chairman, the ministers, and some 
embassy staff for the people who were there. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I guess . . . who would decide on 
that? And secondly, do the titles of first secretary and second 
secretary and counsel from the embassy, how influential 
positions would you class those people being? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The determination as to who went 
where was done in consultation primarily in the federal 
government and the People’s Republic of China. This after all 
was part of a Canada-wide visit which the federal government 
really organized. 
 
We were involved. It was a tripartite discussion in, I suppose in 
each province, but it was a tripartite discussion here. We 
entered into a discussion with the government, with the Chinese 
Embassy, with External Affairs, that together, put together a list 
for the luncheon. That’s how it was done, actually. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, you’re surely not trying to tell 
me that the federal government dictated who you or who your 
Premier invited to the luncheon at the Ramada. If you are, then 
can you confirm or deny that? 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I wouldn’t say they dictated it. They 
certainly gave us advice, which in many cases we took. As I had 
described earlier, External Affairs is competent, professional, 
and one of the finest such departments in the world and we 
value their advice fairly highly. 
 
I don’t think I dictated who should come, but they certainly 
gave us advice. I think in most cases the advice was followed 
even if it didn’t accord with what we anticipated. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well I guess I’m happy to hear you say that 
you appreciate the advice from the federal government and I 
wish you would follow a little more closely, and if you would 
then probably you could get off this business about fed bashing 
day in and day out, night in and night out, minister after 
minister. So I’m very happy that you appreciate the advice from 
the federal government. 
 
We look forward, Mr. Minister, to your list of who was at the 
luncheon, and who actually made up the list, and the criteria as 
to who was invited and who was not. 
 
I will share with you though, and I’ll send you across, a couple 
of names, Mr. Minister. And we were informed that there was a 
couple of fairly high-profile people that were not invited to this 
luncheon and would ask  if we could pass that across to the 
minister  as to why these people were not invited to the 
luncheon and felt slighted because of that and were asked to go 
somewhere else and did gather in another fairly large group of 
fairly influential people from that republic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The names and the titles strongly 
suggest that those are people from the Chinese Embassy that 
. . . well again, there was a limited amount . . . the budget  
and we did want to keep the cost down  dictated a rather 
small group. And thus we entered into discussions with the 
Government of Canada, with the Chinese Embassy. I’m 
disappointed that they, that the people on that list, felt slighted. 
There was no intention to do that. 
 
By and large, by and large we, I say to the member from Arm 
River, we don’t know, we’re not intimately familiar with, the 
chief factors in Ottawa. I think that’s, I would assume that’s, 
where they came from, although I’m only guessing. In terms of 
who we ought to invite from the Chinese Embassy in Ottawa, 
and I assume that’s where they’re from, by and large we would 
accept advice of the federal government as to who needs to be 
included and who doesn’t. I suspect the guest list from the 
Chinese Embassy was by and large a creation of the federal 
government. We simply wouldn’t know, and we would rely 
very heavily on their advice. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. I would ask that the next 
time that we sit in this forum if you could bring back the answer 
as to why they weren’t invited, if indeed they were not, and the 
reasoning for that. And at that point in time, I would hope that 
you wouldn’t blame the federal government for it, because I 
think it would be incumbent upon yourself and your officials to 
see that the appropriate people were indeed invited when they 
were in Saskatchewan, and of course upon that time . . . if 
deemed necessary, that you would correspond an apology to  

those people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well I didn’t . . . There was no 
admission. Please don’t misunderstand me. There was no 
admission in my comments that anything untoward had 
happened, nor was there any admission that any apology is 
owed to anyone. 
 
The seating at the luncheon was limited. Who came from the 
embassy, by and large, a decision of the Chinese Embassy. 
They would rank their people, and we would rely very heavily 
on the Government of Canada for any additional advice we 
needed on who came from the Chinese Embassy. I’m not 
suggesting any apology is in order. I am simply saying that we 
 the seating was limited  we accepted advice from others 
on who ought to be there from Ottawa; we took it. I’m not at all 
admitting that there’s any apologies owed to anyone. I want to 
make that quite clear. 
 
We couldn’t seat everyone who came, the whole 75 of them, 
nor would it have made any sense. We wanted a select group of 
them to meet with senior people from the government, from the 
universities, and from the business community in 
Saskatchewan, to meet with them. And you couldn’t get 
everybody sitting down so I’m not . . . we will certainly give 
you the list of who was invited. We’ll try and . . . if there’s . . . 
if we can expand beyond my bare comments that who came 
from the embassy is largely a decision of the embassy and the 
Government of Canada and we acted on their advice, I will do 
so. But I’m certainly not undertaking to extend any apologies. I 
don’t think any were owing, actually. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 
back to federal-provincial relations, I guess the same question I 
asked previously. There appears to be a potential for a great 
deal of overlap between this particular office and services 
provided by other places in government, such as the Executive 
Council. Can the minister just briefly explain the necessity of 
this particular office and its mandate. That’s the 
federal-provincial relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The Executive Council under this 
government is . . . the function is largely confined to the 
coordination, supervision, and management of the departments. 
They have almost none, almost no functions such . . . there’s 
almost no public servants who provide direct-line services such 
as who would advise on federal-provincial relations. Almost all 
those people are in departments. 
 
Thus if the Premier would be meeting with the Prime Minister 
on a subject which might be trade, his advice would come not 
from Executive Council, whose function again is to organize, 
supervise, and coordinate the departments. He would get his 
advice from Economic Development. 
 
If the Premier had to meet, was meeting the Canadian 
Petroleum Association, to pick a different example, there’s 
nobody in Executive Council who would have expertise to 
advise him. I mean somebody handles his schedule, but beyond 
that he gets his advice and assistance from Energy and Mines. 
Thus, in the area of federal-provincial relations, he looks to this  



1240  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

department to get advice on federal-provincial relations. 
There’s no expertise in his own department  in his own 
department, in Executive Council. There’s no such expertise in 
his own department. The Premier draws advice and support 
from all areas of government depending upon what he needs at 
the time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Now then, how does this then differentiate itself 
from constitutional relations? Pardon me. Perhaps I’m asking 
that backwards. Could constitutional relations not be handled 
under federal-provincial relations and perhaps be a cost savings 
by doing it that way? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, it would probably cost exactly 
the same, and in our view it wouldn’t operate as effectively. 
 
Again, Executive Council does not have programs. They do not 
have capacity to develop policy or research; by and large that is 
. . . I shouldn’t say by and large; that is entirely done in the 
departments. Thus when the Premier needs advice and support 
on the issue of constitutional relations, he looks to this 
department primarily, but he might also want to look to Justice 
if the matter is more legal than policy. And we think that’s a 
better way to organize it. We think it’s a whole lot cheaper than 
having those services in Executive Council. Because when 
they’re in Executive Council you tend to duplicate them. They 
tend to be in Executive Council and there also tends to be a 
separate function in the department. We think this is a more 
efficient and a cheaper way of running things. 
 
Mr. Osika:  How many full-time staff work in the 
federal-provincial relations office and has that number changed 
at all since 1991? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There are five people in this branch. 
Your second question and really your main question was, is 
there more or fewer than there were four years ago, ’92. That’s 
a hard question to answer because the department has been 
organized and reorganized to the point where comparisons are 
very hard to make. 
 
I think it’s fair to say though, there’s at least one more person 
working in this department than there was in ’92. 
 
Mr. Osika:  How many in constitutional relations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There are only three. There is a 
position or two which is vacant. There are only three people 
working here. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you. We’ve been through a period of 
pretty intense constitutional talks in this country as everyone’s 
aware and I’m just a little curious  what do these people do 
when we are in a constitutional lull, which thankfully we seem 
to be in right now? What do they occupy themselves with 
during those periods? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I was smiling because the group is 
really . . . we’re in danger of working these people to death. 

We are, let me . . . there’s a list here which is relatively long, 
too long to read. Let me try to summarize it. We try to organize 
and prepare and think our way through a response to the 
Quebec issue, if I can put it that way. We try to coordinate and 
develop policies relating to our relationship with other 
governments. We also work with the group which you’ll see at 
9:30, SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs 
Secretariat). We also work with them and with other 
departments on the whole issue which is coming to the fore  
being promoted  in a very energetic way by the federal 
government and that’s the issue of self-government. 
 
So our department is involved in that as well. Perhaps we’ll 
take a question or two more if the members have one and then 
we should move on, I think, to Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I take it from 
your last response that we should not see any increase for the 
budget in this particular department as a result of them 
continuing to work on those programs. It should remain fairly 
well static then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  You’re not going to find this, I think, 
very satisfying but we can do no more than hope here. We hope 
things remain quiet on the constitutional front. If that is the 
case, current staffing levels should remain. If something breaks 
loose, we have no option but to meet the challenge and get 
whatever resources we need to meet the challenge. So the best 
we can do is hope that things remain calm, as they are now. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. This next 
question, I don’t want it to sound impolite because, as you 
know, I hold you in a great deal of esteem, Mr. Minister. But it 
seems to me that the Premier is usually the one we see in other 
provinces representing Saskatchewan at different events, and it 
is most definitely the Premier at the constitutional table. 
 
I guess what I’m asking of you to do  in a very delicate 
manner as possible  is to justify your ministry. It just seems 
to me that much of this work is handled either by the Premier 
himself or in fact the Justice minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That is largely true. It’s true in all 
provinces. It’s true in the Dominion of Canada. Exactly the 
same situation occurs. All provinces have a Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs with the premiers and the Prime 
Minister playing a major and, in many cases, the senior role in 
the area. What occurs in Saskatchewan is precisely what occurs 
everywhere else. 
 
There is a need for the ministers. Let me give you an example. 
At their meeting in last August . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
St. John’s, thank you. At their meeting in St. John’s, the 
premiers established a council on social policy because they felt 
that the current system was not working well. A federal 
government would use its spending power to develop new 
programs and then would not continue to fund them and the 
provinces were left with them. 
 
That work was left to the ministers, which I want to pay a 
tribute to my predecessor, the member from Regina Dewdney,  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

who did some very good work on it. But the ministers did that. 
The ministers carry on . . . on some issues such as social policy 
we are ministers in every sense of the word. Sometimes, quite 
frankly, our role is somewhat like that of an associate minister. 
We aid and assist the premiers in their work. 
 
So this is the system which has grown up. It works exactly the 
same here as it does elsewhere and I think the system functions 
reasonably well. I think Canadians are reasonably well served 
by the system of intergovernmental relations which we have. 
 
Unless the member has one or two questions you feel strongly 
about, I think I will move to move that we report progress. 
 
Okay. I move we report progress, Mr. Chair. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Women’s Secretariat 

Vote 41 
Item 1 
 
The Chair:  I will ask the minister to introduce her officials 
first, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
introduce to the House tonight Faye Rafter, the executive 
coordinator of the Women’s Secretariat, and Joan Pederson, the 
assistant executive coordinator of the Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, 
Madam Minister, and staff. It’s nice to see you. 
 
I know that the Women’s Secretariat has had some bit of 
controversy maybe within the government deciding on the 
importance of the Secretariat. In my short time here in office, in 
this Assembly, I’m amazed at the number of departments who 
delegate responsibility to this small sector of government. 
 
Madam Minister, I’m interested in hearing how you can review 
1995 and give our caucus an overview of the workings of the 
Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you. I’m more than pleased 
whenever I can get to brag about the Women’s Secretariat and 
the work that we do. There’s really about five basic areas that 
we work in: one is research and policy development; another 
one is public awareness; policy coordination within 
government; consultation, both within government and in the 
community; and then administrative and financial work related 
to the various goals and objectives. 
 
Now there’s quite a bit of detail. I guess I’m unsure as to the 
level of detail you would want. But we participate both with all 
the other ministers responsible for the status of women across 
Canada. And in that we would work on things like national 
indicators across Canada to measure the status of women, 
because sometimes indicators that governments collect are too 
general to be of specific value in understanding how one 
particular sector of the society is doing. 
 
So part of the work that we’re doing as women is to find ways  

that we can actually measure women’s progress and the various 
economic, social, and political participation within the society. 
 
Now one of the things I might mention that might be of interest 
is I just, in the last two days, received a document from the 
federal government that they’ve just adopted a gender analysis 
policy within the federal government where they’re actually 
looking at ways that they can see what the impact is of policies 
on women as well as men because, for example, certain choices 
in health or certain choices in economic development may have 
a differential impact on men as to women. And so they’ve now 
actually adopted a formal policy at the federal level to be able to 
analyse their policies for the impact that they have on, shall we 
say, the two major sectors in our society. 
 
I’m a little bit indefinite of how much detail you want. I do 
have . . . I’m wondering which would be best, whether to get a 
copy of this and send it across to you so you could take a look. 
That might be the best thing to do. There’s no reason to not do 
either of these. 
 
Could I get you to copy these and then we can hand them 
across. That might take a minute. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Maybe while we have this minute, could you 
just explain a little more fully the document that you received 
from the federal government and what you feel the impact is 
going to have on your Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again, sometimes governments 
unwittingly make policy decisions that have an impact that it 
wasn’t intended to have because the analysis is not as complete 
as it could be, of the impact. 
 
For example, a particular decision on maintenance provisions 
could have a differential impact on male single parents versus 
women single parents. A policy on training could have the 
effect that it supports male-dominated occupations as opposed 
to occupations that are traditionally more typical for women to 
be employed in. 
 
There’s even differential impacts between, shall we say, 
different economic classes of women because, of course, the 
problems of a high income earning woman would be different 
than a single parent woman who perhaps did not have grade 12. 
So there’s even a need to be sensitive to whether there is 
particular supports that are needed within a program for single 
parent women that may be different than for an unemployed 
male who didn’t have parenting responsibilities. 
 
So these are the kinds of things that the Women’s Secretariat 
would increase sensitivity to within the government as we go 
through the various kinds of policy development. 
 
I think it’s particularly important to note in the area of even 
things like apprenticeship trades, a lot of these came out of the 
male-dominated trade unions. And I don’t think it was 
anybody’s intent, but just by virtue of the way those 
occupations developed and the way the apprenticeship 
programs developed, as it works out, most of the apprenticeship 
trades seem to be within job classes that are dominated by men,  



1242  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

and many of the job activities that have a high content of female 
workers don’t have the same access to apprenticeship types of 
structures and opportunities. 
 
So one of the things that’s been discussed, for example, in the 
apprenticeship trades area is broadening some of the 
apprenticeable trades so that women also has the opportunity to 
go through an apprenticeship route and some of the occupations 
that are more dominated by women. 
 
The other thing we do is look at whether we have the same kind 
of access to training opportunities and that results in things like 
particular focus on women in trades. Because when we look at 
the reasons why women have been traditionally underpaid, part 
of the reason is that sometimes the work that women do has 
been less valued than the work that men do, and therefore 
there’s a wage differential. 
 
But it also has to do with promotion. It has to do with career 
selection. It has to do with education. It has to do with supports 
to work. So when we’re looking at policy we need to look at all 
of those things that have made for that wage differential 
between men and women. 
 
And it’s important to address the wage differential because 
many women in the society today are sole family supports or 
are a significant portion of family income. It’s no longer the 
notion that they’re just supplementing. Quite often now, it’s the 
main breadwinner for the family, either whether it’s a single 
parent or a two-person family. 
 
And so this issue of wage inequity has become, I think, 
uppermost in women’s minds, and the Women’s Secretariat 
tries to look at the range of policies that can have a positive 
effect on that. 
 
So I haven’t yet had the full analysis of the federal document. If 
you’re interested in it, we could make sure you get a copy of it 
and that might give you an opportunity to get a little better look 
at that. 
 
(2045) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The 1995 budget 
had allocated $975,000 to the Secretariat and yet the final 
figures actually showed that you only received 935,000. How 
did your operation work on a day-to-day basis to make 
adjustments for this actual cut-back? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There was largely two factors that 
contributed to that. One was that we did eliminate the Women’s 
Advisory Council, which was a 12-member council from the 
province, and as well we’re moving into cheaper space, so the 
other one was really just a cost saving based on 
accommodation. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So the work of the advisory council is done by 
another department or another segment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think what the change in the use of 
the advisory council represents is that instead of women having  

. . . well what should we say, some easily packaged concerns, 
there’s now much more depth of discussion. And what’s 
happening is that many of the departments are setting up their 
own advisory bodies if it has to do with domestic violence or if 
it has to do with health care concerns. 
 
They’re consulting directly with the women who are more 
engaged in those professional sectors, and the women who were 
at the advisory council level were feeling that they were 
duplicating the work that’s being done more substantively in 
other places. 
 
So I think what’s happening is we’re broadening out the base of 
how government consults in order to get women’s perspectives 
and policy development and program development. And the 
women’s council was just seen to be a body that perhaps was 
not able any more to encompass the wide range of knowledge 
and involvement that is now present in these other advisory 
processes. So I see it as, I guess, a bit of a success story that 
we’re able to move into this more broader base of women’s 
involvement in policy development. 
 
It’s also a policy of the government to have 50 per cent 
representation of women on boards, commissions, and 
agencies, and in that way there’s a very direct involvement. In 
fact the health boards in the province, for example, through the 
electoral process, have achieved 50 per cent of women’s 
representation. So in areas where those views are now clearly 
there and clearly established, women in those professional areas 
are directly representing their views into the various areas. And 
it just seemed that that was the more effective body. 
 
That doesn’t mean that we might not from time to time bring 
women together for the purpose of a consultation on a topic or 
some discussions, but as a permanent structure the Women’s 
Advisory Council was not seen to be as needed any more. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It was interesting 
to hear you say that the government has appointed . . . on most 
of the boards they have 50 per cent of the appointees are 
women. Does that hold true with the Highways board? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We could get that for you. I don’t have 
specific boards. As I say again, its our goal to have 50 per cent. 
We’re not always right at that, but we’ve certainly increased it 
greatly from 1991 when we were first elected. 
 
If you just wait for a minute, I could get you a figure on the 
overall improvement I think in representation. 
 
Yes, at the moment we’re at 43 per cent across the board in 
boards, commissions and agencies and continuing to be 
conscious of that whenever a new board is appointed. And in 
fact, I would invite you, if you know women who are interested 
in letting their name stand for boards, to submit them to the 
general list of names that are kept on a computer reference and 
referenced; whenever a board comes up for reappointment, all 
the names are looked at and we try to get regional and a variety 
of representation on to the boards. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Madam Minister. I failed to  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

ask you when we first came in, we had a prepared list of 
questions that we’ve given to various ministers on departments; 
I was wondering how you were making out with completing 
that list of questions for us? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We apparently haven’t received our list 
yet. But our understanding is that it takes a couple of weeks to 
get it done after you actually get the list because of the amount 
of work involved. I’ll have to check in to why it is we haven’t 
received it and see if we can get working on that right away. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Probably the 
next time this estimates come up, it’ll be done by then. 
 
In the 1996 projections, I see that there’s only $901,000 that’ll 
be allocated for the Secretariat. Do you see that this cut-back is 
going to affect your operations this year and can you tell me 
how? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think I essentially answered that 
before. That’s being achieved through the lower 
accommodation costs and the elimination of the advisory 
council. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, the staff component has 
remained constant in your department, and so you’re going to 
achieve the savings mostly just through the space allocation? I 
guess the question I’ve been waiting to ask you and you 
probably have been waiting for me to ask is: I asked the 
Minister of Labour if he considered pay equity a women’s issue 
and now I’m asking you what your stand is on this question. Do 
you consider pay issue to be a women’s issue? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  As I mentioned earlier, many families 
now depend on the woman component of the family to either be 
the sole breadwinner or certainly a significant partner in the 
economics of the family. 
 
And I equate pay equity to women getting the vote. I mean to 
me, it’s that significant of an issue. It’s a fundamental issue of 
equity. And of course any time you’re undergoing fundamental 
changes in society, it takes time because you’ve got attitudes. 
You’ve got systems. You’ve got pay structures. You’ve got a 
whole range of things that have come together to create that 
circumstance. 
 
But certainly I think equity is everybody’s issue because it 
affects the quality of life for the children, for the family. What 
that person is going to be able to participate in depends on their 
income. What the people who depend on them can participate 
in depends on their income. And if you have underpaid women 
raising children or families that are under-resourced, then 
there’s no doubt that that creates other difficulties. So I think 
this is an issue that the whole society should be concerned 
about. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I take it from your response then that you feel 
that there is . . . that it’s not just a women’s issue. And yet I 
imagine there’s some controversy with your colleagues in 
whether this department should be solely responsible for pay 
equity. I guess as representing women, I feel very slighted that  

women’s issues should be delegated to one Secretariat where 
we actually . . . it’s probably one of the lowest funded 
departments, and most of the problems and all the concerns that 
women have seem to be delegated to your department. 
 
Do you really feel like you can do . . . that your department, 
with the amount of funding you have, is going to be able to deal 
with all of these issues? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  If I could use a parallel of the Indian 
Metis Affairs Secretariat, one of the things that we’re very 
careful to do both in the Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 
and in the Women’s Secretariat is to not take over the program 
responsibilities of the other departments of government. What 
we’re intended to do is be a policy window, to create a focus, to 
create policy coordination around those issues but not to take 
over the responsibilities of other departments. 
 
So when we have a discussion on pay equity, for example, that 
would be a full-cabinet, full-caucus discussion, and we would 
arrive at our policy as a governmental position, not merely as a 
Women’s Secretariat position, although we may do some of the 
work in coordinating the information throughout government. 
But we also work with the Public Service Commission and the 
Crown Investments Corporation in working on these matters. 
 
So whereas we do the coordinating work, we don’t do all of the 
work, nor do we take full responsibility for the policy. We only 
take responsibility for articulating the decisions that need to be 
made in regards to that policy. I don’t know that I could explain 
it much better than that. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I had asked a number of questions through the 
Minister of Labour and was disappointed to hear that he was 
going to designate . . . I had to wait to ask the questions to the 
Secretariat, so maybe some of the other questions I can wait till 
he comes up because I guess we agree that the women’s issues 
are not just women’s issues. 
 
The Minister of Labour, I guess, has offered to answer some 
questions for the Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’ll just mention that I have every faith 
in the Minister of Labour’s support for all of these issues, but 
we collect the information on a more routine basis so it’s maybe 
a little more available to us in the format that you’d like. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’d be delighted to wait and ask him some of 
these other questions then. 
 
Madam Minister, can you explain to me how you’ve been able 
to effect some changes that will basically make a difference to 
some of the women’s concerns in this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Okay. The things that we’ve been 
involved in, in the last year, include things like the new labour 
standards legislation that improved working conditions and 
benefits for part-time workers, protection for domestic workers, 
and strengthen maternity and other family-related leaves. 
 
Under the new occupational health and safety legislation it’s the  



1244  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

first time this type of legislation has dealt with harassment. 
Under employment equity, it was extended to include all 
provincial Crowns and agencies as well as executive 
government, the requirement to have equity plans and 
implementation plans. 
 
The sexual harassment prevention program is actually education 
and training that’s established within the Women’s Secretariat. 
In child care, there’s been funding increases in subsidies to low 
income parents, over 1,000 new licensed spaces, and then a 
number of spaces for teens with infants. 
 
In violence, there’s The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, 
which was the first legislation of its kind in North America, and 
I’m very pleased. I think this Act has much exceeded even my 
expectations of it. I was actually discussing this with the then 
minister of Justice when this particular piece of legislation 
came in and I think it’s been particularly successful. 
 
In health, there’s the province-wide toll-free information line on 
sexual and reproductive health; the breast cancer screening 
program has been greatly expanded; the new women’s health 
centre at the Regina General Hospital; and then about 20 
million being spent for home care expansion and support for 
family care-givers. Because of course in the absence of 
government support for care-giving, most women will find that 
it tends to fall to them within the family unit. Although that is 
changing, but it still tends to be the way it is. 
 
There’s been more funding for the enforcement of child 
maintenance orders. And as well, welfare rates have been 
increased in some of the areas, and the supports for training for 
young, single parent women and other women dependent on 
assistance. 
 
In the human rights area, the Human Rights Code was amended 
to prohibit discrimination on three counts: sexual orientation, 
family status, and receipt of social assistance. Legal aid services 
were expanded. The unified family court model extended 
throughout the province, and the aboriginal courtworker 
program. And these would have all been things where we were 
represented on interdepartmental discussions to work 
cooperatively towards the best and most comprehensive, 
inclusive policy that government could develop. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Are there any 
men working in your department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I guess we had one, but we lost him. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Well I hate to be facetious, but I can see that 
with all the work you’re accomplishing, it must be just women 
in there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’d just like to speak for a minute about the 
women’s abuse program. I know that there is . . . the program is 
fairly new, and can you give me an idea of the work that’s been 
accomplished by the people that are within this program? 
 

(2100) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The government has a close working 
relationship, both interdepartmentally and in the community, 
with the Provincial Association of Transition Houses, Sexual 
Assault Services of Saskatchewan, the Provincial Partnership 
Committee on Family Violence. 
 
These are all groups that we work closely with to try to address 
the problems of abuse in the community. Now there’s also The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Act, and what has been 
particularly useful about this Act is all the training that’s been 
provided to law enforcement people in order for them to be able 
to implement the Act. And of course whenever you have that 
kind of an educational process, people not only learn about the 
process but they also learn about the problem. And I think if 
there’s anything that people have found particularly beneficial 
about this Act . . . I think there’s been about 220 people who 
have utilized the Act over the past year, but there’s also been a 
vast amount of training has gone into the community on this 
topic, based on that. 
 
There is a fund that provides compensation for victims of 
crime, which is a counselling and support program for children 
who witness domestic violence; a sexual assault centre, 
child-friendly activities and facilities, and methods to effect 
investigation, prosecution, and treatment in areas where there is 
child abuse. 
 
And as we’ve found obviously, over the past couple of years, 
these are things we still need to improve because it’s very 
difficult to  in any of these abuse situations  to not end up 
re-victimizing the victims. So I mean it’s a sensitive area where 
we really do have to put more work yet into how we approach 
dealing with these issues. 
 
In cooperation with community groups, we have developed 
guidelines on protocols of how to handle these kinds of issues. 
There’s been a community-based response to the abuse of older 
people because sometimes older people are a bit defenceless in 
their own care. 
 
We were a co-signer of the Regina Declaration on the Rights of 
Women Subjected to Violence, along with the other federal, 
provincial, and territorial governments, and that was focusing 
on the needs of women victims who come into contact with the 
justice system. As well, the Children’s Advocate to give more 
access to people concerned about children’s services within 
government. The family law division in the Court of Queen’s 
Bench, which is more sensitive to considering all family 
matters. 
 
And I think that would be sort of a broad overview. But there is 
an interdepartmental committee that works with a 
community-based integrated committee to keep improving the 
strategies and the protocols for dealing with violence and abuse. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. Is there just one coordinator 
or a couple that are heading up this division? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  No. What normally happens with these  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

interdepartmental committees is, depending where the funding 
comes for the particular program under discussion, there will be 
a lead department assigned who coordinates it. But all the work 
is done interdepartmentally. So each department would 
contribute its piece to the strategic resolution of the problem 
being addressed because that might vary from issue to issue, 
which departments might be involved in something. If 
something has more of a legal context, it might involve Justice 
and Social Services. Some other things might involve Health, 
Education, and Social Services. Some might involve Economic 
Development and Education. 
 
You know, it depends what the particular issues are, but there’s 
always a lead department assigned depending on where the 
primary responsibility lays for the issue being dealt with. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Does your dealing with these various programs 
and departments, does it require a lot of road trips, and are your 
staff on . . . do your staff do very much travelling inside the 
province or outside the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  No, within the Secretariat again, the 
focus of our work is largely within government, and so for the 
Secretariat itself not much travel is involved. For some of the 
other departments who work with community organizations and 
what not, they would likely be doing more travelling. 
 
Ms. Draude:  How do you coordinate what is happening 
within Saskatchewan with the other provinces, especially the 
closer ones? Do your policies work with theirs or are they 
similar? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  When the ministers responsible for the 
status of women get together, they do develop a joint agenda for 
action on the Canadian front and then that’s brought back to all 
the respective governments. And certainly on the matters that 
we jointly agree on, there would be some common efforts to 
move ahead on those matters. For other things which might 
have more of a founding in a department, for example 
maintenance orders, the Department of Justice would work with 
other provinces to set up reciprocal agreements and what not. 
But that would be once a program response has been decided 
on. 
 
At the policy level, it would be done more at the national level 
with the other ministers. For example, one of the things last 
year they decided to concentrate on is women in economic 
development. And one of the things the Women’s Secretariat 
has produced this year is a book on supports for women 
wanting to get involved in business. And you may in fact know 
women who would be interested in receiving that book. But 
we’ve just recently published a book for women interested in 
being involved in business and where they can get the 
information support they need for that. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Madam Minister. That was 
one of the questions . . . one of my next questions is women in 
business and what you are doing to support them. Can you give 
me an idea of what the percentage of business set-ups that are 
operated by women? Is that percentage growing? Are you 
dealing more with them in the last few years? 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There is a single window of access 
through a toll-free number in the province. Of course, that’s for 
all people. From 1981 to 1994 the number of Saskatchewan 
women who were self-employed increased from 11,000 to 
29,000. So that’s more than double. Women were initially 11.3 
per cent of the self-employed. From 1981 to 1994 the number 
of self-employed men decreased at the same time that the 
number of self-employed women was increasing dramatically, 
so that by 1994 women comprised 27.6 per cent of the 
self-employed in Saskatchewan. 
 
During this same time we also increased our portion of the total 
labour force from 38 to 44 per cent, so our increase in 
self-employment increased at a greater rate than our 
participation in the labour force. So that means as women 
entered the labour force, we entered more often in business than 
as being employed by someone else. According to StatsCanada, 
the number of self-employed women tripled between ’76 and 
’94. So it looks like in the area of business, watch out, because 
women are apparently on the move. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Madam Minister, and I’m 
not sure if you have these facts, but women whose businesses 
succeed are 2:1 compared to those of men in business. Working 
with the federal government, there’s the program where they 
have $5 million to aid women in business. Is the Women’s 
Secretariat working with the federal government and this 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  They have set up women’s 
entrepreneurial centres but I’m told that they consulted really 
not at all with us other than a brief request for a comment of 
what did we think of it in the beginning. However they do use 
our materials, and as I mentioned, we have produced a book of 
all the various supports and funding sources. 
 
As well, I might mention that the Department of Economic 
Development has had a program for small loan co-ops and I 
know women in the city who are members of these small loan 
co-ops, where they form a loan co-op. And I think it’s up to a 
$5,000 loan to the various women are members of the co-op 
and they support each other in the business endeavours that they 
do. So, for example, one woman I know used it buy computer 
equipment so she could do her own home business service and 
what not. And that’s one of the mechanisms that’s used. But as 
far as the entrepreneurial centres, the province has not had 
much of a direct role in it at all. 
 
Ms. Draude:  What percentage of the larger projects are 
women involved in? I know quite often we see the smaller 
businesses where the loans for $5,000 sort of actually make or 
break the business. But the megaprojects that we see 
government so often interested in, I’m wondering if you see 
more of an increase of women on those boards and as directors 
of those companies. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think generally all I could say is that 
might be a question better put to the chamber of commerce But 
certainly wherever women are involved in enterprises they 
would be as welcome to apply and be considered for any 
programs that government may have as anyone else. Of course,  



1246  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

our deputy minister of Economic Development has most 
recently been a woman, and the head of SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) as well. So certainly, you know, 
women are there. They’re in those kinds of roles. There’s many 
women who have accounting . . . if you look at the graduates 
from accounting school these days, most of the people winning 
the awards and the large amount of graduates tend to be 
women. So I think that presence is definitely there, whether or 
not the business community is taking full opportunity of it. 
 
I know that some banks like the CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank 
of Commerce) and what not make very definite efforts to work 
in those directions. But I really think that’s a policy of those 
private sector employers. We don’t have any requirement for 
them to have those policies. But wherever they do and wherever 
that makes up their workforce, certainly they would be as 
eligible for any of the loans or grants as anybody else is. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. Is the Women’s Secretariat 
involved in program definitions or in setting up day cares? Are 
they involved in the actual decisions of government when it 
comes to publicly funded day cares? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes. We have nothing to do with the 
actual operations. We would have again a policy function. And, 
for example, if the federal government was to put forward a 
policy on child care, we would certainly be part of reviewing 
whether we thought that policy was either useful or applicable 
to the Saskatchewan situation, and whether in fact it was 
something we might wish to participate in. But we have no 
operational program responsibilities in that specific sense. 
 
Ms. Draude:  And the University of Saskatchewan, the 
programs for women’s education studies  it’s not a 
department, it’s a unit  are you working to improve the status 
of this area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  No. Our only role in there would be 
maybe providing resource support to various activities they’re 
carrying out. But that’s really under the purview of the 
university and their board of directors, so it’s . . . board of 
governors. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, the mandate of the Women’s 
Secretariat is so broad, and there’s so many areas that I feel that 
there isn’t the public profile that there should be, and I’m sure 
that your funding isn’t allowing it. 
 
I’m wondering if you’re considering changing the mission or 
the vision statement of the Secretariat to elevate and bring to 
the forefront of the public minds the importance of the 
Secretariat. Or is it something that the government is trying to 
decide if it’s better off just combined within the Department of 
Labour or maybe making a men’s secretariat as well? 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well we like to think that one’s already 
firmly in place, kind of across the piece. But it is difficult 
because, like I say, it is largely an internal function it performs. 
And it’s like Executive Council to cabinet, where there’s an  

internal policy and research function. Although it’s very 
valuable and very needed, it’s not a public service agency. 
 
Certainly there’s many people who understand the role that we 
play in trying to bring their views forward into the bureaucracy, 
but they’re not necessarily terribly vocal or people who would 
necessarily think that they had to do that because basically they 
have a good working relationship with the Secretariat, and 
they’re satisfied to the job that we’re doing, representing them 
within the policy program areas of government. 
 
For example, we meet with aboriginal women’s groups, 
immigrant women’s groups, farm women’s groups, and try to 
bring all these perspectives into the interdepartmental policy 
work that we do. But I mean, you’re right; there is a great 
difficulty in knowing how you get any profile. 
 
We do have a large number of publications that are available 
publicly on everything from preventing harassment, working 
family, the Women’s Directory, action on women’s equality. 
And people who are counsellors and work in different areas tell 
me they make use of these materials. 
 
But again, I mean, you identify a problem. I don’t know; if you 
have any suggestions on how to cure that, let me know. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, the aboriginal women and 
women who are members of visible minorities face even 
different barriers in today’s workplace. Are there any programs 
in place that help the aboriginal women and women of minority 
groups to overcome the stigma that they face in the workplace 
today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The one major initiative we have is the 
employment equity program that goes across all the Crowns and 
departments of government. 
 
But the other thing I might mention is I met recently with a 
group of immigrant people  men and women  who were 
interested in how they might bring their views more directly to 
government. And so what we did is we looked throughout 
government to see where the places to hook them up. So part of 
our job would be to hook them up to the departments and the 
places that can hear their views directly and include them in 
their policy development and program development. Because I 
think it’s much better if they speak directly to the people that 
are affecting their circumstance rather than speaking through us. 
 
But I would see my job as minister, and the Women’s 
Secretariat job, is to make sure they’re linked up to government 
and that they’re connected so that their problems are heard and 
are addressed. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. How much money is 
allocated to these specific causes? The source publication 
outlines these issues as important ones so I’d like to know 
where the funding is coming from to deal with these problems. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I wasn’t maybe totally clear about the 
question. If you’re asking about the publications, we could  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

certainly give you a communications amount. But if what 
you’re asking about is the amount allocated to dealing with 
each of the problem areas, that would almost be difficult to do 
because, for example, take something like domestic violence. 
There’s many departments who are responding to that in 
different ways and so you’d have to be able to figure out the 
amounts across all the areas of government. 
 
So in a way it’s a little bit like trying to figure out exactly 
what’s spent in the Indian and Metis Affairs portfolio. It’s 
difficult because it’s . . . people are citizens of the province but 
then there’s also special programs. So there would be one level 
of funding that exists as we all get a share of services and 
programs of the provincial government; and then another 
portion would be where there’s special, targeted programs. 
 
So like I say, if you’re interested in the publishing amount, I 
could give you that . . . is this it here? The overall amount for 
the communications budget was in the contractual services 
involving developing the different materials, was 50,000. We 
did spend 10,000 particularly on a board-staff handbook 
specific to aboriginal women with appropriate, I guess, social 
and historical references because some of the other materials 
aren’t as relevant in that community and we did contract with a 
woman to work on that particular handbook which has now 
been completed and published, made available. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. How do you decide which of 
the issues that are dealing with native women are going to be 
looked at under the Women’s Secretariat now and what will be 
looked at under Indian and Metis Affairs? And I’m thinking of, 
do you have department staff that actually would go to the 
North and meet with some of these women to truly understand 
some of the problems they have there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  In the particular instance of the 
development of the handbook, they had had a particular goal of 
their own to get their organizations in better shape so they had 
asked for some support to do that. And really we have no 
master plan. If we feel, in discussion with them, that this is a 
priority, that they’ve thought it out, that it’s a broad-based 
priority of their organization, if we have the resources in that 
budget year then it’s something we would consider. 
 
Now when it comes to, again, direct abuse in violence services, 
child care services, and what not, we would see our main 
responsibility to be linking people up to the appropriate 
department, because again the Secretariat is a window into 
government where people who aren’t sure who to go to, who to 
talk to, it’s a starting point for their dialogue with government. 
And it would be our job to then move them into the appropriate 
areas of government to actually get attention to the particular 
issue that they’re raising. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I don’t like to think of farm women as a visible 
minority but they seem to be a group of people that are 
overlooked at this time. Farm women have special needs and 
one of the items that I’m thinking about is the farm fuel tax 
rebate that I brought up in the House a while ago, and I was told 
that it was a human rights issue. I find it hard to decide where 
these questions should be put and also feeling bad for the  

women of Saskatchewan that our needs are delegated to the 
human rights. Are you working or pressuring the Department of 
Economic Development or Agriculture to ensure that policies 
like the farm fuel tax rebate are actually brought to the forefront 
and women are looked at on an equal basis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  In those areas we would have provided 
broader support to the organizations in pursuing their own 
issues. 
 
And so, for example, we recently were involved in helping to 
support an SCN (Saskatchewan Communications Network 
Corporation) link-up of farm women to discuss some of their 
issues. And it would be more that kind of thing rather than 
pursuing a specific thing. On that issue we would certainly link 
them up with knowing how to address that issue and who they 
would have to speak to in order to address it. 
 
But I will not claim that farm women have been as well 
represented in the discussion as some other women have, and 
again, for all the reasons you mention, of access, location, etc. 
But it’s something that the Women’s Secretariat has set as a 
goal, to have better ability to have those discussions with farm 
women and to bring their perspectives into the general policy 
mix. 
 
I would have to say that for many years anybody but . . . I don’t 
know how else to describe it, but very mainstream concerns 
were not well represented within the discussion because, of 
course, people who have other kinds of concerns often are a bit 
powerless, a bit voiceless, and a bit short of cash in order to 
make their views known. 
 
So it does require special efforts to outreach into communities 
that haven’t had as much access to government policy, to make 
sure that their views are included. And as we made a special 
effort in this last year to do some work with businesswomen, so 
do we still need to do some more work, I think, with rural 
women. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I’m hoping that you will 
stand up for these women that need to have their voice heard 
and not just put them in touch with another department official. 
It gets really frustrating and I think it’s one of the reasons why 
we don’t have the profile the Secretariat needs because they 
don’t have the opportunity to actually make a difference. They 
can only refer all the time. 
 
One of the other concerns I have is the downsizing in 
government. A study that I have seen has shown that often 
women are victimized by the government downsizing. I’m 
wondering if you can tell me, with this recent budget and the 
lay-offs that are . . . job positions that are lost, how many of 
them are women. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  It would be difficult, actually, on the 
lay-offs, because there’s bumping going on and anybody who’s 
a unionized employee has actually quite a wide scope of where 
they can bump into other positions. So that would be very 
difficult to know. We do have some workforce analysis on the 
existing workforce of government, if you’re interested in that. 



1248  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

For the representation in management positions within 
government for persons . . . okay, for persons of aboriginal 
ancestry, persons with disabilities, members of visible minority 
groups, and women  the total representation within 
government in management is 32.7 per cent. For the permanent 
staff it’s . . . The workforce analysis . . . I’ll run down the 
female just by occupational group. For administrative, fiscal 
and clerical, it is 80 per cent, and that’s the issue we talked 
about earlier, female-dominated classes. Engineering and 
applied sciences, 4.2 per cent. Agriculture and environmental 
resources, 8.4 per cent. Inspection and regulatory, 28 per cent. 
Education, 52 per cent. Medical and related, 73 per cent. Social 
services, 45 per cent. And trades, labour, and operational 
services, 21 per cent. 
 
And I’ll just mention that that’s why whenever I talk to people 
about pay equity, I say that there’s a number of areas that have 
to be addressed because obviously you can’t be an engineer 
unless you’ve taken engineer’s training and similar to other 
professions. So it’s important that there’s a broad range of 
educational opportunities, a broad range of promotional 
opportunities. And it’s important that we make sure that within 
the education system that that awareness is increased so that we 
have a better representation through all the occupational 
groupings. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I was trying to determine if 
the salaries in comparison from the Women’s Secretariat to 
other departments . . . I see that the staff of 13 people, full-time 
employees, works out to about $51,000. And yet with what I 
compare it to other departments this seems to be below normal 
or near the lowest amount. Can you explain that? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again it’s got to do with the whole 
issue of occupational groupings. 
 
Most of the women who work within the Women’s Secretariat 
would be working in policy analyst type of positions that 
require a fairly significant level of education and background. 
And I think that the figures are a bit skewed there because it’s a 
unit that is particularly put together for those purposes, so it 
would require mostly people who have a fair  like I say again 
 a fair bit of training and experience in those areas. 
 
Probably if you compared a similar male occupational grouping 
of people in a specialized professional area compared to a more 
general occupational grouping, you’d find the same differential. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, with only $149,000 allocated 
to run the programs and policy initiatives that deal with equality 
and equity in the workplace, it seems obvious that it’s not a true 
priority for your government. Can you please tell me how the 
Secretariat plans to adequately educate the public on the 
importance of equity and some of the other women . . . the 
issues we’ve discussed with less than $150,000 a year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well I guess I’ll give the same answer 
to you that I give to a lot of people who believe that government 
is responsible for everything. I think that all people  

in the community are responsible for this education and I think 
all people, no matter what organization they’re in, what church 
they’re in, what business they’re in, are responsible to — what 
union they’re in — are responsible to make sure that these 
things exist within their own organization, within their own 
workplace, within their own church. Government will never be 
able to be the sole arbiter of people’s attitudes, opinions, 
practices, etc. So if it’s something that we hold as a value for 
our society, we all have to get involved in making those 
changes. 
 
And I don’t . . . I think for people to abrogate their 
responsibility to government . . . government can facilitate that; 
it can set a tone; it can provide some resources. But at the end 
of the day, it’s not a thing that governments can ever do by 
themselves when you’re talking about advancing social change. 
It really has to be embraced by everyone who cares about it and 
thinks that society will be improved by it. So we can do our part 
within the limited resources of government, but I think it’s the 
kind of thing that you and your colleagues and everybody else 
has to get involved in before a real, broad-based social change 
would ever take place. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, most of the new legislation 
dealing with the labour standards in the workplace, especially 
for part-time workers, makes it look like women’s issues are 
indeed labour issues. Did the policies and programs come into 
place by mutual decision making and consultation with the 
Women’s Secretariat and the Department of Labour? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  There was two areas that the Women’s 
Secretariat was more involved in with the labour standards. One 
was in funding specific consultations with women so that those 
views were well expressed within the process and also working 
particularly on the domestic workers issue because this was an 
issue where nobody had really paid much attention to the 
domestic workers’ situation so that was an area that the 
Women’s Secretariat focused on. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I have one more question to 
ask you this evening and that is I’d like . . . will you tell me 
what you would like to see the profile of the Women’s 
Secretariat be by the end of this decade? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  That is indeed a very sweeping 
question and being the women that we are in the Women’s 
Secretariat we will likely be sitting down in the next month or 
so to work collectively on that topic and also at the next 
conference of the ministers responsible for the status of women. 
But certainly our goal is that women would have not only equal 
opportunity but equal results, in both political, social, and 
economic realms. 
 
And I think at that point we could say a job well done but until 
then I guess we just keep plugging. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I ask the member from Moosomin 
. . . we had planned on starting this at 9:30. Do you have one or 
two questions you want to ask before we go on to SIMAS . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . All right. I move we report progress. 
 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

General Revenue Fund 
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat 

Vote 25 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. This evening 
sitting to my left is Gord Nystuen, the secretary of the 
Secretariat; Ernie Lawten, assistant secretary, Indian Affairs; 
Donavon Young, assistant secretary, Metis Affairs; and John 
Reid, policy and planning. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just want to 
welcome the minister and her officials here this evening and to 
thank them for the time they’re taking for this particular part of 
the estimates. 
 
Before we begin I just want to give just a brief overview for the 
purpose of the people in the House, Mr. Chair, in reference to 
the area I wish to be talking mostly on and this will be on the 
Metis side of the minister’s department. I will not elaborate on 
the Indian at this point in time until a later date. 
 
But to begin questions, for all purposes, what’s your 
interpretation and your understanding of what a Metis person 
is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  The definition that we’ve used as a 
working definition is someone with Indian ancestry who 
self-identifies as a Metis person and who has some acceptance 
in the Metis community as a Metis person. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. The mandate of this Secretariat is 
to promote and facilitate partnerships between aboriginal and 
non-aboriginal peoples and organizations. Can you explain how 
this can continue with decreasing budgets and ever-increasing 
problems in aboriginal communities due to the years of 
inadequate funding and the lack of social and economic 
programs for these people and especially the Metis people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  One of the mistakes that I think 
governments made for many years was that the answer to every 
problem was money. Now certainly in the case of very poor 
communities that you’re talking about money has to be part of 
the equation, but there’s also a lot of importance in the building 
of relationships that lead to business development, lead to 
employment. And there’s a number of partnership agreements 
that have been signed around the province that I think are 
leading the way in terms of new ways that people are coming 
together to solve the kinds of problems you’re talking about. 
 
There is a greater interest at the municipal level to meet with 
aboriginal people because municipalities are becoming more 
aware of the mix of populations within their boundaries. Some 
of the . . . both Indian bands and Metis are making 
arrangements with resource companies. There’s co-management 
agreements being developed. And in some cases people are 
making direct agreements without government intervention  

with resource companies. 
 
And so I think part of the change is not only one in putting 
direct money into programs, but it’s in building relationships 
that can lead to economic opportunities, jobs, and in the case, 
for example, of agreements that have been signed between 
health boards and aboriginal people, they’ve made an 
agreement for the health board to work directly to hire more 
aboriginal people into their workforce; to assist in making sure 
that people get the training that’s required; to include people 
more in policy development, program development, and in 
service delivery; and even to assist in identifying economic 
opportunities. 
 
For example, such as the building of a special care home for 
people of aboriginal ancestry where it would be an economic 
opportunity where the health board, for example, might 
guarantee to place people in that facility. But it would be 
owned, built, and staffed by aboriginal interests or a corporation 
that might be set up. 
 
So I think what’s developing is a different way of getting at 
some of this stuff. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Just for the sake of the House, in reference to 
your department, what’s the significant difference between the 
Indian and the Metis people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Certainly within the constitution, 
there’s a generalized recognition of Indian and Metis and Inuit 
people, but there’s no doubt that one of the, I guess, significant 
advantages that the first nations have is that they have an 
identified land base. 
 
They have a definite political entity in terms of the 72 bands in 
Saskatchewan and they have a long history of land-based 
self-governance, so I think just that fact in itself and the fact 
that the federal government accepted its fiduciary responsibility 
for first nations but has not for Metis, has led to quite a 
difference in circumstance based on those factors. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Are there any other significant differences 
beside the ones you mentioned here tonight? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Probably one of the other largest ones I 
failed to mention was the fact that first nations have treaties. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  In reference to the response, what portion of 
the money allocated through your department goes to the 
northern half of this province? How much goes to the southern 
half? How much goes to the Metis? And how much goes to the 
treaty? I think you’re going to find a significant imbalance here. 
 
(2145) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’m pleased to report that we’re 
actually not doing too badly. Of course, when it comes to the 
first nations, one of the major expenditures we have is the treaty 
land entitlements, which is the settlement of long-outstanding 
land obligations. And northern Saskatchewan has received the 
lion’s share of the settlement monies, so north and south, in  



1250  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

terms of those settlements, that comes very well. With the 
balance of the limited funding that SIMAS actually directly 
delivers, about 60 per cent goes to first nations and 40 per cent 
to Metis, which considering the population differentials, is not 
too bad of a breakdown at all. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  What criterion are these allocations based 
on? Again, they’re not obviously based on the Indian and Metis 
population. So what are they based on because, you know, 
really there is no significant records in terms of populations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes. There’s basically three separate 
categories of funding. One is organizational funding and for 
first nations that would largely be through the FSIN (Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and through the Metis through 
the MNS (Metis Nation of Saskatchewan). And as well we do 
provide funding to Metis women, Aboriginal Women’s 
Council, and Indian women’s, because they find that sometimes 
without extra resourcing they are not able to represent their 
concerns within the structures of their organizations. 
 
The second area is employment development which is a 
status-blind program. And that basically involves things like the 
health partnership agreements where a staff person from 
SIMAS goes out and encourages large employers within the 
community to make a commitment to bringing aboriginal 
people both into the workforce, and into the economical 
development opportunities, and into the policy and programs of 
their organization. And I feel we’ve had actually, over the last 
year, great success in having people within the community 
commit themselves to these objectives and put resources in 
place to actually make it happen. 
 
And then there’s a very small portion that goes to service 
delivery, and this is directed largely to the large urbans. And 
that would include things like the Metis management authority 
and the tribal council delivery bodies within the urban areas. 
Although there is some small amounts of program dollars, very 
small, based on merit, that goes to things like a little bit of 
supports to Batoche, to the Indian veterans, Indian and Metis 
veterans, to those kinds of things where there’s been special 
celebrations or special acknowledgements. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I sincerely realize the, you know, the 
provincial perspective that you’re responsible for as Minister of 
Indian and Metis Affairs, but I’d like to kind of concentrate in 
my particular area a bit for a few questions and then we can 
bounce all over the province if we’d like. 
 
I’ve got a list of population bases from the communities of the 
west side, and of course, when we say communities we’re 
including Metis, and off-reserve Indians, and non-status Indians 
in the non-aboriginal population. And this is from the CREDO 
(community regional economic development organization) 
information that I requested. 
 
According to the CREDO region populations, in particular for 
my area there’s 8,779 people living in what I term as Metis 
communities compared to the band membership of 3,334. Now 
that’s approximately if not three times the population, yet we’re 
not seeing the adequate funding coming from your department.  

Can I give a copy of this to your department? 
 
And I guess my question is why are the Metis of the north-west 
simply not seeing any adequate financial support from this 
government when we have an Indian and Metis department. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’ll thank you for recognizing that you 
got the figures from CREDO because of course that’s a body 
that our government has established to help facilitate economic 
development. I will mention that we don’t fund constituency by 
constituency. We would be looking at the entire North. And you 
can’t contrast really the spending between Metis and first 
nations because we don’t fund the first nations. The federal 
government does, who I might add has vastly deeper pockets 
than we do and has spent vastly more money than we could ever 
contemplate, even best-case scenario, on any kind of a 
province-wide basis. Certainly we need to keep paying attention 
to being as equitable as we can but some of the solutions for the 
North will be found in developing the economic development 
capacity and not necessarily in direct transfers of cash. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Yes, I think this has been an ongoing battle 
in terms of who is responsible for the Metis people, is being 
transferred from Ottawa back to Regina  it’s a federal 
responsibility, is a provincial responsibility. And what we see 
here is, according to the Estimates here, is you are in essence 
reducing your support for aboriginal organizations and issue, on 
page 76, almost in half. And I was just wondering how much of 
that cut was to the Metis aspect of your organization versus the 
Indian. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Our budgets still aren’t finalized but 
our goal certainly is to have parity in the funding. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess tonight we’ll leave to the next 
questions. Will finances that are allocated to the Metis nation be 
reallocated and redefined once a enumeration of the Metis 
population of this province is completed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  A large motivation behind the 
enumeration, I think, is more for the purposes of MNS being 
able to identify who their new . . . their own members are, and 
who exists in terms of their political realm within the province. 
 
We don’t, at this point, allocate the funding particularly based 
on population. We provide the same services to all persons 
living in the North, and the fact that they are Metis would not 
result in them getting less funding .Certainly they may, because 
of some special education initiatives and what not, receive 
more, but certainly not less. And I’m not quite sure how that 
question would practically affect most areas of programing. If 
perhaps we got into a debate with the federal government where 
they were actually willing to pay for some of their share of the 
responsibility, then the numbers would become more pertinent 
to that discussion. But we don’t currently base our funding to 
Metis based on numbers, so having more numbers would not 
change that. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I think, Madam Minister, that you’re 
confusing me a bit here when you say we don’t really look at  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

specific regions, we don’t look at numbers of Metis, we have to 
look at the federal government issue. It’s all becoming very 
confusing to me. And I think the key thing here is what you’re 
saying to me this evening is that it does not matter from the 
financial perspective whether there is 10,000, 50,000, or 80,000 
Metis living in this province when it comes to financing from 
your department in support of the Metis people. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I think that’s a misrepresentation of 
what I’ve said. What I’ve said is that Metis people are citizens 
of the province and we don’t increase or reduce their funding 
based on the number they are. They are included in the total 
count of people in the province, so the funding that goes to the 
North would be based on people, not on race, not because 
they’re Metis or any other race. They’re just citizens of the 
province and therefore they get their funding accordingly. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Well then shouldn’t your department be 
called Indian and people secretariat as opposed to Indian and 
Metis? I think the key thing here is, Madam Minister, with all 
due respect, is the fact that there is very little support for the 
Metis people within your government. And I think the funding 
for supportive aboriginal organizations and issues, as I 
mentioned, has been cut from 1.09 million to 550,000. And I 
ask which organizations are going to lose their funding and 
what avenues are available for them to make up the loss of 
funding? There are no avenues. And am I correct in saying that 
the major cut is coming at the expense of the Metis side of your 
department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’ll restate two things. When we fund 
organizations that are not Metis, we don’t fund them on the 
basis of the numbers who are not Metis and so there would be 
no reason why we would fund Metis organizations based on the 
number who are Metis. We don’t fund any other group in the 
province in that way. So I think it’s a misrepresentation to 
suggest that the funding that we get from Ottawa for 
equalization payments, for transfer payments on health, 
education, and social services . . . those are based on total 
provincial numbers and are not broken down in the way that 
you suggest. So people would be included in those total figures. 
 
And you asked a second question about the funding. I 
mentioned already that when we divide up the funding in the 
department, it’ll be done equitably, likely 50/50 Indian and 
Metis. And even though we haven’t finalized our budget, that 
would certainly be our goal. Even though the numbers would 
not necessarily support that breakdown, that would be our goal, 
is to have an equitable split. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you for the response, and again I’ll 
state that this particular segment of my questioning is based on 
a Metis perspective and of course, being the fair politician I am, 
we will also put a similar effort into the Indian and first nations 
estimates section of this particular part of our schedule. 
 
I guess the other question is: salary expenses for policy and 
coordination are up by 339,000. How many people work in this 
department? What’s the breakdown in terms of Indian versus 
Metis, and what’s their average salaries? 
 

(2200) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’d just like to mention to the member 
before I respond to his question, the numbers that you gave me 
for your constituency being over 8,000 Metis and 3,000 first 
nations. I hope you don’t represent them in that proportion 
when you’re also representing them, that because there’s 8,000 
they deserve twice your attention than the other folks do. 
 
The comment on your particular view of the department, there’s 
22 people. Eleven are aboriginal  6 first nations, 5 Metis  
with an average salary of 35,000. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Again, continuing to dedicate this particular 
segment to the Metis questions, what kind of policies are being 
worked on at the present moment, with respect to the Metis 
peoples and their effort to finally have some economic and 
social justice offered to them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Okay, our department would largely 
focus its attention on our bilateral processes and our tripartite 
agreement with the federal government. So what happens is we 
would have a bilateral meeting with various ministers of the 
government, meet with the Metis Nation, and we would agree 
on a common work plan for work that we wanted to 
accomplish. 
 
Matters specific to northern economic development would now 
be dealt with through the minister responsible for Northern 
Affairs. But we would certainly have a role wherever we could 
in facilitating the discussions that the Metis Nation indicates to 
us that they wish to be engaged in. 
 
For example, we’re involved right now in negotiating their 
portion of the casino revenues from the associated entities fund, 
and the method by which those funds would be allocated and 
distributed. And we have representatives, and they have 
representatives, who sit on that discussion. But our agenda 
would be something that we mutually develop and then develop 
a work plan and proceed with it. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  In 1994-95, 29 organizations were funded 
through grants to the Indian and Metis organizations. How 
many organizations do you expect will be funded in 1996-97? 
And who are these organizations? Where are they from? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Although the budget has certainly the 
appearance of less money coming from this area, this is not the 
only area where money comes from. And one of the factors 
that’s been taken into account is the money through the 
revenue-sharing agreement with first nations and the associated 
entities fund revenue-sharing agreement with the Metis. 
 
Now that will certainly flow new money into those 
communities, which much of it could be used in ways that were 
previously funded through Indian and Metis Affairs. We do not, 
at the beginning of the year, pre-select everyone who would get 
funding because over the year people send in requests for 
various things and they have to be considered on their own 
merit. But again our goal would be to be equitable in the 
distribution of that money. 



1252  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

Mr. Belanger:  What are Indian and Metis management 
authorities? And who is employed by them? And what do they 
do for the Metis people of the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  One of the things that we’ve been 
struggling with, in the urban areas, is how to adequately address 
all the issues of the large numbers of people who may have 
moved either from reserves or remote rural or northern 
locations into the urban areas, and how to address both the 
relevance and the accessibility of urban services to these folks. 
 
And there’s four management authorities existing in the 
province for the purpose of really trying to both figure out and 
directly deliver some of the services to urban aboriginal people. 
Now two of those organizations are tribal councils, one is 
Metis, and the other one is an aboriginal group that’s made up 
of a mixture of first nations, Metis, and non-aboriginal people, 
really with the intent being they’re working on evolving models 
of how to deliver services within urban areas that are 
meaningful and accessible to people. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I certainly applaud your effort in regard to 
looking at services being delivered and developed by the Indian 
and Metis organizations. Really without money and without a 
solid commitment behind that plan, I don’t suspect we’ll see 
any success in that particular model. 
 
Goes back to my second question, you know, kind of related to 
this, is funding to Indian and Metis management authorities has 
also been cut in this year’s proposed budget by almost 
one-third. Can you tell me which authorities are losing their 
funding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I will mention that the picture’s not 
quite as bleak as you paint. One of the groups who has been 
particularly successful has been the Saskatoon Tribal Council, 
and recently through an agreement with the Department of 
Social Services, they’ve taken over responsibility for delivering 
services. And with that responsibility went 200,000 in funding. 
So they are doing very well and working closely with all 
community organizations in Saskatoon to create a better service 
delivery system in that city. 
 
Now again consistent with my previous answers, we have not 
come to any final decisions about the funding for this year in 
the urban authorities, but it is a very difficult question because 
of course it’s tied up not only with issues of self-governance, 
but it’s also tied up with issues of who has traditionally been 
providing those services in the absence of any firm decisions on 
self-governance. 
 
And as well you may know, Mr. Member, from being involved 
for so long in these areas, that there is also sometimes some 
considerable internal organizational strife that gets in the way of 
solving some of these problems. So this is an area where we’re 
really all having to be kind of patient and see if we can work 
our way through to something which . . . the first concern of 
everyone involved is the well-being of the people living in the 
community. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I certainly echo your sentiments in regards to  

the aspirations of how we must work together. I guess in 
essence, do you have a guestimate that your department works 
to in relation to the total treaty population versus the total Metis 
population? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well at this moment, you know, again 
aside from particular features like the treaty land entitlement 
which is an agreement based on a long-standing obligation to 
provide land entitlements, the rest of the money, the balance of 
the money, I would say goes in larger amount to Metis, based 
on population as we have any estimate of it, than it does to the 
estimate of first nations. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  The other question is, could you also provide 
an outline of the mandate and the goals of the aboriginal 
employment development program, which is controlled by 
Metis, and which is controlled by first nations? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  As I mentioned earlier, that particular 
function is status blind. Its objective is to strategically link both 
first nations and Metis people with large employers so that we 
can enhance both the economic development and the 
employment opportunities. 
 
You may be familiar with our employee who’s responsible for 
that, a Mr. Wayne McKenzie, who has certainly a long history 
within the Metis community and I think is just a real good 
example of a real go-getter on behalf of his community and 
behalf of the objectives that he’s committed to. I’m very 
pleased to have someone of his calibre pursuing this work for 
us. And he has successfully helped us to conclude, is it four 
now, health agreements — four health agreements with large 
health districts within the province, one of them being an 
amalgamation of health districts on the east side, and as well is 
now working on two large projects which, until they’re 
completed, I can’t really say who the discussions are with. But a 
very large employer in the North will be of significance to 
yourself and also with a large, major union in the province. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Again, I echo the sentiments and I support 
you in your efforts. Then why is this program, if so successful, 
which is severely underfunded in my opinion, is also suffering a 
further cut of $70,000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  In actual fact, although in our . . . in 
every department’s contribution to the need to make up the 
$114 million we lost from the federal government, there’s not a 
department in government that wasn’t touched by this, and this 
is one of them. So that’s just the repercussion of the federal 
cut-backs and that’s where it falls. 
 
The one thing I might mention, because a theme that keeps 
coming up in this discussion is that the Metis are somehow 
unfairly treated in relation to the first nations, you really can’t 
ignore the role of the federal government in this, because like I 
say, first nations have had direct access to federal government 
pockets for a long time and the province puts in what it can put 
in, but it really can’t compare with the resources that have 
flowed from the federal government. 
 
Now we do have a tripartite agreement where the federal  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

government agrees to cost-share with us money that’s spent for 
Metis, but they have not accepted their constitutional 
responsibility under section 35 to recognize the equal status of 
Metis to first nations. 
 
There has been a recognition, due to court cases of the Inuit in 
the far North, but so far the federal government has not 
acknowledged that. So really the problem is not one of the 
province making choices between first nations and Metis, but a 
differential between the money available from the federal 
government and from the provincial government to these two 
separate groups. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I certainly appreciate your response in 
relation to that and a lot of your responses, and I’m flying at 
you from all angles here and it’s not done intentionally. I had it 
all kind of formulated. 
 
I think the key thing here is when we talk about constitutional 
obligation, you’re saying to the House that if the federal 
government is not meeting up with their responsibility to Metis 
versus the treaty . . . And by no means am I trying to 
differentiate between the funding of the treaty versus the Metis. 
 
I think it’s certainly commended the first nations in the 
province are doing a tremendous amount of work. I’m just 
saying that the Metis should have the same opportunity afforded 
to them. So in reference to that point, how is it then that Alberta 
is able to set up Metis Settlements Act without complicating the 
whole process and without complicating the Constitution of 
Canada, and yet Saskatchewan cannot? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Two things as we discussed this 
amongst ourselves seem to be emerging. One is the different 
historical circumstances of decisions that were made as far back 
as 1930 on these matters. And Alberta went in one direction; 
Saskatchewan went in another. I think the other one is that 
currently we have been discussing a whole range of ways of 
approaching this issue, but as long as the MNS has us in court 
with a large land claim in the North, one of the policies of our 
government is we don’t negotiate where litigation is taking 
place. So we’re at a bit of a catch-22 on that one at the moment. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Okay. I’ll go back to the . . . I’d like to share 
another pamphlet with you, if I may, and I’d ask one of the 
pages, you know, to get a Xeroxed copy. And it talks about 
the. . . it’s a pamphlet here from the New Democrats, talks 
about our commitment to the Indian people. It’s time to fulfil 
the rights of Indian people . . . the land and self-government. It 
talks about our commitment to Metis people. It’s time to 
recognize the rights of Metis people and I quote: 
 

The New Democrat government will work with Metis 
people to address the outstanding issues of land and 
economic development. At the starting point, we will 
negotiate with Metis people a new Metis Act. 

 
Can you give me an update on what type of negotiations that 
you do have with the Metis Act and why is it taking so long?  

This pamphlet incidentally is from 1991, I believe. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Actually I have a copy of that pamphlet 
in my drawer. So I mean you can copy it if you want, but I have 
that one. I look at it frequently just to make sure that 
everything’s . . . if the universe is unfolding as it should. 
 
On the particular issue of the Metis Act, it is a matter for our 
bilateral table, and both the MNS and ourselves have been 
doing work on this matter to look at what the various options 
are, because they run the whole gambit from an Act that would 
deal primarily with organizational matters in the way that the 
MNS organizes themselves politically, to things that might 
encompass matters of culture and identity. And so there’s a 
great deal of scope which could or could not be included in 
such an Act. 
 
And the other part of an Act like that is it really does require 
both the government and MNS considering seriously what type 
of provincial legislation might for ever change their 
entitlements as they may or may not eventually be legally 
endorsed from the point of view of their presence under section 
35.(1). If they were ever to decide to legally challenge their 
exclusion, the fact of the province doing a certain type of Act 
may then preclude the federal government or take them off the 
hook, if in fact the MNS ever had the desire to put them firmly 
on that hook. 
 
So I say that what could be done within an Act, could be 
everything from an organizational Act to something that’s much 
broader in scope, and it would be more of a cultural type of Act. 
But that whole discussion is taking place, and will take place 
until there’s something that we feel that we can mutually agree 
on, both respecting the interests of the Metis and the public 
interest in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you again. So might I understand that 
you will not be dealing with the Metis people, under the Metis 
Act, for fear it may compromise your position in reference to 
the constitution of this country in terms of letting the federal 
government off the hook. And the second part of the question is 
that you will also not talk about Metis settlements with the 
Metis, Metis settlements in the province, because you are also 
being challenged in court by the Metis people. Is that a correct 
assumption to make on both counts? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  This is not special for Metis people. 
We do not negotiate with anybody we’re in the midst of 
litigation with. It doesn’t matter who they are, any shape, size, 
etc. 
 
On the question of the Act, this is not just an issue for the 
government, this is an issue for MNS, whether in fact they wish 
to give up that potential for putting the federal government on 
the hook. This is a very deep consideration for them as well — 
this is not something that we have invented or imagined — this 
is a significant issue for them to consider as well. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I would suggest, Madam Minister, that based 
on those facts that I gave you, based on the CREDO that your 
government has established, the population base and what not,  



1254  Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

that perhaps a good start in terms of negotiating these type of 
settlements and these type of discussions would be in the 
north-west. And of course the north-west is in the Pinehouse, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows area. 
 
Which goes back to the provincial perspective. Is your 
department and are you personally committed to be getting into 
those discussions as to how we can improve service to the 
Metis communities so direct funding and direct benefit can 
happen right at the local level instead of being . . . kind of 
taking a shotgun approach? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again, we’ve had several kinds of 
meetings in the North. 
 
Now one meeting we had was with the organization of northern 
mayors that’s been formed, and in that particular exercise the 
Minister of Municipal Government and the Minister of 
Northern Affairs are the lead ministers, and we would support 
those activities through SIMAS wherever we can. 
 
Our main relationship is through the bilateral process where we 
deal largely with political matters and we have an agenda that 
we’ve mutually agreed on that we are working on. Those 
agendas, through the northern mayors association, would be 
largely carried out in conjunction  like I say  with 
Municipal Government and with the Minister of Northern 
Affairs. But certainly wherever we can aid in assisting some of 
those problems to be resolved that they identify, whether it be 
in northern housing or in other areas, we’re certainly willing to 
contribute to that. 
 
And often I find there’s a great value in attending those 
meetings because I’m able to bring back perspectives from the 
discussions that we have there to contribute to broad policy 
discussions that are taking place in government. So it’s a 
process that is not . . . in some ways it seems like a slow process 
but in other ways the progress in terms of resource partnerships, 
educational work, the funding of DTI (Dumont Technical 
Institute), GDI (Gabriel Dumont Institute)  these are areas 
where there’s been a considerable investment made  
NORPAC (Northern Professional Access College), NORTEP 
(northern teacher education program), all of these kinds of 
things. 
 
I mean, I think there’s no question that there’s been steady 
progress, but when you’re dealing with an area that has 
significant natural barriers to economic development and where 
even the simplest services are very costly to develop, obviously 
things are not going to progress as quickly as they are in areas 
where it’s a little bit cheaper to do things and there’s a little 
more population mass, so that if people start a business they at 
least have somebody to sell their product to. The smaller your 
business area the less commercial opportunities there are. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:27 p.m. 
 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  
General Revenue Fund  
Finance  Vote 18  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1229 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1229 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1233 

General Revenue Fund  
Intergovernmental Affairs  Vote 30  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................1234 
Osika ................................................................................................................................................................................1234, 1239 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1237 

General Revenue Fund  
Women’s Secretariat  Vote 41  

Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................1241 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1241 

General Revenue Fund  
Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat  Vote 25  

Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................1249 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1249 

 


