
















































March 19, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 345 

 March 19, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again today 

on behalf of many concerned citizens of this province of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, 

Weyburn, Fort Qu’Appelle, and many other smaller 

communities throughout southern Saskatchewan. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, today I’m representing a 

petition to do with the closing of the Plains Health Centre also. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the petition contains names of numerous southern 

Saskatchewan communities, along with Regina. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present names of many concerned citizens of Saskatchewan 

who are concerned about the closing of the Plains Health 

Centre. 

 

The petition of the undersigned of the people of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the Plains Health 

Centre should remain open. 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

These people are from throughout Saskatchewan, primarily 

Regina, Carievale, Swift Current and so on. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I rise as well on behalf of 

people concerned about the closure of the Plains Health Centre 

in Regina. The petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from the 

communities of primarily Bangor and Waldron, Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today also to present  

petitions with names of people throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people who have signed this petition are from Moose Jaw, 

Regina, Carievale, Bengough; all over Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today, 

too, to present petitions and names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition has been signed by people from 

Odessa, Francis, Vibank, Pense; south-east Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Assiniboia, Gravelbourg, and Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I once again rise to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, and thousands of signatures from all throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today with 

my colleagues and thousands of people all throughout 

Saskatchewan to bring forward a petition regarding saving the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions are 

mainly from Moose Jaw, some from Regina, Chamberlain, and 

several of course from Regina Albert South constituency. 

 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

repeal the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement and 

replace it with a fair tendering policy; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Labour regarding former 

Labour Relations Board member John R. B. Hobbs: (1) 

why did Mr. Hobbs receive an ex gratia payment of $4,435 

when he was terminated from the Labour Relations Board 

after five months of service, in order to accept a Crown 

counsel 1 position in the Department of Justice; (2) what 

formula was used to calculate these monies? 

 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next ask the government the following question: 

 

Regarding the New Careers Corporation: firstly, the 

number of projects in which New Careers placed its clients 

during 1995; secondly, the names and descriptions of those 

projects; and thirdly, the locations of those projects. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 16 grade 6, 7, and 8 students from W.F. Ready 

School in the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. They’re 

here today with their teacher, Mrs. Wettlaufer, and chaperons 

Mrs. Dennett and Mr. Apperley. I’ve been able to be at a 

number of the morning sessions where all of the school gets 

together to talk about different issues and to recognize the work 

of the students. And so I’m very pleased to have students from 

W.F. Ready here today. I’ll be meeting with them after their 

tour in room 218 and then for a photo session. 

 

I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming the 

group from W.F. Ready School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to introduce to you and through you to the members a 

group of grade 8 students. Now the sheet I have says 8, 9. I 

think there’s more than that, but they’re here from the Cornwall 

Alternative School in my riding and they’re accompanied by  

their teacher Vonnie Schmidt. 

 

And I would ask the members to join with me to make them 

feel welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Aboriginal Tourism Strategy 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday another part of Saskatchewan’s Partnership for 

Growth was announced, and it is I believe, a very fundamental 

part. 

 

The Economic Development minister released a new aboriginal 

tourism strategy that will help Saskatchewan’s aboriginal 

people take advantage of an economic sector that has great 

potential for growth. This of course means jobs for aboriginal 

people and spin-off benefits for the whole province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this strategy begins with an inventory of new or 

expanded aboriginal tourism opportunities with a market 

analysis done by KPMG Management Consulting. The study 

was commissioned by the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations and the Saskatchewan Tourism Authority. 

 

The possibilities for development are exciting: parks and 

heritage sites, museums and galleries, the performing arts, 

guided hunting and fishing trips, and wilderness tours, to name 

a few. 

 

As the rest of the world becomes more and more urban, as 

tree-zoned boulevards replace forests, and reservoirs replace 

free flowing streams, the more attractive and vitally necessary 

our natural areas become. Already there is growing interest in 

aboriginal tourism from people in Germany, Britain, and 

France. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this strategy will bring economic development to 

Saskatchewan, and just as importantly it will give us even more 

reason to preserve what we have  some of the most beautiful 

and unspoiled resources on this planet. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Livestock Show and Sale 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would today like to 

welcome all the exhibitors and buyers to Regina for the annual 

bull sale. It is a long-standing tradition, with this being the 91st 

annual Saskatchewan Livestock Show and Sale featuring 

Hereford, Angus, Limousin, Shorthorn, Simmental, and 

Charolais. I think there are about 300 bulls up for sale in total. 

 

Buyers and farmers from across Canada and the United States 

travel in for the show every year, and it’s events like these that 

provide a great showcase for quality Saskatchewan livestock.  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

They are essential to Saskatchewan livestock producers. 

 

Given what we hear, Mr. Speaker, every day from across the 

floor, I am very happy that there is finally some genuine bull in 

the city of Regina, and I welcome it here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Soil Conservation 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Conservation of our 

natural resources is critical to our survival. Today I would like 

to congratulate the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation 

Association for the important work and leadership they have 

provided in preserving this resource. 

 

Farmers are doing their part in preserving the soil through 

various means such as direct seeding, crop rotation, and shelter 

belts. 

 

While I applaud our Saskatchewan farmers for taking 

responsibility for this matter, there are several individuals who 

should also be recognized for their contribution. Recently, the 

Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association awards were 

presented at a meeting in Regina. Ken Allport of Kyle, 

Saskatchewan and Larry Janzen of the Seager Wheeler farm at 

Rosthern received awards for outstanding farm practices in soil 

management. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the award winners and the soil 

conservation association for excellent work with regard to zero 

tillage, tree planting for shelter belts, crop rotation, and the 

advancement of machinery manufacturing promoting soil 

conservation. 

 

Good management is the key to preserving this resource and the 

environment is everyone’s responsibility. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Humboldt Indoor Pool 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to recognize the Humboldt indoor pool project 

organization. The chairman, Mr. Dave Gullacher, and the 

people of Humboldt and area are to be commended for their 

dedication and hard work over the past several years. 

 

Local efforts have committed $150,000 to the project and an 

indoor pool for Humboldt will soon be a reality. 

 

Construction on the pool started in fall of 1995 and is 

scheduled to be completed by the end of May 1996. The pool 

structure adjoins the Humboldt Uniplex, which houses the 

curling rink and the arena which is the home of the Humboldt 

Broncos, and several other meeting halls. 

 

To Humboldt and area, congratulations on your dedication and 

perseverance in the pool project for the betterment of Humboldt 

and area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Apprenticeship Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, you’ve often heard me speak 

of the leadership provided by the people of my constituency. 

During Education Week, I want to recognize especially, a 

program in my constituency that has been recognized now 

nationally. 

 

The Eston-Elrose School Division and several local businesses, 

along with the students of the school division, have gone into 

partnership to create an apprenticeship program that has been 

selected as the Saskatchewan provincial winner in the 1995-96 

National Partners in Education awards program. 

 

Sponsored by the Royal Bank, this year’s competition drew 

more than 135 partnerships across the country. All provincial 

winners go to the third international partnership conference in 

Toronto on April 13 to 16. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to visit this program last 

summer and it’s very, very exciting to see the students working 

in cooperation with the local businesses, learning something for 

which they then get accreditation when they are done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Eston-Elrose program is offered in 

conjunction with SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology) at Palliser college. It gives students 

the opportunity for some practical experience in the professions 

and businesses before they throw themselves into the 

workforce. As well, the students are given credits for these 

classes. 

 

The participating businesses are showing both community 

responsibility and worthy self-interest. People with experience 

make good employees and getting experience is very difficult. 

These students are getting experience in auto body repair, in 

commercial cooking, in journalism, in sales, in agricultural 

machinery repair, and in a host of other areas. 

 

I congratulate the Eston-Elrose School Division and its business 

partners for winning this prestigious award. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Naicam Cadets Win Biathlon Awards 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 

opportunity to recognize the hard work and dedication of the 

Naicam Legion Cadet Corps Unit 2815. Its boys and girls 

biathlon teams represented the province of Saskatchewan’s 

Army, Navy, and Air Cadet Corps at the National Cadet 

Biathlon Competition in Val Cartier, Quebec, March 3 to 8. 

 

The competition consisted of four races. The first male 

competition was eight kilometre individual, and female 

competition was six kilometre race with each skier shooting 

five rounds three times. 

 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

The Naicam Legion Cadet Corp Unit 2815 boys biathlon team 

consists of Cadet Scott Roenspies, Carl Dosch, and Darren 

Zimmer. They won bronze in the aggregate and silver in patrol. 

 

The girls biathlon team of Louise Weber, Kristy Leonard, and 

Jennifer Griffith place fourth in all of their races. 

 

I would ask the members of this Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating the Naicam Legion Cadet Corps biathlon teams 

and their leaders, Captain Scott Ponath and civilian leader Sid 

Roenspies, for their admirable representation of Saskatchewan 

at the nationals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Environmental Award to Lloydminster School 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Responsible 

management of our environment and education go hand in 

hand. It seems appropriate during Education Week that I 

congratulate a school in my constituency that is demonstrating a 

leadership role in both of these areas. 

 

Avery School in Lloydminster has reached a milestone in the 

environmental field and has been recognized by the SEEDS 

(Society of Environment and Energy Development Studies) 

Foundation for this accomplishment. The school has reached 

emerald status for completion of 500 environmental projects. 

The students reached this target in mid-December when they 

completed a Christmas art project using nothing but natural 

materials to create centrepieces. 

 

The school began these environmental projects in 1991, and 

things began to pick up as they completed 250 projects in just 

over a year. The principal of the school, Debra Brown, says the 

students have shown a great deal of interest in these projects 

and will carry this knowledge with them as they get older. 

Educating our students about this issue at a young age means a 

cleaner and safer environment for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this school deserves a pat on the back, I 

should also point out that Lloydminster is in the top 10 school 

divisions in the country for environmental projects per capita. 

Congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Moosomin Restaurants Benefit from Casino Regina Visitors 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The buses are headed 

in the opposite direction. Instead of leaving the province, they 

are now travelling to Saskatchewan in droves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ward:  I’m referring to the benefits rural Saskatchewan 

is reaping from the new casino in Regina. We all know that the 

casino has created hundreds of jobs and spin-off benefits with 

the tourism industry in Regina. But it has not been widely 

publicized that a restaurant in Moosomin has hit the jackpot 

with an increase in customers. Busloads of people are stopping  

at Tinno’s Restaurant and other dining establishments for 

something to eat when they travel to and from Casino Regina. 

 

A spokesman for the touring network is quoted as saying it 

works out to about $5 million a year for a dozen or so 

restaurants in rural Saskatchewan. And the owner of the 

restaurant is quoted as saying it is like a small factory moved 

into town, or a few oil rigs, and more people are working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these casino visitors are spending tourist dollars 

where they have a large impact, in rural Saskatchewan. This 

example demonstrates that the spin-off benefits from the casino 

are reaching out across the province, and in this case, several 

hundred kilometres away. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Teacher Employment 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 

everyone in this House is well aware, hundreds of students who 

have graduated from education programs at our universities 

have been unable to find teaching jobs in this city or this 

province. They’ve been forced to find employment in provinces 

other than Saskatchewan. What makes this situation particularly 

frustrating for students and parents alike is the fact that the 

member from Regina Dewdney recently went back into the 

classroom to teach, while he continues to hold a seat in this 

legislature. 

 

Will the Premier explain if he believes the action of his former 

right-hand man are appropriate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I would say to the hon. 

member opposite that he will have to worry about the 

appropriateness of the members on his side and their conduct 

and, if you will, leave for us on our side how we think our 

members have conducted ourselves. 

 

And I want say to you specifically that the former deputy 

premier, who was elected in this legislature in 1971 and serves 

to this day with high distinction both the House and the people 

of Saskatchewan, has absolutely nothing, nothing to account 

for. And it should be your good fortune to serve even a fraction 

of that kind of service in the public as honourably as the 

member has from Regina. 

 

Finally, I would simply say this, Mr. Speaker: that it is in my 

judgement a fallacy for the Liberals to say that jobs in teaching 

are available elsewhere, when you look at Liberal 

administrations and Conservative administrations like Alberta 

and Ontario and New Brunswick, where the teaching and the 

education cuts have been massive and extensive, unlike the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, my daughter is one of those 

who have been forced to leave the province to take a teaching 

job elsewhere. She, like many education program graduates, 

would prefer to teach in this province. However there remains a 

very limited number of opportunities, one of which has been 

snatched up by the member from Regina Dewdney. Will the 

Premier explain to my daughter and hundreds of other 

education graduates why there are no opportunities for them in 

Saskatchewan, yet there is for a member of his government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. 

member would be kind enough to tell us who it is that will be 

putting in his crop this spring and who it is that will be taking 

off his crop this spring and who it is that will be taking the 

returns from his farm operation, hopefully successful as they 

might be, as I pray they are in his case and for all the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, all the while that he takes down and holds down 

the job here in the Legislative Assembly in the province of 

Saskatchewan, which would apply to virtually every member in 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

And to argue in any other sense, I think, is a lowering of the 

standard of this Assembly, and I would say with the greatest of 

respect to the member, but more importantly with respect to his 

daughter, to raise his daughter as an example in this House, is 

very, very unbecoming in most circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the Premier is 

confused. I’m a chicken cook, not a farmer. And the reality is 

that I’m in private enterprise. 

 

As the taxpayers of Saskatchewan know, the member from 

Regina Dewdney has a million dollar pension, but that’s not 

good enough. He’s now working on a second pension at the 

people’s expense. It’s not enough that this member has a 

well-paying job as an MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly); he must also take opportunities from our young 

people so he can correct exams at the taxpayers’ expense. Does 

the Premier not find it ironic that the member from Regina 

Dewdney was part of an NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government that has eliminated more than 1,000 teaching 

positions over the last five years and now has personally taking 

a teaching position from one of our young people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member should, 

rather than directing his question to me in the first instance, 

direct this question to his own leader. His own leader takes a 

pension that I pay for, being a former member of the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police). He is taking the taxpayers, 

that I have contributed to and everybody in this House, on that 

pension plus a full-time salary as MLA. If he’s not taking it, 

he’s going to be taking it. Did you ask this of your leader? Is 

there a double standard for Liberals? Okay to do but nobody 

else to do? 

 

I think that the Liberals have got a little bit to learn here about 

consistency and morality when it comes to this issue and we 

don’t need to have any lectures from them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Agriculture has stated consistently during the ongoing GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) controversy that farmers are 

honourable and they will do the right thing. Mr. Speaker, the 

farmers of Saskatchewan appear to be doing the honourable 

thing by holding this government to a promise that GRIP 

wind-up bills would not be collected. 

 

A CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio report 

yesterday indicated that two-thirds of the money that farmers 

have been billed for has yet to be received by Crop Insurance. 

Would the Minister of Agriculture agree that this is an 

indication that farmers feel they are on the right side of the 

issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

for that question. Yes, the numbers are in and over half the 

farmers have paid back their bills. As a matter of fact we, as 

government, paid back our bill to farmers. We paid 39,000 of 

them, used the rest of our money to put into agriculture 

programs for the most part. I don’t think that the, Mr. Speaker, 

that the farmers in rural Saskatchewan who may be having 

difficulty, some of these people, paying their bills, appreciate 

the member opposite making a spectacle of them. 

 

I have said many times that they can go to the corporation and 

make their arrangements to have this bill repaid. The process is 

laid out before them very clearly, and that’s what will remain. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to send over 

some bills for the minister to deal with personally if I could, 

and ensure that he intervenes as he did earlier and have Crop 

Insurance review these cases on a case-by-case basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the deadline for farmers to pay these bills was 

more than two weeks ago. If they felt obligated to pay, the 

majority of farmers would have done so by now. What, if any, 

measures is the minister taking to recover money he feels is 

owed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I think, Mr. Speaker, the member knows 

the answer to that question. We have processes laid out to . . . 

have explained to farmers how the bills should be repaid. If 

they can’t be repaid, the interest will accumulate at the rate 9.6 

per cent. But the key factor is they can go to the organization, 

go to the corporation, and make arrangements to have them  



350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

repaid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just really want to ask the member opposite if 

this rule applies to the federal government as well. I ask him to 

table the representation he’s made to the federal government for 

the 1,300 bills, overpayments, through the WGSA (western 

grain stabilization account) that they are collecting. 

 

Now he can stand in this House here and I’ll take the criticism. 

I’ll answer his questions. But I want him to show me and table 

today the letter that he’s written to Mr. Goodale saying that they 

shouldn’t collect their overpayments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

McDowell Report 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

morning our caucus announced that we are not going to accept 

the MLA pay hike. Right now I’d like to table a letter from each 

of our members stating our intention to give up the increase by 

simply not claiming the full amount of per diems. 

 

This afternoon I’m challenging every member of this Assembly 

to do this, to follow our example. 

 

I would now ask for the assistance of a page to distribute to 

each member a similar letter, starting with the Premier. All you 

have to do is sign them and hand it in to the Clerk. It’s that 

simple. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question is to you: will you show some 

leadership, get out of the trough, sign that letter and give back 

the pay increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

pleased to answer this question on behalf of the government. 

I’ll try to take a measured approach because there’s some things 

I’d like to say to the member and he may give me an 

opportunity to say them in a subsequent question. The purpose 

of McDowell was never intended particularly to be a pay cut, 

although it did turn out to be a 2 per cent reduction in pay. Its 

main purpose was accountability and transparency. 

 

Now with July 1 implementation there is a one-time increase 

which is more than  and I’m going to emphasize more than 

 offset by the reductions overall during all of our elected 

terms of government. The member knows that and I assume 

that’s why he voted for it in the first place. 

 

And if you think your $40,000 payback is going to make people 

forget your 14 billion in debt that’s your legacy, then I think 

you’re sadly mistaken. So you stand by your record and we’ll 

stand by ours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think when it 

comes to debt we have to take a very serious look at the $22  

billion in debt that the Provincial Auditor says we have today 

that has increased from that 14 billion in a mere five years since 

your government has been in power. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 

Minister, you recently broke a campaign promise by sending out 

GRIP bills to 12,000 Saskatchewan farmers. You said this was 

an overpayment and it was only fair that farmers should pay that 

back. Mr. Minister, you’re receiving a $4,400 overpayment and 

you’re refusing to pay that back. Why do farmers have to pay 

their overpayment back when you are keeping yours. Mr. 

Minister, will you sign that letter today and get out of the trough 

and pay back your MLA overpayment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will say 

again and again and as many times as I have to say it, that there 

is no increase. Our pay is calculated over the term. If it upsets 

him that there is a short increase during the transition period, I 

can’t help that; it’s more than offset by the reduction. In fact, 

in-Regina members, the reduction over the session is over 

$3,000 and for out-of-Regina members it’s over 2,000. So I’m 

not quite sure what this tempest in a teapot is, but my figures 

say it’s a reduction. And if you want to make a donation to the 

Legislative Assembly, we thank you for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  It’s important to notice that the government’s 

own employees, the good ones, seem to know what the actual 

cost is, and not the ministers. Mr. Speaker, my minister is for 

the Minister of Post-Secondary Education. That minister, the 

other day, said that we discovered that SIAST is planning to cut 

hundreds of jobs and thousand of student positions. We were 

told this was because of federal government cuts and there 

wasn’t any money here for back-fill. Well there doesn’t seem to 

be any money for back-fill but there seems to be enough money 

to fill their back pockets. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you justify cutting thousands of student 

positions at the same time that you’re getting a $4,400 pay hike. 

Will you sign your letter, get out of the trough, and give up your 

MLA overpayment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going 

to remind the members of a few measures that we’ve taken over 

the years, besides balancing the budget, which was not a small 

task. Cabinet took a pay cut of 5 per cent. MLA salaries under 

our government have been frozen since 1991 but actually back 

to 1987. 

 

An Hon. Member:  1987. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  We hear you  ’87. 

 

Eight fewer MLAs is a result of redistribution. And now we 

have a clear, transparent, accountable MLA pay system which 

should help some of the members stay out of trouble. 

 

And no pay hike over the term. No pay hike over the term. And 

I find it passing strange that the member opposite would want 

to manipulate the numbers to the detriment of his members. 



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, your 

government has devastated health care in this province. You’ve 

closed rural hospitals. You’re closing the Plains Health Centre. 

And more cuts are on the way. 

 

Mr. Minister, your Premier said cuts would start at the top. Yet 

right at the top of your department, you as a minister get a 

$4,400 pay increase this year. Mr. Minister, will you sign the 

letter that you have received today and give up this one time 

MLA pay increase? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No doubt you 

are desperate to make people forget the billions of dollars of 

debt that’s the legacy of your government’s policies in the ‘80s. 

And it’s not surprising to us that again you make these 

desperate attempts at instant credibility. 

 

But I will emphasize that there is no pay increase over the term. 

This balances out. In ‘95-96 fiscal, it was 46,000; transition 

year, 48; and down to 44 in every subsequent year after that. 

These are the figures provided by the Legislative Assembly. I 

reiterate them for your information. 

 

And based on the amount of time you spend in this House, 

which is about 25 minutes a day, as well as missing most of the 

votes, I would say that you should . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Order. I will remind the 

minister that it is contrary to the rules of the Assembly to refer 

to a member’s presence or absence. And the minister knows as 

well that it’s not acceptable to do indirectly what you can’t do 

directly. I’ll ask the minister to withdraw that unparliamentary 

remark. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I forgot that, 

and I’ll withdraw that remark. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan 

highways are a disaster. You don’t have enough money to fill 

your potholes, and yet somehow you found enough money to 

fill the big hole in your wallet. Mr. Minister, the Premier said 

the cuts would start at the top. Yet Saskatchewan highways get 

poorer while the Minister of Highways gets richer. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you sign the letter and give up your MLA 

pay? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well 

obviously this is a topic that has greatly absorbed the members 

opposite. You might think they’d be discussing the economy. 

You might think they’d be figuring out some other things that 

would be of some use to anybody. But instead they continue to 

want to grandstand on the basis of what is after all a pay cut. 

 

So I will just emphasize that we will live with the results of  

McDowell, which we know to be a 2 per cent reduction in pay. 

And that was our commitment, and that’s what we’re doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Balanced Budget Commitment 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

1995 election platform document, the NDP government made a 

commitment to, and I quote, “four more years of balanced 

budgets.” 

 

Just months after making this promise, this government spent 

$16,500 taxpayers’ dollars to conduct an opinion poll in which 

they asked respondents whether they would, and I quote, 

“favour a balanced approach in which there is a small deficit 

budget.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Finance explain why she 

wasted taxpayers’ money trying to wriggle out of her promise of 

four balanced budgets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, this government was 

one of the first governments in the ‘90s to balance our budget. 

 

An Hon. Member:  The first. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The first  I stand corrected  to 

balance our budget. Our commitment is to sustainable balanced 

budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just because we go out and say to the people of 

Saskatchewan, we’d like your opinion, we’d like your input, 

doesn’t mean that we’ve changed our commitment. Our 

commitment is to prudently manage the finances of the 

province of Saskatchewan, to provide tax reductions when 

affordable, and to continue to balance the budgets of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, last year the Canadian Bond 

Rating Service indicated that if spending results, and I quote, 

“indicate that the province’s budget figures are on track, a 

rating outlook revision to positive could occur.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, a bond rating service is suggesting it will make it 

cheaper for this government to service the debt if Saskatchewan 

continues to balance its annual budget. Will the minister 

explain to the people of this province why she and her 

government would even consider running a deficit, threatening 

our credit rating and breaking a solemn promise to the taxpayers 

of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the 

member is in the right legislature. This is Saskatchewan; this is 

not Ottawa. We have balanced our budget, unlike his  



352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

counterparts in Ottawa who have yet to see the end of the light 

at their tunnel. 

 

What we said to the people of this province is that we are going 

to balance our budget. And we’re going to continue to balance 

the budget, whether we have to deal with forest fires, drought, 

or massive reductions in transfer payments from the federal 

government. This province is committed to balanced budgets, 

and that commitment will remain. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I thought the blaming and 

whining were over last week, but obviously we continue this 

week. 

 

When offering this government’s commitment of four balanced 

budgets, the minister stated, and I quote: 

 

If the federal government decides to act unilaterally by 

offloading its problems onto the provinces, there may be 

adjustments to our long-term plan but there will be no 

change in direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, federal funding to Saskatchewan was as promised. 

Will the minister now stand in this House and justify why she 

and her government would have even considered running a 

deficit budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I find the question 

amusing. This government has never talked about deficits; 

we’ve talked about balanced budgets. 

 

But the member opposite has to think very carefully about what 

his role is in this House. Is he here to defend his constituents? 

Or is he here to defend his counterparts in Ottawa? And I will 

read a quote from a newspaper in his very own riding: 

 

Why does . . . (the member opposite continue) to defend 

the federal Liberals? The long and the short is that 

Chrétien and his Liberals have slashed and burned social 

programs. 

 

If these programs are in a mess, it’s the federal government that 

needs to answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I say to the member opposite is, speak for 

the people of Saskatchewan. That’s his job in this legislature. 

This government will continue to speak for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, in her 1995 budget speech, the 

minister stated, and I quote: “Sound financial management is a 

pre-condition to economic growth. Business is reluctant to 

invest in a province that cannot manage its money.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, running a deficit budget would make  

Saskatchewan the first province to go back to running deficits, 

as they attempted in their polling to find out. Will the minister 

tell the jobless people of Saskatchewan whether this 

government considered just how damaging this sort of 

mismanagement could be to job creation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether 

the member opposite was sent into the House with these 

questions and he has to keep asking the questions no matter 

what my answer is. 

 

This government has never considered running a deficit. We 

were the first government in Canada in the ‘90s to balance our 

books. Our commitment is to long-term, sustainable balanced 

budgets. No matter how many times he asks that question, I will 

continue to give him the answer: we balanced the budget, we 

intend to keep it balanced, and Saskatchewan people are very 

proud of that fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, would the minister and her 

government have a commitment to balanced budgets, but their 

1995 NDP election platform document stated, and I quote: 

 

Under our plan, Saskatchewan will set the goal of reducing 

government spending by at least reducing their 

expenditures by $40 million through increased government 

efficiencies. 

 

Would the minister now explain when we can see such 

reductions in internal spending? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I say to the member 

opposite, wait for the budget. But I’m very pleased that the 

member opposite has introduced the topic of election platforms. 

We came out with an election platform which was realistic. We 

didn’t say, here’s our great plans, as the Liberals did, and the 

only thing that you have to assume is that the economy will 

grow by 8 per cent. Even though they couldn’t find a real 

economist who would say that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that is practical, that listens to 

people, and speaks up for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Latimer Trial Inquiry 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, it has now been five months since 

the people of Saskatchewan learned of misconduct by the 

Justice department in its handling of the Robert Latimer trial. It 

will come as no surprise to members of this House that since 

the allegations of jury tampering by the Justice department 

came to light, the public’s faith in our system of justice as been 

greatly shaken. 

 

The public wants to know what went on in this case and they 

want to be assured the Minister of Justice is taking steps to  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

prevent this from happening again. However, it appears the 

Justice department is dragging its heels in releasing the findings 

of its internal review into this matter. 

 

My question to the Minister of Justice is, how much longer will 

the people of Saskatchewan have to wait until they get some 

answers into this very sorry affair? We have a suspended Crown 

attorney with pay, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, as a lawyer with 17 years of 

experience in this province, I’m very pleased to say that there 

are many fine, capable people who work within our justice 

system, and I’m very proud to say that Saskatchewan can be 

proud of those people. And it just so happens that many of my 

compatriots in the legal profession happen to support the party 

opposite. 

 

The whole criminal justice system isn’t a contest where you get 

a score card, and I think we need to remember that. There’s a 

role for the criminal justice system that presents the facts and 

the whole situation. And I think we need to not get into some 

kind of a situation where we’re keeping track of the justice 

system on a basis of keeping score. We have a very good justice 

system in Saskatchewan, and we will be continuing to support 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, with this investigation coming so 

closely on the heels of the Martensville fiasco, it’s not 

surprising that people have so many questions about the 

minister’s department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year the Justice department’s budget was over 

$175 million. With these doubts and questions swirling around 

the department, will the minister not admit today that a 

full-scale review of the entire department and how it operates is 

in order to ensure people are in fact getting their money’s 

worth, especially when we’re told of how cash strapped this 

government is? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll thank the member for 

that question as well. I fully respect the member’s position as a 

former RCMP officer, and I understand his role in upholding 

the justice system in the same way that I have, and so I 

appreciate his questions, and I’ll deal with them directly. 

 

I know that we all need to work together if there are problems, 

and we will do that. I would say that within the Department of 

Justice  I’ve been minister for three months now, or I guess 

it’s going on four months  we have in that department 

reviewed quite a number of the different areas. 

 

It’s possible that we will take a detailed review of the 

prosecution sides in the same way that we’ve looked at the land 

titles system and the same way that we’ve looked at the 

corrections division. When we do that, I will make the 

appropriate announcement, and I’m sure I will give advance 

notice to the hon. member across the floor because I do really  

respect his opinions. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 30  An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Hotel Keepers Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 31  An Act to amend  

The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Municipal Hail Insurance Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 32  An Act to amend  

The Local Government Election Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Local Government Election Act be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 33  An Act respecting Service Districts and to 

make consequential amendments to certain other Acts 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Service Districts and to make consequential 

amendments to certain other Acts be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 34  An Act to amend  

The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Electrical Inspection Act be now read and 

introduced the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I move that first reading of 

a Bill to amend The SaskEnergy Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table the answer to written question 

no. 13. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 13 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Convert. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 14 is converted to 

motions for return (debatable). 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 2  New Approaches to Farm Security 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of 

my remarks, I will be moving the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly work with farmers, with farm 

organizations, and with the government in designing a 

workable, fair, and affordable approach to farm security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, GRIP was the shortest long-term program that 

enabled farmers to be dependent on a system instead of 

encouraging them to become adventurous, enterprising, and 

assertive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my background is in farming, and I know very 

well to be a farmer these days you must be a special person. 

You must be committed and optimistic. Who else would go into 

a profession where for weeks at a time you work all hours of 

the day, seven days a week, to seed the crop, and then when you 

meet at the local coffee shop, you wonder if you did use the 

right seed or fertilizer and whether it will rain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last two years farmers have said that they 

wanted a revamped crop insurance program. This is what they 

are saying about all agricultural programs.  less duplication, a 

simplified process, and less administration costs, user friendly. 

That’s what farmers want. 

 

Saskatchewan’s diverse regions are affected by different 

weather conditions, diseases, insects, and soil conditions. And 

yet we as farmers want to be competitive, productive, and 

financially stable. 

 

We need effective programs that will prepare our farmers so we 

will be able to compete in a changing global world — programs 

that take into account our input costs, weather, and other 

circumstances beyond our control. 

 

Our programs must be flexible and supportive so that as farmers 

we are responsible to ourselves, that we work to be traditionally 

toilers of soil, with pride in our daily accomplishments, and that 

we have the ability to control our own destiny and budget, to  

plan and prepare our future based on sound farming practices. 

 

Farmers are initiating positive changes in agriculture, finding 

new markets and products. Examples include: vacation farms, 

including bed and breakfast; livestock, from cattle to elk and 

ostrich; speciality crops. We are venturing into these areas, 

expanding into global markets, and using modern technology — 

computers and the Internet — to keep us up to date with all of 

the information. 

 

Our plan in agriculture is clear as we prepare for the 21st 

century. This strategy includes Agriculture 2000 which is A 

Strategic Direction for the Future of Saskatchewan‘s 

Agriculture and Food Industry. This plan focuses on three main 

areas: the farm, diversification, and adding value to what we 

produce  an institutional development. 

 

The objective is to promote economic development and 

opportunities which will diversify Saskatchewan’s agriculture 

base and create the kind of jobs that are needed to sustain rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Long-term research and development commitments are 

necessary to nurture new ideas, better crops, better livestock 

genetics, new technology and projects. Agricultural 

biotechnology is another leading edge undertaking that shows 

enormous potential for farmers in business. Value added and 

agribusiness activities provide an opportunity for farmers to 

access more marketing options with the potential for higher net 

returns. 

 

A recent example of how we are diversifying and sustaining 

rural Saskatchewan through more profitable primary 

commodities and increased value added opportunities include: 

the $91 million Canada-Saskatchewan agricultural food 

innovation fund, to provide research and development 

assistance to emerging and value added sectors. This fund will 

create long-term jobs and help the province meet its export 

targets. 

 

Other examples: the Agriculture Development Fund has been 

refocused to increase funding that will encourage development 

of agriculture-related, value added industries. 

 

The $20 million agri-food equity fund provides start-up for 

agricultural and expansion capital for companies which add 

value to the province’s primary production base. 

 

Our Saskatchewan Agriculture minister is listening to what the 

farmers have to say about programs and services. Number one, 

regarding crop insurance, we must renew the national public 

policy to maintain provision of a basic risk management 

package for farmers. 

 

As part of that renewal, we are now conducting consultations 

with farmers in a review of crop insurance programs. Both 

levels of government need input from farmers on that kind of 

program, a program that will meet their needs in the changing 

agricultural and food industry. 

 

Number two, a whole farm safety net is needed to provide  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

income protection. We do not want to see a reversal back to the 

days of makeshift government programs. The federal 

government has come to realize that the province is not in a 

fiscal position to make up for Ottawa’s budget cuts in the area 

of safety nets. 

 

We also need companion programs that will address the 

province’s specific needs. Work on these initiatives will be 

developed through further consultation with stakeholders in the 

agricultural community. The agricultural and food industry is 

facing rapid changes: new technology, different consumer 

tastes, pressure on transportation, debates on marketing 

structures, a rethinking of the relationship of government and 

the agricultural sector, fiscal constraints and so on. 

 

That is why it is so important that changes affecting the farm 

industry  loss of the Crow, rail line deregulation and 

centralization of grain handling  are responded to by 

programs that will enhance our own initiatives. It is our job as 

government to provide leadership so all of the stakeholders can 

decide how to manage the changes we are experiencing. We 

will implement a workable, fair and affordable program that 

will be acceptable because we as farmers, farm organizations, 

and government, all will have contributed through consultation, 

keeping in mind the values of our citizens — of cooperation, 

caring, and community. 

 

By working together we can help each other to adapt and 

become more diversified, a united approach that we can all 

benefit from. Together we can work to ensure a sustainable 

future for agriculture and for the province of Saskatchewan as 

we move toward the 21st century. 

 

Discussion on this very topic seems timely because March 24 to 

30 has been declared Agricultural and Food Week. A good time 

to talk about the changes we are facing in the agricultural 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that: 

 

This Assembly work with farmers, with farm organizations 

and with government in designing a workable, fair and 

affordable program that will benefit Saskatchewan farmers 

and their families. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I would ask the hon. member if she would 

like to inform the House who is seconding her motion. 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Oh I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. Walter Jess, 

Redberry Lake will be seconding the motion. 

 

The Speaker:  And I will remind the member of what she’s 

just remembered, not to use proper names of members in the 

House. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak in favour 

of the private members’ motion introduced by the member from 

the Battlefords-Cut Knife that reads: 

 

That this Assembly work with farmers, with farm 

organizations and with the government in designing a 

workable, fair and affordable approach to farm security. 

 

I am very pleased that our government, led by the Minister of 

Agriculture, has seen the importance of consulting with farmers 

throughout Saskatchewan to develop programs that are a fair 

and affordable approach to farm security — security that can be 

provided by programs designed by Saskatchewan farmers in 

conjunction with the provincial government. Incidentally, 

Saskatchewan taxpayers provide twice as much per capita to 

agriculture as the highest level of commitment made by any 

other province in the entire country. 

 

In addition, the commitment of my government goes beyond the 

dollar figure and is consistent with a statement made in 1949 by 

Aldo Leopold, and I quote: 

 

The earth is a vital, living organism whose permanent 

well-being must never been endangered. All people have a 

right of access to the earth’s resources to meet their basic 

needs. The use of people and the earth for profit 

contradicts this trust we have inherited and threatens both 

the well-being of the earth and the lives of people. 

 

When we see land as a community to which we belong, we 

may begin to use it with love and respect. There is no other 

way for land to survive the impact of mechanized man, nor 

for us to reap from it the aesthetic harvest it is capable, 

under science, of contributing to culture. 

 

It is very important that we as legislators keep in mind our 

responsibilities to the environment to ensure that we have 

productive land for future generations. This is an area of 

interest that involves the potentially negative impact of the use 

of chemicals and fertilizers on a long-term basis. 

 

A great many people have indicated concerns over such items 

as growth hormones in livestock. While we as farmers are 

somewhat limited by the restrictions in this area, we also find 

ourselves with new opportunities for niche markets that are only 

available to organic producers. Saskatchewan has some major 

advantages because of pure water, clean air, and a relatively 

unpolluted environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  It is the responsibility of any legislators to 

maintain and build on that advantage. I am pleased to say that 

my goal is approaching the protection of the environment with 

the utmost responsibility, much as we are taking a responsible 

approach to farm security. 

 

On coffee row, through telephone calls as well as in the public 

forum, my constituents discuss a wide range of issues including 

crop insurance. The comments I had from the farmers in my 

area indicate that, for the most part, they strongly support the  



356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

crop insurance program that has served them so well for the 

past 35 years. Discussion centres around wanting to maintain 

individual coverage and very strong support for the spot-loss 

hail clause that my government introduced after a major 

lobbying effort on behalf of the farmers. The spot-loss hail 

clause had been removed by the previous Tory government in 

an attempt to support the private insurance companies. 

 

My farmers strongly support the inclusion of spot-loss as part of 

crop insurance. We listened to their wishes and responded 

positively to their request. In fact my government’s approach to 

the consultation process is well received by farm organizations 

and farmers alike. 

 

Protection for Saskatchewan farmers is more a necessity now 

than ever with the high cost of inputs, and of course the 

destruction of our greatest protection to a land-locked province. 

I refer of course to the Crow rate and its complete destruction 

by the federal Liberals. 

 

About 10 days ago, I had the rare privilege to hear the federal 

Minister of Agriculture speak on farm programs. He talked for 

over half an hour about a great many subjects, but he never 

once mentioned the Canadian Wheat Board. What he didn’t say 

scares me more than what he did. 

 

Never once did he indicate any support for the greatest 

marketing service that prairie farmers have ever had working on 

their behalf. I am concerned that trusting the Canadian Wheat 

Board to the federal Liberals is just asking for the same 

protection that the Liberals, both provincially and federally, 

gave us through the Crow battle, the battle that was fought long 

and hard by farmers and farm organizations. But Ottawa prefers 

to listen to the likes of the CPR (Canadian Pacific Railway). 

 

Not only are we now in a post-Crow period with the obvious 

disadvantages of having the federal Liberals take hundred of 

millions of dollars out of farmers’ hands, but they have created 

a situation where farmer renters are in competition with farmer 

landlords for the meagre dollars that Ottawa decided belong to 

us for the untimely assassination of our favourite bird, the old 

Crow. 

 

Not only did the federal government abuse farmers and 

landowners in that way, now they want to give up thousands of 

hopper cars that were purchased by farmers and taxpayers to the 

railways for a meagre 25 per cent of their cash value. Then in 

another demonstration of universal Liberal financing, they 

decide that we as farmers should have the opportunity to pay for 

these cars once more. What is even more ridiculous is the 

support of the official opposition in this Chamber — support 

for such a process. 

 

I realize the Liberals opposite want to support their federal 

counterparts if they can, but what kind of voodoo economics 

are you trying to promote? Perhaps the provincial Liberal Party 

should not have hired so many advisers from the dark back 

rooms of the former Saskatchewan Tory government. 

 

I want to ask the Liberal opposition if they are going to stick 

with plan A, which consists of blindly supporting the Liberal  

government in Ottawa, or open up your eyes and ears to what is 

going on here, which is the most negative move that any 

government has ever done to Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

I used to argue with a friend of mine that the Tories were worse 

than the Liberals. He always made the argument that the 

Liberals were the worst because, as he says, the Tories for the 

most part do nothing while the Liberals do something to you. 

Well this time I want the Liberal opposition to change their 

ways and support us on this one — support us as we struggle 

against Ottawa for the ownership and the ultimate control of the 

fleet of hopper cars. We as a government will do our part with 

the 1,000 cars that Saskatchewan people now own, and we will 

not be asking farmers or taxpayers to buy them again for the 

railways. 

 

Stand with us. Stand with the Saskatchewan farmers for once. 

Don’t line up with the Ottawa Liberals against Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

One very positive direction that my government has decided to 

emphasize is the education and training of young people so that 

they are prepared for a future in the area of practical agriculture. 

The first two groups to agree to try out a program were the dairy 

producers and the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association. 

The support from the dairy producers is much appreciated at 

this time, and we have many trainees on the dairy program. 

Lately we have been getting a lot of interest from cow-calf 

operations and growing interest from grain farms. 

 

At the present time, we have 59 trainees in the Green Certificate 

program. The program is a way of conducting staff training on 

Saskatchewan farms. The goal of the program is to fill key roles 

in the farming industry with skilled people. It provides farm 

workers with a way to obtain certification for mastery of 

practical, hands-on skills without leaving the farm. Family 

members are eligible. In the case of our dairy trainees, 90 per 

cent of the trainees are family members. 

 

Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food is working in cooperation 

with Alberta Agriculture, Food and Rural Development until 

the program is fully organized. The specific skills which form 

the basis of the curriculum were identified by farmers in the 

various industries’ specializations. Funding for materials in the 

program coordinated is provided by Saskatchewan Agriculture 

and Food through the Agricultural Institute for Management in 

Saskatchewan. During the pilot project, the Green Certificate 

program currently covers several areas or skills profiles in 

agriculture including cow-calf, feedlot, dairy, sheep, crop, and 

irrigation crop production training. 

 

This is structured around skill profiles which list all the skills or 

tasks required for proficiency in a particular training area. 

Participants receive a training curriculum representing the skills 

needed to obtain the Green Certificate. The trainee receives 

most of his or her knowledge through apprenticeship-like 

training under a competent trainer-farmer. The farmer is 

responsible as well for the major assessment of the trainee’s 

proficiency in performing skills. 

 

Trainees must understand why a skill is performed and be able  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

to demonstrate the skill with competent ability. Once the trainer 

has completed the assessment in each performance objective, 

the skills are initialled, signifying they have been mastered and 

the trainee is able to perform them. Trainees progress at their 

own rate. 

 

The next stage of the program is the evaluation of the trainee by 

the Green Certificate assessors on the basis of his or her ability 

to perform specific skills. The testers are persons who are 

currently in the industry at a farming level and performs and 

supervises the same tasks routinely. And they are already 

involved in the program as a trainer. The certification test 

assessors evaluate students to ensure verification of reliability, 

validity, and uniformity of the testing and training. After the 

trainee is deemed competent in all the skills he or she will be 

awarded the appropriate level of the Green Certificate. 

 

I have participated in one of the test days at the University of 

Saskatchewan at the dairy barn. It is very gratifying to see the 

enthusiasm of the young people who are taking the training and 

being tested. I want to acknowledge at this time the cooperation 

we are receiving from Mr. Dave Christensen of the animal and 

poultry science department and from Jim Rynn, dairy herdsman. 

Jim assists in organizing the test days as well as participating in 

the testing, and has been a resource person for the program. The 

testers are very conscientious and are not afraid to mark a 

trainee as incomplete for a specific skill if they feel the trainee 

needs more training in that particular skill. 

 

Certificates that are fully awarded are very valid, reliable 

certificates of a person’s ability. The trainee also receives 

valuable feedback from the testers, perhaps suggesting another 

way to do things. So the test days really add to the training. 

 

(1445) 

 

My special thanks to Jim Birch who is coordinator of the 

program. Jim is another Saskatchewan boy who has come back 

home to live and work in Saskatchewan. 

 

Congratulations to all of the graduates. I am pleased to say each 

one of the graduates of level 1 are moving on to level 2 for 

further training. 

 

There is no cost to the trainee for the Green Certificate 

program. All resource materials and program coordination are 

provided by Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food. The resource 

materials provided to the trainees for self-study are excellent 

resources. 

 

A dairy home study manual accompanies the material for level 

1. And when the trainees move on to level 2, they are eligible to 

receive a cattle animal health manual and a cattle nutrition 

manual. There’s no charge to the trainee under the pilot project. 

However, money is not provided for wage subsidization, etc. 

There is an investment of time required by the trainers. If you 

are wondering if the time investment is worthwhile, I would 

refer you to any one of the trainees or trainers who are in this 

program to ask them the question. Their opinion will mean 

more than anything that I could tell you. 

The pilot project will be evaluated this month to determine if it 

will continue in Saskatchewan and if changes to the program 

are necessary. 

 

Even the high schools are becoming involved in the Green 

Certificate program. The project at Fort Qu’Appelle at Bert Fox 

Composite High School got under way officially with 

registrations on the pilot project on Thursday, March 7 and 

Friday, March 8. Six students registered. They are between the 

ages of 15 and 18 years old. Most will work with relatives, 

while one young native lady will train with a cow-calf producer 

on the Peepeekisis Reserve. This will be written up in the “Farm 

and Food Report” soon. 

 

At the same time registrations for cow-calf and crop certificates 

are increasing in the Cut Knife-Rockhaven area and the Biggar 

area. 

 

Three test days have been held for the dairy trainees resulting in 

five dairy trainees receiving dairy technician level 1 certificates. 

They are all carrying on into level 2 and reporting it to be a big 

step up from the level 1. 

 

The first cow-calf and hopefully the first feedlot test days will 

be held the week of April 15 to 19. The program is being 

evaluated at the present time. A focus group meeting with the 

evaluators plus dairy trainers and trainees was held on March 5. 

The producers and trainees were very positive and only 

suggested fine-tuning. Another focus group meeting will be 

held with the evaluators and cow-calf and crop people on 

Wednesday, March 20 at Cut Knife. 

In each of the agricultural areas, there are three levels of 

training. The first level is production technician training, which 

is on-the-job training focusing on the practical aspects of 

farming. These skills are essential for basic employment on a 

Saskatchewan farm. 

 

The second level is production supervision management trainee, 

which includes a mixture of on-the-farm training and self-study 

with some written assignments and testing required. This set of 

job skills is relatively complex and requires a significant 

amount of decision-making ability, as well as a physical 

dexterity. 

 

The third level is the farm business management and business 

plan training and is meant for individuals who will become 

major decision makers or owner-operators in a farming 

operation. This third level will involve class studies. 

 

To summarize the program, participants receive a training 

curriculum representing the skills needed to obtain this Green 

Certificate. The trainee receives most of his or her knowledge 

through apprenticeship-like training under a competent 

trainer-farmer. 

 

The farmer is responsible as well for the major assessment of 

the trainee’s proficiency in farming skills. Trainees must 

understand why a skill is performed and be able to demonstrate 

the skill with competent ability. 

 

Once the trainer has completed the assessment in each  



358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

performance objective, the skills are initialled, signifying they 

have been mastered and the trainee is able to perform. The 

trainees progress at their own rate. Trainers and trainees must 

secure their own employees or employers. 

 

The next stage of the program is the evaluation of the trainee by 

the Green Certificate assessor on the basis of his or her own 

ability to perform specific skills. The assessor is the person who 

is currently in the industry at the farming level, and is already 

involved in the program as a trainer, as I mentioned before. 

 

The certification test assessors evaluate students to ensure the 

verification and the uniformity of the testing and training. After 

the trainee is deemed competent in all skills, he or she will be 

awarded the appropriate level of the Green Certificate. 

 

As I said, there is no cost to the trainer or the trainee of the 

Green Certificate program. All resource materials and program 

coordination are provided by Saskatchewan Agriculture and 

Food. However, money is not provided for wage subsidies. In 

addition, trainers and trainees are expected to find their own 

people. 

 

As I personally played a role in the introduction of the Green 

Certificate program to the province of Saskatchewan and to the 

Saskatchewan farm scene, I am very positive about its success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  I am extremely pleased that my government is 

making an all-out effort to hear from farmers and farm 

organizations. I refer of course not only to the meetings 

throughout Saskatchewan but to our ag caucus committee that 

is prepared to meet with farmers and farm groups throughout 

the year. And I am pleased to second the motion by the member 

from the Battleford-Cut Knife which reads: 

 

That this Assembly work with farmers and with farm 

organizations as well as government in designing a 

workable, fair and affordable approach to farm security. 

 

I, like many, have spent a good portion of my life as an active 

farmer, having been raised on the family farm at Richard. Of 

course, like all farm family members, I was involved from the 

time that I was old enough to walk. In reality I started my 

farming career when I climbed on the tractor in the summer of 

1959, and for the most part ended my active career with the 

farm when the tractor climbed on me in 1991. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to join 

in the debate again today regarding rural Saskatchewan and the 

farming community, being one of those people and have been 

involved in it all of my life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the end of my comments I will be moving an 

amendment to this motion which will talk about this provincial 

government and its failure to support the farmers of the 

province through its actions in two ways, from the tearing up of  

thousands of GRIP contracts as well as breaking its word, its 

promise, in this House not to send out the bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers indeed are leaders in our province and I 

certainly would like to recognize that today. Our farmers and 

the members opposite have talked about diversification. The 

farmers in this province are way ahead of the industry; they are 

way ahead of the government in their diversification efforts for 

many, many years. 

 

Farmers, for years, have been diversifying simply to stay afloat 

because of the lack of a sustainable farm program in this 

province. Farmers have been moving toward value added 

products for years and years and we see many of those in place 

today. We see value added industries that have been started on 

the farms; whether it’s preserves, preservatives, jellies, 

chocolates, jams, all those things, as well as some more major 

and substantial ones in processing plants through our registered 

seed growers and what have you. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that we have in this 

problem . . . in this province is that transportation needs of the 

farmers have not kept up with them. The government, this 

government, has not supported a sustainable plan of 

transportation changes in this province and still refuses to come 

together with the agencies involved to set up a transportation 

system that we need in this province. We saw last week when 

the federal government announced substantial money coming to 

the province for road structure and yet the problem that we have 

in this province is that there is no plan to look at where we need 

a system of roads and railways to meet the needs of farmers and 

certainly the value added industries that we have. 

 

In many communities, including my own, there are what the 

farmers have put together on their own, is marketing groups  

people coming together, farmers coming together, to discuss 

strategies as to how they can get the biggest bang for their buck 

from their farm products. This has proved to be a group that can 

come together, talk about each other’s needs and talk about how 

they can best market their crops and products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talked about a long-term 

commitment. I guess that’s a little like the pot calling the kettle 

black because they don’t have a long-term commitment, as I 

talked about, for transportation. They certainly don’t have one 

for the future of agriculture in this province. 

 

And small wonder that farmers are sceptical about any program 

that governments have in light of what this government in 

particular has done and governments before them. 

 

If I could, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about the GRIP fiasco 

for a minute and how that has turned so many farmers against 

any program any government will ever bring back into the 

farming community. If we look back to the first year of this 

government in power in 1992 when farmers had binding 

contracts with the government regarding their production plans 

for the year, the government immediately came in, cancelled 

those contracts unilaterally. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, they 

introduced retroactive legislation to cancel the contracts with 

the farmers. 



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

The government skips out scot-free whereas us farmers had to 

remain in the program and the only way that we could move out 

of the program would be on a buy-out phase which has turned 

out to be a major problem in this last fiasco of sending out the 

bills. 

 

We moved from the cancelling of the contracts, Mr. Speaker, in 

1992 to the next years when there were changes each and every 

year, to a point in March of 1995 when the Agriculture minister 

of the day in this House, on behalf of cabinet and the 

government opposite, made an announcement that they would 

indeed not be collecting the GRIP bills. 

 

The fiasco continues, Mr. Speaker. We went on to have a 

balanced budget, which the government opposite is happy to 

talk about, balancing the budget on the backs of the farmers of 

this province when they took  or stole, I guess would be a 

better word  $188 million of farmers’ money out of the GRIP 

program to balance their budget. 

 

Small wonder, Mr. Speaker, that crop sector programs are 

sceptical in the eyes of most farmers. Mr. Speaker, if I could, I 

would like to quote an article from a gentleman in Aneroid 

where he talks about the GRIP program. And the article is 

entitled “The Last Straw.” And I quote: 

 

Recently, when I picked up the mail, I got a surprise bill 

from the GRIP wind-up for the amount of 20,559. That 

was the last straw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m quoting the farmer from Aneroid. 

 

Another article, Mr. Speaker, if I can, from the Leader-Star 

services by Murray Mandryk, where the headlines read, “Rural 

youth vanishing breed.” Small wonder that we can keep our 

youth in rural Saskatchewan on the farms when there is no 

sustainable, long-term plan to keep our farmers here on the 

farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, GRIP is just one example of why our farmers are 

sceptical of this government and that there is no long-term plan 

and commitment. 

 

Another example is crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. As we look at 

our crop insurance program, as we have fewer and fewer 

farmers involved in the program, as the premiums rise higher 

and higher and our paybacks are lower and lower, small wonder 

that farmers are sceptical about joining the crop insurance 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I could quote again from the Outlook paper 

where the headline reads, “Upshall slams door on Outlook Crop 

Insurance office.” Just one of eight offices that were indeed 

cancelled, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1500) 

 

If I can quote as well from an article that will be coming out in 

The Western Producer this Thursday, where they talk about the 

decline in program participation has been attributed to concerns 

about ongoing changes in program design and delivery and  

premium costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that article can relate to all crop sector programs 

in this province, including GRIP, including the crop insurance, 

including the crop sector program that we’re probably going to 

have in this province in the coming year that we’re not so sure 

will be of any value to any farmers in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another article . . . We talked about, earlier 

on, about the scepticism. And another article in the paper is 

entitled, “Review of crop insurance.” Now, Mr. Speaker, we 

went ahead, or the minister went ahead, laid off many 

employees, closed eight offices, gave notices to 154 crop 

insurance agents that the contracts which will come due by the 

end of July will not be renewed. 

 

And then the article talks about review of crop insurance. Little 

wonder there’s scepticism, Mr. Speaker, to this government’s 

plan for any future farm safety programs when the minister 

makes wholesale changes to the program and then goes about 

on a perceived input from our farmers around the province. 

After he’s already changed the program, made up his mind that 

it will not change for this year, he goes out on the pretence that 

he is going indeed to listen to the farmers of the province to see 

what crop insurance they need. 

 

Another headline, Mr. Speaker, is: “Crop insurance reviewed as 

farmer participation drops.” It’s a little bit like closing a door 

after the horses are out. We review it after we’ve changed the 

program. Participation has dropped; farmers will not participate 

in the program any more which we so desperately need in this 

province  a small wonder that farmers are sceptical about 

what the government is doing. 

 

As I mentioned a little earlier, Mr. Speaker, there is going to be 

a crop sector program in this province this coming year as well 

as crop insurance. Both programs will be funded with money 

that was already previously spent once. There will be no new 

money in the programs from the provincial government for the 

farmers. And once again, likely at the end of this coming crop 

year, there will be money left again because the programs are 

virtually useless for the farmers of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite again talked this afternoon 

about federal programs, as they continually like to blame the 

federal government now for everything that happens that’s 

wrong in this province. They wore out the previous 

Conservative bashing, and now it’s the federal Liberals. 

 

I would like to point out that the NDP’s brothers in Ottawa, 

who are the very people that supported a railway strike when 

our grain was sitting in the bins . . . we were not able to get it to 

port. The federal government was moving to get these people 

back to work, get the grain moving, which meant millions and 

millions of dollars from the farmers of this country. And yet the 

federal NDP voted to let the railway workers stay out on strike. 

It’s a little bit ironic that they criticize the federal government 

when their own people there are bashing on the farmers as well. 

 

They talk about the federal government, and I would just like to 

point out a few areas where the federal government kicks in  



360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

billions and billions of dollars into this province. And I’m 

wondering what would happen if we didn’t have those dollars 

coming in with the lack of commitment to the farming 

community that we have by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If I can raise the NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) 

programs, Mr. Speaker, in three different areas and we start 

with the NISA basic program where in ‘94-95 there was about 

$23 million injected into farmers in this province; ’95 there’d 

be about 51; in 1996 another $66 million. 

 

We move on to the NISA enhanced program and in ‘94-95, Mr. 

Speaker, we had $36 million. This year we’ll have another $42 

million. NISA kick-start, once again last year 40 million; this 

year another $60 million, Mr. Speaker. We have the crop sector 

companion programs where last year we had . . . or this year we 

will have 54 million injected, increasing to 104 million in the 

following year. 

 

Agri-food innovation fund, Mr. Speaker, ‘95-96, 4 million; next 

year 20 million; the following year another $40 million, Mr. 

Speaker. No small sum of money to help out the farmers in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, the program that we were just 

talking about that are in such dire straits in this province. And 

last year 67 million; this year 68 million; next year an additional 

74 million, Mr. Speaker. Millions and millions of dollars. And 

yet this government continually tends to call down the federal 

government and indicates at their lack of support for the 

province’s farmers. I think the shoe’s on the other foot, Mr. 

Speaker, and I believe it’s this government that has a lack of 

commitment to the farmers of this province. 

 

Interest on cash advances, Mr. Speaker, ‘94-95 some 8 million; 

this year another 8 million; next year could be as high as 12 

million, 13 million, Mr. Speaker. The list goes on and on and 

on with the amount of money that the federal government is 

pumping into Saskatchewan to prop up the agriculture 

community, which this government fails to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say that our intention is to work with 

farmers of the province, the very background that I have come 

from. And I will be talking to many, many farmers and I have 

done so already. Farmers continue to call me asking what 

support there is for them and why this government has a lack of 

respect for the farmers of this province. And I can tell you that 

farmers are very much upset out there and will be very sceptical 

when it comes to putting together any form of safety net 

programs in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of the province indeed do not trust this 

government. As I indicated earlier we talked about the farm 

safety nets, the GRIP fiasco, the lack of commitment in the crop 

insurance program which we should have had a new program in 

place for this coming year, Mr. Speaker, when we don’t have. 

We’re once again going to be relying on a program that is 

outdated, that is in debt, that doesn’t meet the needs of the 

producers, and yet there is no commitment to ensuring anything 

new for this year. We talked about 1997 and all we can hope, 

Mr. Speaker, is that by 1997 that this government does have the  

courage to come forward with a new plan that will mean 

something to the producers of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, if I could, I would just like to say again 

that the reason that we moved the amendment to this motion is 

that the farmers do not trust this government and will not, and 

we will be working with them to try and come up with a 

sustainable plan that will meet the needs of the farmers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if I could I’d like to move this motion: 

 

And that all words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 

following words substituted therefor: 

 

Condemns the provincial government for failing to work in 

the best interest of Saskatchewan farmers by: (1) 

unilaterally tearing up thousands of gross revenue 

insurance program contracts without having an alternate 

effective farm support program in place; and (2) breaking 

its word by sending GRIP overpayment bills after it 

expressly promised in the legislature not to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do move, seconded by the member from 

Saltcoats. 

 

The Speaker:  The amendment is moved by the hon. member 

for Arm River, and because the Speaker has not had a chance to 

peruse the amendment earlier, I’d just like to take a moment to 

ensure that it’s in order. 

 

I find the amendment in order. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Ms. 

Murrell’s resolution in part reads fair and . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I have to remind the hon. 

member that it’s out of order to refer to other hon. members by 

their proper names but only in their roles of constituencies, and 

I’ll simply ask the member to proceed without that reference. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I apologize. Mr. Speaker, the 

mover’s resolution reads, in part, “fair and affordable approach 

to farm security” and I would agree with that  if it were so. 

But I have many reservations if that will really happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the premiums have to be reflected in the coverage. 

At present, the premiums are far too high for the little bit of 

coverage that farmers do receive. Mr. Speaker, we do not want 

to repeat the mistakes that were made by the provincial 

government with the GRIP program. A lot of those mistakes 

included the unilateral decision by the NDP provincial 

government to change the terms of the GRIP contracts in ’92 

which resulted in the breaking of written contracts with farmers 

that signed in good faith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will take a long time and lots of consultation 

with grain farmers if we want to regain their faith and 

confidence in the ability of government to administer a farm 

income security program after the breaking of these contracts. 

 

Also with GRIP, we want to never, ever repeat the disaster of  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

the manner in which Saskatchewan GRIP program was wound 

up, and as my colleague has mentioned, calling in for bills to be 

repaid that were promised would never be recalled. 

 

On March 31, ’95, the former minister of Agriculture, Darrel 

Cunningham, stated in the legislature that the government 

would not attempt to collect GRIP overpayments. The exact 

quotation is, “Governments should keep their promises.” When 

the minister of Agriculture promises farmers that the GRIP 

overpayments will not be collected, farmers rely on the word of 

the minister and make financial arrangements accordingly. It’s 

simply not fair for the new Minister of Agriculture to come 

back and change his mind and say, in effect, oh, we were only 

kidding; now you’ll have to pay back the overpayments you 

received. 

 

An Hon. Member:  We were only campaigning. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Campaigning. Yes, that’s part of it. 

 

Crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, at present is too expensive and is 

also far too complicated. In designing a new farm income 

security program we won’t want to repeat the mistakes of the 

Saskatchewan crop insurance program. The record of saying 

one thing and then doing another thing is disgraceful. 

 

Undertaking an expensive internal re-engineering program in 

’94 called the strategic plan, Vision 2000, which talked in 

glowing terms about shared values, consultations with users and 

employees, then commissioned Ernst & Young to write an 

internal report on the reorganization of the crop insurance 

program  at a cost, I might add, of $85,000  which 

ultimately recommended the closure of 8 of the 29 customer 

service offices. Absolutely nothing was said in the strategic 

plan, Vision 2000, about shutting down customer service 

offices. 

 

Here again we have to regain the trust and confidence before 

we can persuade farmers to join in the creation of a new farm 

income security program, whether that be ordinary crop 

insurance or income insurance. 

 

On February 19, 1996 the Minister of Agriculture announced 

the closure of eight customer service offices. He also 

announced the elimination of the Crop Insurance Corporation’s 

network of marketing agents effective July 31, 1996, Mr. 

Speaker. From now on crop insurance will not be purchased at 

the farm gate but only in government offices. 

 

The very next day, February 20, the minister had the nerve to 

invite the public then to participate in public consultations 

about improvements to the crop insurance program. After the 

fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This review is supposed to deal with the coverage levels, 

premium costs and program debt. Town hall meetings were 

announced for 10 communities running from March 4 to 8. It’s 

difficult to have any faith in these consultations when the 

government has just finished shutting down eight offices 

without any consultation with the users about the issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to touch briefly on the NISA and the 

enhanced NISA, which in my estimation are two very good 

programs that are going to help in bad years and they are going 

to also be a form of a retirement program for farmers. I would 

hope, in the wisdom of the people and the powers to be in this 

government, that when they bring in new safety nets, for 

goodness sake do not change these programs for the sake of 

saving a buck to bring us in a new safety net. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, a new crop insurance should 

take more into account such things as input costs of fuel, 

fertilizer, chemicals and pesticides, because our input costs 

have increased drastically, our coverage has gone down and our 

premiums have gone up. And therefore this program has 

became useless. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agriculture program is getting smaller. It’s 

been downsized. Crop coverage is very low. And the minister 

has said crop insurance cuts will save $5 million. At the same 

time, being very hypocritical, the government has grown. The 

cabinet has got bigger; ministerial assistants have been hired; a 

deputy minister has been hired; for roughly a figure of two and 

a half million dollars. Well there goes half the cost we saved by 

shutting all our crop insurance offices and laying off the rural 

people in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the number of farmers 

covered by crop insurance is also deceiving. Mr. Speaker, many 

farmers list a crop that they do not seed just to keep their 

contract open. These numbers are counted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the banks insist that farmers sign over crop 

insurance in many cases to receive an operating loan. So in 

other words they are blackmailed. Many of these people 

wouldn’t touch crop insurance because it’s far too expensive. 

 

All of these issues, Mr. Speaker, have to be addressed in the 

new plan. And for that reason I will be supporting the 

amendment put forth by my colleague. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I stand 

here today with great excitement and somewhat concerned, with 

a farmer’s background myself, thinking of the challenges and 

changes facing farmers. 

 

Farmers are facing challenges with the elimination of the Crow 

benefit, deregulation of the rail transportation, the influence of 

international trade and agreements. We need to work with 

farmers, farm organizations, industry and government, to design 

a workable and affordable farm security program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was listening to the opposition speak on this 

government, that they weren’t supporting farm input costs. I  



362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

can tell you, Mr. Speaker, annually, last year we spent 117 

million on fuel tax rebate; PST (provincial sales tax) 

exemptions for machinery and repairs, 59 million; other inputs, 

53 million; and value of reduced interest under feeder-breeder 

program, 2 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government spends $425.50 per 

capita  the highest in all of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford:  But, Mr. Speaker, the federal government, at 

the same time that we are helping the farmers with the input 

costs, they are generating input costs for them. The Crow 

benefit is being eliminated with a loss to the farmers of $300 

million annually. 

 

I think we want to tell the members opposite that they need to 

talk to their federal counterparts. The key here is to diversify, 

Mr. Speaker  value added production in agriculture 

biotechnology and marketing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers have diversified in my area. They are 

growing peas, seed potatoes, game farming, and berries, just to 

mention a few. Farmers in the Choiceland area, Mr. Speaker, 

are growing about 500 acres of seed potatoes, working together 

with industry. This processing plant, Mr. Speaker, generates 11 

full-time jobs and this industry is looking at expanding to 5,000 

acres of seeded potatoes. There are also other areas that they are 

seeding potatoes in my constituency for seed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also some of the farmers have diversified into elk. Mr. Speaker, 

elk has generated a great lot of revenue for the farmers. There 

are farmers in the Smeaton area, White Star, and Samburg that 

are raising elk. Farmers are also raising bison, and also a 

number of our first nations reserves. We have the Sturgeon 

Lake Reserve and the Wahpeton Reserve, and farmers in the 

Spruce Home and White Fox area are also raising bison. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers are diversifying, and industry is reacting 

in many areas. There are almost 300 processing companies in 

the province. This helps in two ways. Over 6,000 long-term 

jobs, but even more so, Mr. Speaker, processing plants are 

being built closer to the farmers and allowing for more 

affordable transportation for them. Mr. Speaker, rural-based 

companies account for 57 per cent of processing. The balance 

of 30 per cent is located in Regina and Saskatoon, and 13 per 

cent in urban centres. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, farm organizations, farmers, industries 

and government, are working together. With that, I will be 

supporting the motion and not supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I’m so pleased that we have the 

opportunity today to address the issues involving farmers, farm 

organizations, and farm security in the House today. 

 

As you are aware, agriculture is a vital part of my 

constituency’s economy and of the province’s economy as a  

whole. It deserves time and attention from all of us. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve spoken with many of my constituents, and I feel it 

is my responsibility to bring some of their concerns to the 

House today, concerns that need an answer from this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my background is in farming. I was raised on a 

farm and I brought my children up on a farm. And we were 

involved in the hog industry. The hog industry is something that 

has been addressed in the government’s newest document, their 

Partnership for Growth, and I was delighted to see that and yet 

at the same time surprised when I realized that out of all the 

provinces in Canada, there’s only two that actually had a 

decline in hog numbers in the last year. And Saskatchewan. . . 

B.C. (British Columbia) was one of them, and that was because 

most of that area had been cemented over that was used in the 

hog industry, and Saskatchewan’s growth numbers have 

actually gone down as well. 

 

Our producers are struggling under the unfair taxes of the PST 

that Alberta does not have, and Manitoba’s taxes are 

considerably lower. One producer has told me that his operation 

has an increase of $300 a month in the utility rates, and this is 

going to amount to about $3,600 this year or about a quarter of 

his bottom line. 

 

How is this a commitment to helping farmers gain financial 

security? In the member’s motion, she mentions a workable, 

fair, and equitable approach to farm security. Something 

affordable from this government would be a nice change. 

 

This government’s policies have been anything but affordable 

for the farmers; their high taxes, their high utility rates, and the 

bureaucratic road blocks have discouraged expansion. They’ve 

made it harder and harder for our farmers to create their own 

opportunities. 

 

We have people in this province who are willing to set up 

further processing industries in grain, cattle, hogs, and poultry. 

We have manufacturers in rural Saskatchewan who want to 

grow and flourish. 

 

I work with people in businesses who are committed to 

agriculture through manufacturing and process: Del-Air 

industries in Humboldt that sell a lot of ventilation equipment 

not only across Canada but in the United States and as far away 

as Japan; Bourgault Industries who sells equipment right 

around the world as well, and their newest plant expansion is 

not in Saskatchewan; Schulte Industries who sell right across 

Canada, and one of . . . the CEO (chief executive officer) there 

told me the other day that unless profit stops being a swear 

word in the vocabulary of this province, we’re going to be in 

big trouble. These people are looking for good news from this 

government, and I think it’s about time they found it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have to point out the irony when this 

government talks about fair approaches and then holds the 

unfair regulations of the farm fuel tax rebate. Farmers in the 

same households are eligible unless they are husband and wife 

or common law couples. It’s time this government started 

recognizing that all farmers, whether they are male or female or  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

whether they are married or singles, are farmers. Farm security 

should be available to everyone, not just a selective, 

male-dominated process here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I conclude I would like to make one last 

point to this Assembly. If this government truly believes that 

agriculture is the backbone of the economy, then why do they 

continue to heap problems upon our farmers: the GRIP bills, 

utility rate increases, the poor roads, and the hospital closure? If 

this government truly wants to work with farmers and farm 

organizations, why is there really no grand strategy for rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Farm security means an opportunity to ensure that there is a 

bright future for tomorrow for our children. Farmers are 

gamblers, Mr. Speaker, by their nature. They have to gamble on 

the weather. They have to gamble on prices. They have to 

gamble on interest rates and they have to gamble on the whims 

of markets. What farmers don’t need, Mr. Speaker, is to have to 

gamble that the government is on their side as well. 

 

I’m all for the underlying principle behind the member’s 

motion, but I can’t support it. It’s time for a lot less talk and a 

lot more action. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m not 

sure if it’s a pleasure to rise today or not, to talk about the 

destruction of farming in Saskatchewan, but I think this is the 

place where it should be discussed and where some of the 

solutions to the problems in farming today should be coming 

from. 

 

But unfortunately the government opposite are not the people to 

be presenting the viable options for farmers of Saskatchewan. I 

think back to the promises that were brought forward by the 

Premier when he was in opposition, prior to ’91; how he was 

going to do things so much better. He was going to get more 

money out of Ottawa. 

 

Well there was a little trip that the Premier took to Ottawa, 

along with a number of friends of the NDP Party — and 

perhaps even the member from Wood River attended on that 

trip — where they went down to Ottawa to beg the prime 

minister of the day for more money. And what did they come 

back with, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I think it’s very clear to every 

farmer in this province what they came back with. They came 

back with a bill for Saskatchewan farmers of $120,000 for the 

airplane ride to Ottawa and back, and that was it. There was no 

additional support garnered by the member from Riversdale for 

the farmers of this province. 

 

The member from Cut Knife, in her opening remarks, stated 

that GRIP was the shortest-existing long-term program for 

farmers in this province. And I agree with her; it indeed was. 

Because it came into place in 1991 and as soon as the members 

opposite were elected to government, they set about destroying 

the program. They set about destroying the program, a program 

which the Premier had said he was going to make bigger and 

better and spend more money on. 

But unfortunately he appointed as an Agriculture minister the 

member from Rosetown, who only believes in tearing things 

down. When he was appointed the minister of Highways he 

wanted to turn them all into gravel roads. So when he had the 

opportunity in Agriculture, what did he do? He tore up the 

GRIP contracts. He killed the GRIP program, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but the corpse was still there. 

 

So we move on a little time to the current Minister of 

Agriculture who claimed in his days in opposition that he was 

going to make things better for farmers in Saskatchewan. And 

what did he do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? He buried GRIP. The 

minister from Rosetown killed it and the member from Watrous 

buried it. And that’s why we had the shortest-lived long-term 

farm program in Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but before . . . after they killed it and 

before they buried it, we had another Agriculture minister in 

Saskatchewan, the member for Canora, Darrel Cunningham. 

And Mr. Cunningham got a little desperate during the election 

campaign that he wasn’t going to win his seat. So he promised 

that the GRIP overpayments from 1991, which occurred 

because of the changes the member from Rosetown had made 

and changed the program, the member from Canora, Mr. 

Cunningham, who is no longer in this seat . . . The current 

member for Canora thought I was casting aspersions upon her, 

which was not the case. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the previous member for Canora, Mr. 

Cunningham . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Are you casting aspirations? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  No, I don’t; not up there. 

 

Said that, to try and win his seat, that he would forgive the 

GRIP program overpayments. And he was backed up by his 

Premier because of the chances of losing not only that 

individual’s seat but a number of seats in the area. The Premier 

backed him up on that particular promise, that the GRIP 

overpayments would be forgiven. 

 

So what happens? The government opposite is re-elected. The 

current Minister of Agriculture takes over the portfolio and 

deep sixes that promise  another broken NDP promise. That’s 

what you hear falling in this province, is NDP campaign 

promises. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Dan, you’re hurting my feelings. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Unfortunately the member from 

Watrous has a thin skin today. 

 

So they buried that program, Mr. Speaker, and sent out 12,000 

farmers’ bills, of which a number have been returned. 

 

But even on that issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to  



364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

overpayments the government opposite certainly seems to be 

willing to collect them but somewhat more reluctant to pay 

them, particularly when it comes out of their own pocket rather 

than some unknown farmer across Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where do the GRIP overpayments come from? 

The GRIP overpayments came because the member from 

Rosetown changed the rules. In Manitoba those rules didn’t 

change. The farmers there collected $20,000 more than the 

farmers in Saskatchewan collected. The price of grain . . . it 

didn’t matter whether you grew it in Carberry, Manitoba, or 

Nipawin or Shaunavon or Alida. It didn’t matter where it was 

grown, the price of wheat was the same thing across western 

Canada. 

 

The only thing that changed was the support programs. In 

Alberta the farmers there collected almost $10,000 more than 

what the farmers in Saskatchewan collected. Again the prices 

were the same; only the programs were different. 

 

And farmers out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are not happy 

about the changes implemented by the member from Rosetown 

when he was the Agriculture minister; Darrel Cunningham 

when he was the member for Canora  and ultimately cost him 

his defeat  or the member from Watrous when he sent out the 

GRIP bills. 

 

I have a letter from a farmer that was sent to the Premier, and I 

think expresses the anger that farmers feel over their betrayal  

their betrayal by the broken campaign promises of the members 

opposite. And I would like to read this letter into the record, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that all the people in Saskatchewan at 

some point in time, when they have a chance to review the 

records of this Assembly, can understand and feel the anger that 

farmers feel towards this particular government. 

 

And it wasn’t just the Premier that received this letter, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I was glad to see the member from 

Redberry Lake up and speaking earlier because he received one 

of these letters. In fact his name is second on the list after the 

Premier’s name. Other members who received it was the current 

Minister of Health from Saskatoon; the Minister of Agriculture, 

the member for Watrous; the member for Melville, the Leader 

of the Official Opposition; and the Leader of the Third Party. 

 

And unfortunately some of the members are complaining that 

they didn’t receive a copy. Well I think that I’m more than 

prepared to give this to the Clerk’s office and they can 

photocopy one for the current member for Canora . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will read this letter: 

 

I am extremely disappointed in your government’s 

handling of the gross revenue insurance plan while it was 

in effect and especially the way your government cancelled 

GRIP. 

 

Since my vote in the last election got you back in as 

Premier of Saskatchewan, and during the provincial 

election campaign last spring you and Agriculture minister  

Cunningham said farmers would not have to repay 

overpayments we received in 1993, could you kindly pay 

the amount owing to Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation of $534.19 on my behalf. 

 

I really wonder whether the Premier has provided that money. 

He’s unwilling to give up his 4,400. I’m sure that this poor 

farmer is still waiting for the Premier to pay this bill for him. 

Carry on: 

 

This statement really hurts me, (I have to edit certain words 

out of here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the farmer was fairly 

forceful in his comments) especially when you and your 

NDP constituency were campaigning last spring saying 

farmers would not have to repay the overpayment received 

in 1993. Then once elected you and your Agriculture 

minister from Watrous changed your tune. Furthermore, 

when the Tories released a leaked document January 11, 

1996, saying the bills were going out, the minister 

responded by saying the information was incomplete and 

distorted. 

 

Those were the current Minister of Agriculture’s words. 

 

The minister is full of it. He knew what was happening. It 

is these kinds of actions  integrity and the credibility of 

the minister and the Premier  that are in question. Who 

do you believe and when do you believe them? 

 

We joined the gross revenue insurance plan to subsidize 

our income due to low grain prices and high input costs. 

Today the grain prices are up. We are trying to get ahead of 

the game. With input costs rising at the same rate, we do 

not have the $534.19 to hand to the government. Also it 

seems to be very timely that the western grain transition 

payments are being made and your government decides to 

send these bills to repay the 1993 overpayments. 

 

I am sure we are not the only farmers in Saskatchewan in 

this situation. Not having these funds, just remember who 

elected you into power in this province in the last election. 

 

I think that letter explains what a good many farmers in 

Saskatchewan feel. And I think it also has a veiled threat to it, 

to remember for those members of the government just who did 

elect them. And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, their 

actions already prove that they have little or no consideration 

for the people who actually vote for them and place them in 

their seats. 

 

What happened with the GRIP money that was already in the 

program, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because there was a significant 

amount of money there. Money that had been allocated by the 

federal government, the provincial government, and the 

farmers. Money that had been allocated by . . . not by but for 

agriculture. And I’m glad to hear that the member from 

Rosetown has a few comments to make. Unfortunately there 

aren’t any gravel roads . . . highways left that aren’t gravelled in 

this province. 

 

What happened with the money from the GRIP program? Well  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

there was $782 million of surplus in Saskatchewan’s GRIP 

program. And the provincial government opposite, who are now 

claiming that the federal government is downloading on them, 

isn’t giving them any money, turned around and gave the 

federal government back $326 million. 

 

Now the people of Saskatchewan certainly could have used 

$326 million. But no, we got to send it back to Ottawa. And 

what happened to the rest of it? I mean there was 782 million in 

there. 

 

Well the provincial government took out $188 million to 

balance their budget last year. That’s how they balanced the 

budget. It wasn’t the Finance minister who through some magic 

wand balanced the budget. It wasn’t through cuts on her staff or 

cuts to the government. It was from taking it out of farmers’ 

pockets. And the member from Saskatoon Haultain is waving 

his pay slip around to show that he got his share of the $188 

million. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s the one of those that should be 

turning his $4,400 back in because the farmers had to pay their 

overpayment back, and the members opposite should do the 

same thing if they had the integrity to do it. 

 

Well when farmers look at the rest of the money that was into 

there, the government said that they were putting some into 

agriculture programs. Well it sounds good. I mean the money 

was already supposed to have been allocated for agriculture. 

But we’re going to put more money into agriculture. But what 

they didn’t tell the people of Saskatchewan is when they put in 

the 65 to $70 million into agriculture, they sucked the same 

amount out at another spot so that there was no net increase to 

agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact is if you look at the numbers, there was four hundred 

and thirty-some million dollars in the budget of 1991 for 

agriculture. The budget for ’95 from the Minister of Finance 

here was $306 million, a decrease of $130 million. And that’s 

after  after, Mr. Deputy Speaker  they pulled the $188 

million out of the GRIP program. They couldn’t even give that 

back to the farmers. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government 

opposite does not have the credibility with farmers to even 

consider putting in a new program. 

 

So the GRIP program . . . squeaks the member from Rosetown, 

the man who broke the contracts, who broke the contracts. The 

contract said that you had to have any changes in place in the 

farmers’ hands by March 15. So what happened? Well the 

minister comes up on March 18 and says, we have a new plan 

here, and by golly, I’m deeming this to have happened on 

March 15. I think it is only him and God that have the ability to 

deem. But he did it. And because the farmers did not have the 

financial wherewithal, because their money had been taken 

from them, could not launch the court challenge. 

 

There were others in this province that did have the financial 

wherewithal to challenge this government when they deemed 

things to have happened, and that was the Federated Co-op 

system. They took the government to court and won. But the 

farmers didn’t have the financial wherewithal to do it because  

the government had taken their money. And the government in 

Saskatchewan pocketed the differences, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we’re talking about 13,000 grain cars that producers 

would like to purchase. Well the farmers in Manitoba have 

$20,000 each in their pocket that they can go out and help pay 

for these hopper cars; the farmers in Alberta have $10,000 each 

that they can go out and help pay for those hopper cars; and 

what do the farmers in Saskatchewan have? They have a GRIP 

bill. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is because of this government that the 

farmers in this province are going to have a great deal of 

difficulty being able to participate in paying for those hopper 

cars, because the government opposite took their money. 

 

So what happened when the GRIP debate was on, Mr. Speaker? 

Well the opposition of the day, the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) Party, rang the bells to let people across this 

province know what the issues were. Eighteen days, and the 

Speaker changed the rules and put an end to it. That’s what 

happened, and the GRIP Bill passed. 

 

And the farmers were a little upset about this happening. They 

had a rally on the lawn of the legislature and it was a fairly 

good-sized rally. There was 800-or-so people out there. And it 

was interesting that the member from Rosetown, the 

Agriculture minister, he came out and talked. They hung him in 

effigy, but he was out there and talked to them. And then they 

had to redistribute his seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They were a 

little concerned he was going to lose his seat, so they 

redistributed it. They stuck in some good NDP territory up in 

Biggar so that they could win that seat. But unfortunately that 

meant they had to do something with the then member from 

Biggar, so they parachuted him into Saskatoon. 

 

You know they have to protect their own; they do a very good 

job of that. They circle the wagons and point out. So the 

members opposite, during the GRIP debate, when the farmers 

were rallying on the doorstep of the legislature, each and every 

one of them went outside and tried to buttonhole somebody to 

convince them that this GRIP program, this new, improved 

GRIP program, was going to be their salvation. 

 

And indeed even the member from Shaunavon, of the day, the 

current member from Wood River when he was the NDP 

member, was out there lobbying on behalf of the GRIP changes. 

He thought it was a heck of a good idea. The fact is he even had 

a bigger plan, but he couldn’t convince his colleagues of it. 

 

So as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, agriculture 

spending in Saskatchewan under the current administration has 

dropped from about 420 million to 306. 

 

(1545) 

 

An Hon. Member:  And the farmers make money on their 

own. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  And the member claims the farmers are  



366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

making money on their own. 

 

Well it would be nice, it would be nice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 

that was indeed the case. What happened with grain prices? 

Well wheat prices have gone up indeed, and transportation 

costs have gone up equally. Fertilizer prices have gone up, 

machinery prices have gone up, and why has that happened? 

Well telephone bills have gone up, power bills have gone up, 

fuel taxes have gone up, fertilizer taxes have gone up. It’s all 

. . . the only person who’s making more money out of this, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the government members. 

 

But they are going to keep their $4,400. Don’t take a chance on 

that; we’re not giving that up. They’re taking the money out of 

the farmers’ pockets, but they got it safely tucked away in hip 

national . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from Wood 

River is a little concerned that perhaps the farmers are hearing 

about his support for the GRIP changes. 

 

Crop insurance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The government wants to 

make some changes to crop insurance. Well they have made 

some changes to crop insurance. In 1994 they put in place the 

whole farm safety net program. So you couldn’t cover just 

specific crops that you were producing; you had to cover the 

whole gamut. A lot farmers were unhappy about that, Mr. 

Speaker. They believed that they were good at growing one 

particular crop but were a little shaky on something else 

perhaps, something new that they wanted to try out. But they 

have to cover everything now. 

 

And these changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, made a lot of the crop 

insurance programs unaffordable. And because they’re 

unaffordable, because they don’t provide the adequate 

protections that are needed, a large number of farmers dropped 

out of the program, and indeed they continue to do so. 

 

And one of the areas where crop insurance was changed that 

we’re seeing a dramatic impact this winter is on wildlife 

depredation. The government changed the program so that 

anybody who suffered any wildlife depredation could not 

receive any compensation. In Manitoba they cover 75 per cent 

of any losses to just over $7,000. In Alberta they cover up to 80 

per cent of the loss to over $10,000. But in Saskatchewan, 

under our enlightened agricultural-based government, we have 

no protection. And this is from the people who believe that they 

have credibility to design a new program that will work. 

 

The next thing they did is they eliminated 60 full-time positions 

throughout Crop Insurance around Saskatchewan. They 

terminated over 150 crop insurance agents. Again, people that 

were dealing hands on with the farmers out in the field. Now 

they have to go down to, perhaps even down to the Crop 

Insurance office in Melville to find anybody who’s actually 

working there any more. 

 

And who benefited from these savings that — the cuts to over 

200 people — Crop Insurance is going to make? Who benefited 

from this over $5 million? The farmers pay for the crop 

insurance program along with the federal and provincial 

government. The farmers have a share in that. But it’s the 

government that benefits for this. It’s the government that  

benefits for this. 

 

And then we come down to the next hit that farmers and farm 

programs face in this province, and that is our roads or lack 

thereof in this province. And the member from Rosetown is the 

member who wanted to turn them all into gravel roads. Well, 

Mr. Minister, you may have had a decent idea there considering 

you are not fixing any of the roads. They might have been a lot 

better off having had gravel than the holes that the current 

Minister for Highways leaves in there, where people fall in and 

damage their cars. 

 

The member wants to talk about the debt. This will be 

interesting. The current member for Regina . . . he used to be 

the member for Regina Dewdney; I’m not sure what seat he 

represents now because he’s generally in school. But when he 

was the deputy premier, he stood in here and said that there was 

indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a debt held by the province of 

Saskatchewan prior to the election in 1982. This was a great 

revelation to the members opposite, but it certainly wasn’t a 

revelation to the people on this side . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . No it wasn’t $15 billion; it was approximately 8 billion, 

approximately 8 billion. 

 

And when you take 24 per cent interest rates on $8 billion, Mr. 

Member from Rosetown, it does add up fast. Ask all the 

farmers that had to face it themselves because of the programs 

that were not in place and were put in place by the previous 

administration  programs that were not in place when your 

previous government was defeated in 1982. You had programs 

then that didn’t pay farmers when they needed it, and that’s 

what kind of programs you’re trying to design today. That’s the 

kind of program you left in place with GRIP. 

 

So we have a program happening here, Mr. Speaker, of not 

building the roads, not building the roads after the Crow has 

been killed by the official opposition’s cousins in Ottawa. This 

is going to have a very traumatic impact on the road structure in 

this province, and we in Saskatchewan have approximately 25 

per cent of all the roads in Canada. So more traffic on our 

roads, based on a million population, is going to have a very 

traumatic impact on the quality of our roads. 

 

And so the government opposite has to start dedicating some of 

the monies that they are collecting from the massive tax 

increases they have implemented to providing some 

infrastructure support throughout Saskatchewan. And that 

means spending some money on some of the roads. The 

Highways’ budgets have gone from $207 million in ’91 to 168 

last year. 

 

And we have faced some inflation in that time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Costs have gone up. The power rate to the Department 

of Highways has gone up. The telephone cost to the Department 

of Highways has gone up. All this time they’re sucking more 

and more money out of the budgets of each department, and 

less and less is going to maintenance and to construction. In 

fact virtually nothing is going to construction. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very difficult to believe that 

this government opposite are able to bring forward a  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

credible farm support program, especially when I take a look at 

this Saskatchewan New Democratic news release dated 

February 26, 1991. I would like to read parts of two paragraphs. 

It says, and these are in quotation marks: 

 

“In a prepared news statement today, PC MLA John 

Britton said that should . . . (the member from Riversdale) 

become Premier he would ‘tear up the agreement that 

created GRIP and NISA.’ That’s a lie, and the Devine PC 

government knows it, (the current member for Watrous) 

. . . charged. 

 

“(The member from Riversdale’s) . . . position, which has 

been stated in the news media many times, is that a New 

Democratic government would ensure farmers 

‘deal-plus.’” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have GRIP paying out a large amount of 

money. We have a GRIP program where the government turned 

around and sent $782 million back to the contributors, and this 

is going to be deal plus? Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members 

opposite have no credibility in dealing with these issues. 

 

What the farmers of Saskatchewan want, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is a realistic hope that the government will leave agriculture in 

this province alone. Because every time the NDP intervene, it’s 

to the detriment of Saskatchewan’s agriculture. 

 

So my message is, please, no more NDP-style health from the 

city slicker lawyer from Riversdale. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this afternoon on the 

motion that we have before us that this Assembly work with 

farmers and with farm organizations and the government to 

design a fair and workable approach to farm security, and then 

the following amendment which comments basically on the 

gross revenue insurance program and the premiums that were 

required to be paid by farmers and people not wanting those 

premiums to be paid. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to comment a little bit about the 

GRIP, the gross revenue insurance program, to indicate to the 

members opposite exactly what this program is. If anyone 

thinks that it was a program of genius design, they should take 

and analyse it because what it was, was basically crop insurance 

with a different price for the crop  a price that was greater 

than what we can get in the market. So it made perfect sense to 

do everything possible not to grow anything and take all your 

money from the program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was a very simple program when you 

broke it down into a mathematical equation, exactly the same as 

crop insurance. Mind you, the only variation is the price. Crop 

insurance is the price that crop . . . the market value of crop 

times 70 per cent times the yield. 

 

The GRIP program was IMAP (indexed moving average price) 

as the price times the yield times 70 per cent. And anyone that 

has any mathematical understanding at all realizes that although 

that is in a different order, it is identically the same. The only  

thing different about it was that the IMAP price did not reflect 

what could actually be obtained in the market. And therefore it 

became very clearly a program that could be manipulated and 

used. And used it was. 

 

Now the members opposite may want to have a program like 

that, a program that teaches individuals to go to the government 

for money and to manipulate a program and to take revenue that 

has no connection at all to producing a crop. It isn’t the type of 

program that you want if you want to have a sound agricultural 

sector in the province of Saskatchewan. And the agricultural 

sector in the province of Saskatchewan is 10 per cent of the 

economy of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So if you start fooling around with it and generating a situation 

where it becomes non-productive, you are fooling with a fairly 

large chunk of the economy of this province  five times what 

it is in a lot of other provinces, four times as much as it is in the 

province of Alberta. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may feel that the loss 

of this program was a loss that they could not afford. But, Mr. 

Speaker, that is not the case. What happened is that in those 

areas and those farmers that were prepared to utilize different 

cropping techniques and to grow different things, the 

agricultural sector actually advanced much faster than what 

you’d find in the other provinces. And if anything could be 

said, it’s that the government didn’t push the other ones more. 

You could possibly make that particular point. But the point 

that you make with GRIP is not there to be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have other things that I would like to say on this 

particular debate, but I beg leave to adjourn for a later date. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The motion is defeated, the debate 

will continue and the Speaker has already spoken once and we 

will . . . the member may continue. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I am being given directions as to what to do 

from the side, from the peanut gallery, and I’m finding that I 

should take my advice from myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan in agriculture is 

facing a number of changes that have been occurring in the last 

while. The changes that are facing the south-western part of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re being 

requested to grow more than one type of crop and to do it more 

often than every second year, as the member from Shaunavon 

would like to know one of the things that’s being asked and the 

changes that are being asked in the province this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the biotech area, there has been a large number 

of changes occurring that allow for things to happen in the 

growing of crops in the province of Saskatchewan. One of the 

changes that’s occurring is that the canola is being changed so 

that it will probably be able to be grown on a system of about a  



368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

hundred miles further south in the province of Saskatchewan 

because it is becoming more drought tolerant, and that would 

increase the area that could be seeded to this particular crop. 

Mr. Speaker, increased production of specialty crops in 1995 

resulted in Saskatchewan farmers receiving $371 million from 

the market, more than the value of wheat that was grown, when 

you combine all of the specialty crops together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to build in this province on the 

strengths that are there, the strengths that we have in land area, 

in ingenuity of the farmers that are farming that land, and in the 

ability to turn the products grown into marketable items. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to leave some time for some other 

people to speak so I am going to sit down now and let others 

carry on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am really 

pleased to have the opportunity to address the motion made by 

the hon. member from Battleford-Cut Knife. Like the other 

members of our caucus, I feel that I must address this important 

issue today on behalf of my constituents and on behalf of all 

Saskatchewan farmers that this government has ignored. 

 

The member from Battleford-Cut Knife has talked about a fair 

and affordable approach to farm security. It is obvious that she 

is not a cabinet member because the NDP cabinet members 

don’t talk about meaningful support to agriculture at all. They 

only speak when it is time to announce another cut or another 

broken promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, a commitment to agriculture 

is long overdue. Forgive me for being sceptical, but this 

government’s action in the past leave me a little bit suspicious. 

The GRIP fiasco has left all farmers in total distrust of this 

government. The member from Battleford-Cut Knife mentions 

crop insurance. Well yes we do need a revamped crop insurance 

program for the one we have has been completely unaffordable. 

The NDP know this, but they have done nothing to assist 

farmers with lower premium rates. 

 

This government speaks of joint federal-provincial initiatives to 

assist agriculture. They know the federal government 

contributes a large portion of the funds for these ag programs 

but refuse to acknowledge or appreciate the federal government. 

They speak of this Assembly working with governments but 

refuse to give credit to the federal government when it most 

honourably keeps its commitment to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government is so committed to agriculture 

and to caring about farmers’ security, why then have they 

continued to ignore the rural situation? Poverty is increasing in 

rural Saskatchewan. We continue to hear daily from our rural 

families who are not able to make ends meet. They are anxious, 

and they are afraid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the use of food banks in rural areas like Unity and 

Carlyle has sky-rocketed in the past five years. It’s not easy for 

these people, people who want so desperately to make their 

own living, to have to rely on a food bank to feed their families. 

They are proud, and it is a staggering blow knowing that they 

cannot support themselves. 

 

This trend will continue as long as the NDP government 

continues to dismantle rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in the 

government’s first document on the economy, Partnership for 

Renewal, they promised to close the gap between farmers’ 

income and the income of people working in non-farming jobs, 

yet recent statistics show that urban income is still 30 per cent 

above rural income. There’s only one explanation for this, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is this government’s real lack of commitment 

to rural Saskatchewan and to agriculture. 

 

Jobs, Mr. Speaker, are not being created in rural Saskatchewan. 

Farmers need extra jobs to supplement low farm income. 

People are living in poverty. Does this sound like a government 

committed to farm security? Mr. Speaker, my constituents are 

also getting frustrated because this government has turned its 

back completely on all members of rural Saskatchewan.  

 

Let me talk about Bourgault Industries for a moment. Bourgault 

Industries manufactures farm machinery. They create jobs for 

farmers and rural people  about 500 jobs at the present time. 

These people must supplement their farm income to feed their 

families. Bourgault has not asked government for grants, so 

they have saved taxpayers money and also contributed greatly to 

the rural economy. All they ask is a decent No. 368 Highway to 

transport goods on and provide safe passage for their 

employees, school buses, and ambulance service to their plant 

and community. 

 

In this case, there is great economic activity and a great 

economic benefit to all of Saskatchewan. All they ask is a 

decent road, but this government seems unable to understand or 

to care. Nothing this government has done in the past has led 

me to believe they even recognize rural Saskatchewan, let alone 

care about it. They haven’t listened. They haven’t listened to 

farmers who complain about the state of rural highways in 

disrepair. Apparently according to this government, if a road 

doesn’t lead to a city, it’s not a road worth taking. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that rural Saskatchewan is worth it. 

That is why this government needs to make some very real, very 

effective efforts to keep agriculture alive. Farmers are and will 

always be an essential part of Saskatchewan’s economy. It 

breaks my heart to see young people having to leave the farm 

because they just can’t afford to raise their family there. Farm 

security is synonymous with rural development, and rural 

development complements and assists urban development. We 

need to hear the voice of farmers and ensure that their voices 

are included before programs are developed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree that Saskatchewan needs a workable, fair, 

and affordable approach to farm security, but it needs to be 

done by a government that is committed to a long-term future 

for farming and farm families. And this government is not. 

 



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

But we as the official opposition are committed to farming and 

the importance of agriculture in our province, and we will 

continue to fight to keep rural Saskatchewan alive. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With regards to the 

motion from the member from Battleford-Cut Knife, with farm 

organizations and with government in designing a workable fair 

and affordable program that’ll benefit Saskatchewan farmers 

and their families, I welcome this opportunity to say a few 

words in support of this motion. 

 

The economic blueprint for job creation as set out in 

Partnership For Growth identifies and builds upon the 

strengths of this great province. Mr. Speaker, one of the main 

strengths is agriculture and biotechnology. In order to achieve 

and maintain our growth in agriculture, it will require that we 

all pull together so that we can adjust successfully to the 

demands of the global market-place. And we can do this the 

Saskatchewan way: through partnership and cooperation. 

 

Rural families and communities face unique pressures thanks to 

a large extent because of the policies or lack thereof of the 

federal Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  The elimination of the Crow benefit, where were 

the cries of condemnation from our members opposite? We 

didn’t hear them. Deregulation of rail transportation, Mr. 

Speaker — I am positive that within a very short while, because 

of this policy, it’ll lead to such an abandonment of rail lines that 

two main lines will survive: the privatized CNR (Canadian 

National Railway Company) in the North and the CPR 

(Canadian Pacific Railway) in the South. The demands on rural 

Saskatchewan and this government to build and maintain roads 

will be a great challenge. 

 

Suddenly the federal government becomes greatly concerned 

and announces a grant of $20 million to fix 60,000 miles of 

rural roads. Thank you very much. First it takes away the Crow; 

slashes, gouges, and removes $320 million, and then returns a 

mere pittance. We should be thankful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another hurdle to overcome is the ongoing debate 

over our marketing institutions. Controversy about the 

Canadian Wheat Board and hog producers has raised a lot of 

serious debate. The western grain marketing panel meetings 

were well attended and the overwhelming majority of farmers 

who attended these meetings indicated they are in favour of the 

CWB maintaining its monopoly status. 

 

And we of course strongly support that; 81 per cent of the 

farmers in our poll said that they support the WCB as it 

currently operates, and this is consistent with previous surveys. 

 

Our survey indicates that if people are confronted with a simple 

question about choice, the dual market, then they like the 

concept of choice. But if choice threatens the board as it 

currently operates, then producers want a strong wheat board  

that can exercise market power through a single desk. 

 

We must and we will find ways to build effective marketing 

mechanisms that will allow producers to receive maximum 

revenue and at the same time serve our customers well. An 

independent study by Kraft and Furtan indicates that the CWB 

has been worth as much as 667 million per year to western 

Canadian farmers. For a farmer growing 1,000 acres of wheat, 

this represented a net benefit of more than $33,000 per year 

from 1985 to ‘94. 

 

The authors found that the CWB, through its single-desk 

marketing, was able to extract a premium for western Canadian 

wheat among many customers. This premium was worth an 

average of 265 million per year, which comes to $13.35 per 

tonne between 1980-81 and ’93-94. 

 

So these are significant issues facing not only rural areas, not 

only Saskatchewan, but the whole nation. And while we sit 

complacently, the very fabric of the Canadian identity, which 

makes this the greatest place in the world to live, is being 

shredded apart by a federal government which has no vision, no 

plans for a strong, united Canada, and is letting everything go. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Wall:  The federal government remains committed to 

reducing the CHST (Canada Health and Social Transfer) 

transfers for health, education, and welfare programs for the 

upcoming year. Reductions to cash transfers will comprise 73 

per cent of all the federal operating expenditure reductions. The 

federal operating expenditures will decline by 11.1 per cent 

while the cash transfers will decline by over 35 per cent. 

 

Our concern with cuts to the CHST is shared not only by all 

Canadians but also by Finance ministers across the country, and 

yet Ottawa has not received the message. I wonder if our friends 

across the way have received the message. 

 

The budget is simply a move by the federal government to 

engage in deficit reduction on the backs of the poor, the sick, 

and the young. That Ottawa has made no move to address the 

inequities and unfairness of the current tax system lets us know 

exactly where they stand. They have a budget without a vision 

or a plan for the future. Federal offloading next year alone: $50 

million in health, 25 million in post-secondary education, and 

another 25 million in social services  of course we are 

concerned. 

 

Together though, we can find solutions to these challenges. 

Although these may seem as huge hurdles, we the people of 

Saskatchewan will overcome these issues. In agriculture our 

approach will be twofold: one, to protect the policies and 

institutions that serve the best interests of our farmers — a good 

example of course is the CWB — and to provide equal 

opportunity for farmers to access markets, to distribute returns 

achieved from all markets through price pooling, and to provide 

a competitive advantage for Canadian farmers by increasing 

returns through single-desk selling. Our other approach will of  



370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

course, will be to work with agriculture and with the 

communities to adapt to the change. 

 

The overall blueprint on agriculture is set out in our document 

Agriculture 2000. This document is a result of public 

consultation with the people of Saskatchewan, asking the rural 

residents how we could best help them to adjust successfully to 

the changing environment. The keys are diversification, value 

added production, agriculture biotechnology, successful 

marketing not only of our products but also of our expertise. 

 

Just a few words on diversification. More than $200 million 

will be available through various funds to encourage further 

research, development, and diversification. Significant increase 

in acres being seeded to durum, canola, flax, peas, lentils, 

beans, mustard, sunflowers, safflower  along with this 

production of special crops has come the expansion of special 

crop primary processing industry: the cleaning, the bagging, and 

the marketing of it. 

 

The value added production, the value added processing 

companies were springing up. At last count, Saskatchewan had 

296 food processing companies, employing nearly 6,000 

people. A new opportunity for them. 

 

The Saskatchewan food processing sector continues to grow, 

creating jobs and diversification opportunities for 

Saskatchewan’s agriculture and food industry. Saskatchewan 

has an abundance of raw resources, raw materials, land, and 

good people with high work ethic. We have all the things it 

takes to make a successful company and a strong industry. And 

we are doing that. 

 

The report also states that the rural-based companies account 

for 57 per cent of the total number of food processors in 

Saskatchewan. And more than half of Saskatchewan food 

processors who export are companies with less than 10 

employees. This is a confirmation of our policy that states that 

small business is playing a major role in export market 

development. 

 

The 90 million Canada-Saskatchewan agri-food innovation 

fund has identified food processing as a strategic area for 

funding. And so we have other programs. 

 

Just a word on biotechnology and agriculture. Biotechnology 

has been a part of agriculture since farmers first chose seeds 

from the best plants, hoping to produce better crops, and since 

prime animals were selected as breeding stocks to improve the 

herd. That was biotechnology. Today the methods may be more 

sophisticated but the goal is still the same  to improve the 

industry. 

 

Agriculture biotechnology is a modern tool in the old science of 

plant and animal improvement. It involves many things, and I’m 

not going to take the time to go through all of them. 

 

Ag biotechnology is not new, but it has been developed beyond 

the imagination of our ancestors and Saskatchewan is leading 

the way in the field of agriculture and biotechnology. 

 

Saskatoon’s Ag-West Biotech Incorporated, funded through 

Saskatchewan Agriculture and Foods’ Agriculture Development 

Fund, puts Saskatchewan out ahead in the development of 

research and industry networks nationally. 

 

Agriculture biotechnology is an important and exciting 

Saskatchewan industry and is ready to move this province into 

the technologically advanced century ahead. Just today we 

received a bulletin in the mail with regards to the conference 

which is going to be held in Saskatoon in June of this year, an 

international forum with regards to biotechnology and ag 

biotechnology. We are a leader not only in Canada but in the 

world. Internationally we are known. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  By the year 2000, ag biotechnology is expected to 

generate over $200 million a year in sales and provide hundreds 

of new, high skill jobs. We are working that way. 

 

The machine industry has also grown up with regards to the 

innovative farmers which we find in Saskatchewan. We have 

high quality equipment that has been developed to produce and 

harvest those crops and raise those livestock. Farm equipment 

managers, led by the most advanced dry land farming 

technology in the world, is becoming a major force in the 

Saskatchewan industrial development. Sales reached more than 

420 million in 1994, with export sales accounting for over 100 

million of the total. 

 

The Saskatchewan farm and machinery industry also employs 

more than 5,000 people. An example of this is companies like 

Flexi-coil in Saskatoon who employs around 1,200 people and 

ships its products all over the world. 

 

Bourgault Industries in St. Brieux; Morris Industries in 

Yorkton; and on the home level, small manufacturing places 

like REM Manufacturing which manufactures agriculture 

equipment. Fabro, which manufactures small seeders that are 

used on the experimental plots in universities in western 

Canada and the western United States. A great market for these 

things because of Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Saskatchewan manufacturing companies either saw an 

opportunity to improve upon existing machinery, or they had a 

concept for a new machine, and it was a need on the prairie 

farms and they developed it. An example of this type of 

development can be seen in the manufacturing of air seeders. 

Saskatchewan is considered a world leader. So we have all 

kinds of things going on in the agricultural field. 

 

I’m not going to touch on the livestock. The member from 

Saskatoon north talked a lot about these, and so I will continue 

with something else. 

 

Safety nets. We’ve heard a little bit of talk about safety nets. 

We’ve heard a lot about the GRIP program, which is over and 

done with. Let’s forget it. Let’s get on to the future because the 

future is now, and let’s take a look at what we can do. We must 

renew our national policy to maintain the provisions of a basic 

risk management package for farmers. Uniform national  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

standards must be developed, for the safety net programs are 

essential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government continues to commit to the 

agriculture sector, agri-food, and expenditures were about $425 

per capita while the federals spent a grand total of $91 per 

capita. 

 

Saskatchewan supports moving to national-based safety net 

program. All Agriculture ministers have agreed to a safety net 

framework that would consist of: crop insurance to provide 

protection against production losses, a whole farm safety net 

program to provide income protection, and companion 

programs to address province-specific needs. 

 

Saskatchewan’s interim program which is in effect for ‘96-97 is 

consistent with the framework. Decisions on the make-up of 

our future safety net package will be made once further 

consultations have been completed. Saskatchewan’s crop 

insurance program is under review. Changes will not be made 

until the 1997 crop year after consultation with the producers. 

 

The industry will continue to face change and will have to 

adapt. By working together with farmers, business, and 

government, we can work to ensure a sustainable future. And so 

it is with great pleasure that I will support the motion that this 

Assembly work with farmers, with farm organizations and with 

government in designing a workable, fair and affordable 

program that will benefit Saskatchewan farmers and their 

families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just want 

to take a few moments to raise a few points and enter this 

debate. I would suggest the reason that we have this motion 

before us this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is because this 

government has to do everything in its power to try and tell the 

people how well they govern in view of the fact that they have 

done so much to destroy so much in this province, especially in 

rural Saskatchewan. And I think when we look at agriculture, 

it’s one area that I certainly hear a lot about in my constituency, 

about the number of the problems that the farm community are 

facing. 

 

And I find it very interesting as I listen to members in the 

Assembly as they are debating this motion in front of us, about 

the fact that the government is now talking about working 

together with farm . . . farmers, farm organizations, to design a 

workable, fair and affordable approach to farm security. 

 

Well I certainly agree that something has to be done to design a 

workable, fair and affordable approach to farm security in view 

of the fact that what we have has been totally decimated and we 

really have nothing in place. 

 

The unfortunate part  and the member from Swift Current 

just alluded to the fact  that there will not be a new program 

in place for the farm community of this province until the next 

crop production year, 1997. And I say unfortunate because, Mr. 

Speaker, while we have seen substantive increases in prices for  

our commodities the last crop year was anything but rosy for 

most farm . . . or farm families in this province. Right. 

 

It doesn’t matter where you go, from one corner of this 

province to the other, there are little pockets where producers 

had excellent yields and excellent crops and good quality crops, 

but many producers across this province are facing a year when 

they had a very low production factor. And in fact some of the 

crop out in my area continues to lay in the fields and if the 

wildlife hasn’t totally damaged that crop already, there might be 

something left to harvest this spring. And under the crop 

insurance program, those farmers are going to still have to go 

out and put that  what’s left  through a combine in order to 

claim if they have anything left to claim under the crop 

insurance program. 

 

And I would suggest that certainly we need to look at 

addressing long-term farm security in view of the fact that crop 

insurance really doesn’t offer anything to the families in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that this government 

would stand up and tell us and brag about what they have done 

for farm communities and for farm families in view of the fact 

that we haven’t seen anything to date other than a lot of rhetoric 

and a lot of talk  nothing that farmers can put their hope and 

put their trust in and farm families can really rely on. 

 

I also find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that just previous, or 

even last spring when we tried to get some answers about the 

programs that were in effect and what would happen with 

regards to the GRIP bills that we were warning people that were 

going to be coming, especially if there was an election called 

and this party was re-elected to form government of the 

province — that there would be bills going out — and I 

remember the debate that took place in this Assembly where the 

former minister of Agriculture, even in question period, said 

that there wouldn’t be any bills going out; that there would be 

cheques going out to producers and there wouldn’t be any bills. 

 

We also know what took place during the election, Mr. Speaker, 

where we again had raised the issue. And it’s just as recently as 

a week or so ago the media even acknowledged the fact that we 

had warned people that there would be bills, that bills would 

have to be sent out because there were people that had been 

overpaid. And the Premier even stood up during the election 

campaign and said no, we would never do that; there will be 

money going out to producers. 

 

And the reality is today, Mr. Speaker, yes, there were cheques 

went out to some 35 . . . or 39,000 producers, but 12,000 

producers received bills in their mailbox. And the unfortunate 

part about that, Mr. Speaker, is that many of the producers who 

received notices of bills in their mailboxes didn’t receive one 

cent from the GRIP program. 

 

And you may ask, well how did that happen? Well that 

happened because there were young people who entered the 

agricultural . . . or entered farming in the years ’92-93, just 

when the GRIP program was changed, and because in many 

cases they had taken over land that had been under contract to  



372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

GRIP, were told by Crop Insurance that you must maintain or 

carry or enter the GRIP program. They entered the GRIP 

program and as a result, Mr. Speaker, they’re ending up  in 

some cases, producers in my area  with bills of up to $3,500 

and they never received a cheque from them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, many people have been hurt by the actions of 

this government, by the actions of this current Agriculture 

minister, and certainly former Agriculture ministers. 

 

(1630) 

 

I also find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, going back even to 1991, 

and I notice an NDP document, Saskatchewan New Democrat’s 

news release where they were telling us that the Conservatives 

were wrong; in fact they were lying to the people of this 

province by suggesting that the New Democrats would destroy 

the GRIP program. And the current minister, at that time the 

agricultural critic, said that the Conservatives were lying and 

that the Devine PC government knows that they are not being 

truthful to the people of this province. 

 

And the reality is, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that while we 

warned people of what was going to happen, unfortunately they 

voted the NDP into power and watched them decimate the only 

program that offered some protection on the monetary side of 

the farm income. Crop insurance offers some protection on the 

basis of crop production, but there was nothing to address low 

commodity prices. 

 

I find it interesting as well in this same article, and this is the 

current Minister of Agriculture, at that time the critic in the 

NDP Party, said, and I’m quoting: 

 

“We say the Devine PC government didn’t have to raise 

taxes to pay for GRIP and NISA. We have identified more 

than one hundred million dollars a year in cuts to 

government waste and mismanagement, which could have 

paid for GRIP and NISA without a general tax increase,” 

Upshall said. (I’m quoting.) 

 

“If the Devine government truly supported the rural 

economy it would have cut waste instead of imposing new 

taxes on the families of rural as well as urban 

Saskatchewan,” . . . 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I read this and as I look back over the last 

four years I ask myself, well what happened to all the 

commitments to cut government waste? And what happened to 

all the commitments to not increase taxes? 

 

And we have the Minister of Finance standing up today and 

telling us, well we didn’t increase taxes. Well you talk to 

anybody who has had to pay their power bill or their telephone 

bills or their energy bills, or any of the other increases . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And we just have a member just 

indicating now, well that isn’t a tax. Well what is a tax? 

Everyone has to pay it. It comes directly out of your pocket. Not 

only that  increases to your utility rates  but as well a tax 

increase on these utility rate increases. 

 

Who raised the provincial sales tax in this province? They told 

us in 1991 that they wouldn’t be raising the taxes. But what 

have we seen? We have gone from 7 per cent to 9 per cent. And 

on top of that, they’ve added to all of our utilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government was really interested and would 

go back to some of the promises they made, even back in 1991, 

and if they wanted to cut out some of the waste and 

mismanagement, maybe they need to take a look at where they 

start. 

 

Number one, why did the Premier increase his cabinet to 19? 

Why didn’t the Premier take a lesson from some of the 

comments he made before the 1991 election when he suggested 

12 to 14 members was enough as far as the size of cabinet? But 

here he is, up at 19, while he asks people all across this 

province  here in the city of Regina and right across rural 

Saskatchewan  to take less, while they cut here and they cut 

there. 

 

And then, as we’ve seen over the last few days, the government 

members have been willing to stand in this Assembly while 

they decimate programs to farm families and to families right 

across this province, from the urban to the rural, and they’ve 

been willing to stand here and say well, you know, it really isn’t 

an increase because we haven’t had an increase in pay over the 

past number of years, so therefore this one-time cash injection 

that we’re going to get, it’s justified and we’re going to take it. 

 

Well maybe the ministers . . . the Minister of Highways should 

lead by example. And I know Highways has nothing to do with 

this motion, but certainly for rural people, highways is of a very 

major concern to the rural economy of this province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a number of concerns 

that have been raised by this motion. I would trust, Mr. Speaker, 

that at the end of the day, after all the rhetoric that this 

government is giving us and after all the suggestions and the 

motions they’re bringing forward, I would hope, Mr. Speaker, 

that we are indeed able to arrive at a workable and fair, an 

affordable approach to farm security. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope 

we’re able to do it without just totally decimating everything 

that’s out there right now, but probably building on what we 

have had in the past, in some cases, and adding to it to build a 

better farm security program. 

 

But as I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, I find it incredible that 

we need to stand here in this Assembly today and just adding 

some more as far as talk and conversation to this whole 

program. Let’s get down to business. And I hope the 

government gets down to business to indeed address this issue, 

rather than telling people how well they’ve done while they 

have pulled the rug right out from under their feet. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

join in the debate this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite have asked for cooperation between this House,  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

government and farm organizations, in developing a fair and 

affordable approach to farm security. I’m sure all members of 

this House would admit that cooperation is a laudable goal. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I believe the government, with the 

steadfast support of the members opposite, has done much to 

poison this atmosphere that’s needed for cooperation within our 

rural community. 

 

Sure, Mr. Speaker, the farmers want a good, reliable, and 

workable farm security system from their government. 

Unfortunately they don’t believe such a thing is possible. It’s a 

pipe dream. It’s as much of a fantasy as this government 

actually achieving its targets for job creation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has poisoned the atmosphere 

needed to make cooperation work in many ways. For starters, 

Mr. Speaker, over the last four years rural people have pretty 

well been the number one target of this government. According 

to the Provincial Auditor’s fall report, spending on agriculture 

has gone from over 1.1 billion in 1992 to 554 million in 1995. 

Today members opposite are implying that this might be cut 

even more. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, while this government cut the agricultural 

budget in half it felt that rural Saskatchewan still had it too 

good. Alleging that they could save money, Mr. Speaker, this 

government went on to cut 52 rural hospitals. They reneged on 

the GRIP contracts in 1992 as well. They threatened to turn our 

rural highways into gravel and by doing these things the 

members opposite have poisoned the atmosphere of cooperation 

that they so much desire to restore with the farming community. 

 

This atmosphere, Mr. Speaker, will not be restored, at least not 

so long as this government is in office, because rural people in 

this province just cannot trust them. Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry to 

say that the trust needed to make this motion work doesn’t exist 

because the members opposite further damaged the trust and 

confidence of rural residents by yet even more actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, aside from closing hospitals, they’ve closed our 

rural SaskPower offices. They let SaskPower take away the 

rural underground program that replaced unsafe above ground 

electrical systems with buried cable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with hospital closures and cuts to programs like 

this, how can the members opposite expect the people of rural 

Saskatchewan to cooperate with them. Mr. Speaker, I think the 

members opposite should ask themselves whether they would 

cooperate with someone who puts the almighty dollar ahead of 

their lives and their safety. I wouldn’t hold my breath waiting 

for the members opposite to do that though because I don’t 

think they would be able to or else they wouldn’t be able to 

sleep at night if they really asked themselves those questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government poisoned the atmosphere of 

cooperation suggested in this motion in yet other ways. 

Recently rural people were hit with a shameful 12 per cent 

power rate increase. This included the highest reconstruction 

charge for any class of customer. To make matters worse, this 

government has jacked up the STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company) fares as well. We all know that this  

only hurts the students and the senior citizens in rural areas, 

who must rely on the bus to take them into the cities. 

 

Next week, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be sitting in this House listening 

to the Finance minister deliver her budget address. This, Mr. 

Speaker, will only confirm to rural people that this government 

can’t be trusted. If there’s no trust, there won’t be any of the 

cooperation that these members opposite so desperately seek 

today. 

 

We hear that this government will be making further cuts to 

highways. This government, Mr. Speaker, intends to introduce 

the idea of cooperation on another level  for our education 

system and our municipalities. Only this time, cooperation 

simply will be a disguise for amalgamations and cuts to rural 

services. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have a motion 

before us which is doing just as I describe. They’re asking for 

cooperation from rural people even though that’s not really 

their aim. What is their aim, Mr. Speaker? Well I believe that 

the aim of the members opposite is to support this government 

in introducing another crop insurance program that is a shadow 

of its former program. Basically they want rural people to 

cooperate with them so they can just go cut more services to our 

farming community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government knows it just can’t cut a program. 

It knows that the easiest way of getting away with gutting 

something is to redesign it, repackage it, and simply pass that 

off as an improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they want to do the same thing with farm security 

programs as they did with health care. Pretty soon, Mr. Speaker, 

I imagine we will be hearing about how they intend to 

repackage education in our rural areas. Cuts won’t be called 

cuts or amalgamation. The members opposite will call them 

streamlining or modernizing. If rural people don’t buy that line, 

which they are far too smart to buy, the members opposite will 

say they are just making choices to bring rural Saskatchewan 

into the 21st century. The truth be known, Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite could care less about what happens to rural 

Saskatchewan, and they know it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite ask for cooperation 

from rural Saskatchewan, this government recently showed why 

it doesn’t deserve that trust. Before starting its consultations 

with rural people about the farm security system, this 

government decided it had to close Crop Insurance offices, 

slash services, and some 214 jobs. Why didn’t they let this be 

decided in consultation? Why not ask rural people if they want 

these services or if they could afford the loss of jobs in their 

communities? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite just went ahead and 

cut these offices without getting a consensus from the rural 

community because they didn’t want to cooperate. They could 

care less about rural Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, is the 

sorry irony of today’s debate. Here we have members of this 

House asking for cooperation from farmers when they are the 

very people who have rammed cut after cut down the throats of  



374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 1996 

rural people without even a single care for the principle of 

cooperation. They cut and they cut, and they add insult to injury 

by breaking promises and then taking money from agriculture 

and using it to balance their budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the people of rural Saskatchewan needed 

another reason to see why these people can’t be trusted, I could 

give them another one. Mr. Speaker, last year this government 

balanced their budget. While it is positive, they did it by taking 

$188 million that they had slotted to spend in agriculture and 

they used it to balance their budget. 

 

While they did this, however, they chose not to take $60 million 

in dividends from the Crown corporations. They also decided it 

was okay to take 50 million less than they had budgeted from 

VLT (video lottery terminal) and liquor revenues. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, how in all seriousness can the members opposite 

expect anyone in rural Saskatchewan to cooperate with them 

when they give Crown corporations and video lottery terminals 

a higher priority than our rural families? 

 

It’s simple, Mr. Speaker. They just cannot expect anyone to 

cooperate with them because they can’t be trusted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the members opposite ask for the 

cooperation of rural people in this motion before them today, 

farmers aren’t holding their breath in anticipation of what this 

government might change. They expect to pay more and more 

while getting fewer and fewer services from this government. 

They expect this government to dump millions more on trade 

trips, casinos, and TV addresses while they cut rural programs 

in the name of austerity. 

 

Because rural people believe this, they’ve taken matters into 

their own hands. The best farm security is good farm 

management and cautious and calculated diversification. 

 

Farmers in this province are diversifying into new crops, adding 

livestock  and often exotic livestock  to their operations. 

They’re using better technologies, diversifying into spices and 

horticulture. Others are trying to get more by marketing their 

own products or by taking advantage of tourism opportunities. 

Others have begun small scale manufacturing. 

 

If it weren’t for these efforts and strong rural grain prices, 

where would this government be financially? Thanks to our 

strong farm economy and good resource prices, provincial 

revenues remain buoyant, and buoyant enough to make up for 

the fact that the NDP economic recovery has been a jobless 

recovery. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, this government is treating rural 

Saskatchewan true to form. Rural people have saved our 

economy from completely grinding to a jobless standstill, and 

what have they got for it? They pay more, and get less and less 

for services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that farmers aren’t waiting for farm 

security programs from this government. If however that 

members opposite really want the cooperation they’re asking 

for, Mr. Speaker, I make a suggestion to help them out a bit. If 

they want cooperation, it’s simple. Quit wasting taxpayers’ 

money on casinos, trade trips, and expanding the size of 

government while you cut rural programs and rural services. 

 

If the members can see their way to do that and honestly, if they 

focus their efforts on creating this environment where the mom 

and pop businesses around rural Saskatchewan can afford to 

create some jobs again, then I think there is some hope. Rural 

people want their children to stay and this government has been 

making that very difficult. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government wants cooperation but we’ve seen 

today that they don’t deserve it. For that reason I’d urge the 

members opposite to take a new course if they want to try and 

earn the trust of rural people. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would be supporting the amendment 

put forward by the member from Arm River. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

support the motion from the member of Battleford: 

 

That this Assembly work with farmers, with farm 

organizations and with the government in designing a 

workable, fair, and affordable approach to farm security. 

 

With the short time that I have here to speak this afternoon, I 

just want to say on the messages that I’ve been hearing from the 

opposition parties, their messages of doom and gloom being 

provided from the opposition parties, which just aren’t true. 

 

In just the last few weeks I’ve been out in my constituency, I 

have seen farmers coming together to review with the crop 

insurance program that’s being there. They’re not speaking of 

doom and gloom. They’re speaking of fair programing. They 

want to see some changes, and they’re glad that they have the 

opportunity for some input in that. 

 

I also see . . . today I just attended the announcement of a 

REDA (regional economic development authorities) for our 

area, for south-east Saskatchewan. I didn’t hear any doom and 

gloom. I heard optimism. I heard optimism about regional 

economic development in the rural area. I heard good messages. 

People that are ready to consult, want to be consulted with, and 

looking at the kind of changes that we’re facing in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday I rode on a small bus line because a number of 

communities that work together to provide a bus line that they 

could see that would help meet the needs of those communities. 

I didn’t hear doom and gloom; I heard optimism. 

 

Agriculture is facing a number of challenges  challenges a lot 

from the changes in federal funding to the Crow rate that’s 

facing our province right now. And I think it’s very interesting  



March 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

yesterday when it came up in the legislature that the federal 

government’s providing $20 million for roads  $20 million 

for 150 kilometres of roads. We have over 60,000 kilometres of 

roads in this province, over a $300 million withdrawal of funds 

to our transportation system in this province, and they see this 

as some kind of a solution, some kind of support. 

 

The Minister of Highways announced that our government 

supports 13,000 grain hopper fleet cars being sold to a producer 

group. That’s because we listen to the farmers and the 

producers in this province. I’m not so sure that the federal 

government has heard that message. 

 

In anticipation of the federal government selling its grain 

hopper car fleet, the province commissioned a report which 

does support the ownership by the farm producer group. The 

recent federal budget increased maximum freight rates by 75 

cents per tonne. Does this mean that the federal government is 

raising the rates to provide room for the railways to buy the 

cars? 

 

This province spends more money per capita on farm programs 

than any other province or the federal government in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  We do support agriculture in this province. 

Yes, some of the programs have to change, and the farmers are 

willing to work with those kind of changes that meet those 

challenges. I do not hear the doom and gloom scenario that I’m 

hearing from the opposition. 

 

There’s other issues right now that the provincial government, 

with the Wheat Board marketing agencies that are working also 

on listening with farmers; our ag biotech, diversification 

projects; $200 million going into ag development and 

technology. These are all indications of the support of this 

provincial government for the farm and the farm sector in this 

province. 

 

The farmers in this province should be credited for their ability 

to adapt to change. They also want to work with a provincial 

government that will provide and help with those changes that 

they need to meet, whether it be in health care changes, 

education changes, transportation changes, agriculture changes 

 our rural communities have a lot of support for our 

government. They recognize that there are many challenges that 

they’re facing, and they see this as an opportunity for change 

and to help meet in partnership through community-based 

programing. 

 

I am very pleased to be able to support this motion today. I have 

a lot more faith in our agriculture sector than is obviously the 

faith that the opposition parties have across the hall. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In view of the hour and the many 

things that could be said on this another day, I move to adjourn 

the debate. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  What is the point of order? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  The point of order is that we were going to 

vote on the amendment to the motion. 

 

The Speaker:  I’ve listened to the member’s point of order. 

The debate on the motion which is the standard procedure in the 

House is the debate on the amendment and the motion occurs 

concurrently. So when I asked if the House is ready to adjourn 

debate, it adjourns debate on both the amendment and the 

motion simultaneously. So by passing the motion to adjourn 

debate, it brings to a conclusion consideration of the 

amendment as well as the main motion. The member’s point of 

order is not well taken. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:55 p.m. 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 345 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 345 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 345 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 346 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 346 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 346 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 346 
Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................. 346 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
Aboriginal Tourism Strategy 

Murray ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 346 
Saskatchewan Livestock Show and Sale 

McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 346 
Soil Conservation 

Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 347 
Humboldt Indoor Pool 

Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 347 
Apprenticeship Program 

Wiens ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 347 
Naicam Cadets Win Biathlon Awards 

Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 347 
Environmental Award to Lloydminster School 

Stanger ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 348 
Moosomin Restaurants Benefit from Casino Regina Visitors  

Ward ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 348 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

Teacher Employment 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 348 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 348 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 349 
Upshall......................................................................................................................................................................................... 349 

McDowell Report 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 350 
Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 350 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 350 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 350 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 351 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 351 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 351 

Balanced Budget Commitment 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 351 
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 351 

Latimer Trial Inquiry 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 352 
Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
Bill No. 30  An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 

Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 
 
 
 



Bill No. 31  An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 
Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 

Bill No. 32  An Act to amend The Local Government Election Act  
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 

Bill No. 33  An Act respecting Service Districts and to make consequential amendments to certain other Acts 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 

Bill No. 34  An Act to amend The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 

Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 353 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 354 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 354 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
Motion No. 2  New Approaches to Farm Security 

Murrell ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 354 
Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 355 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 358 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 360 
  Langford ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 361 
  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 362 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 363 
  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 367 
  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 368 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 369 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 371 
  Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 372 
  Bradley ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 374 
  Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 375 
  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 375 
  Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 375 
   
 
 


