













































March 27, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 537 

 March 27, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 

behalf of concerned citizens in Saskatchewan concerning the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Swift Current, 

Aneroid, Ponteix, and a number of small communities in 

southern Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

numerous southern Saskatchewan communities as well as 

Regina. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, from Wakaw, Balgonie, Radisson, and Eyebrow, 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise today to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily 

from Regina and Estevan, but also include Moose Jaw and 

Weyburn. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 

present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens in regard to  

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on this petition are from the city of Moose Jaw, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I also rise today to present petitions with 

names of people from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that signed this petition are from Regina. They’re 

from Stoughton, from Borden, and all over Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

south-eastern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition has been signed by people from 

south-eastern Saskatchewan as I stated; from the towns of 

Kipling, Wawota, and Glenavon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people who have signed this petition are from Moose 

Jaw, Assiniboia. I also see Southey on here, and Claybank. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, once again I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

from Regina here. They’re from Moose Jaw, from Assiniboia, 

Saskatoon, Shamrock, Rocanville, Strasbourg, Pilot Butte. 

They’re all from throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today  



538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

to present petitions on behalf of the people all throughout 

Saskatchewan in regards to saving the Plains Health Centre. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

mainly from Regina, but some from Foam Lake and Yorkton. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly, in your gallery, two very special friends of many 

people on this side of the House, Ken and Peggy Stone. 

 

I had the pleasure of being the master of ceremonies at their 

wedding last September. Peggy worked for some 30 years at 

Social Services, and we worked together for many years. And 

of course Ken is a good friend. And his dad, Art Stone, was a 

member of this Assembly for 20 years, from 1944 to 1964. And 

of course the Sturdy Stone Building in Saskatoon is named after 

his father in part. And the folks are down here for the day for a 

visit. And I know that it is like coming back home for Ken. 

He’s been in this building many times. 

 

And I know that all members will want to wish them a warm 

welcome to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and to the other members in the House 

three people seated in your gallery, three people who are very 

concerned about education in this province. I’d like to introduce 

Professor Joe Garcea. Professor Garcea is a professor of 

political studies at the University of Saskatchewan. I’d also like 

to introduce Isabelle Ryder. Isabelle is president of the 

University of Saskatchewan Graduate Students Association. 

And also Lindsay Vanthuyne: Lindsay is seated up there in the 

middle. She is from the Kelsey Student Association. She’s 

currently the public relations director, but I understand that 

she’s the president-elect for next year. 

 

Welcome to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through  

you to all my colleagues in the legislature, a group of air cadets 

from Squadron 702 in Saskatoon. They are aged 12 to 18 years. 

They are accompanied by Lieutenant David Haye and Officer 

Cadet Lou Smith. 

 

They have had a tour of the building, I understand, and I’ll be 

meeting them later to visit with them and answer their questions 

and have a photo session. So I hope that all members will be on 

their best behaviour during question period today and that the 

Air Cadet Squadron 702 will enjoy the proceedings. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 

Assembly a fine group which you’ve no doubt noticed sitting in 

the west gallery. There are 82 grade 3 and 4 students from St. 

Angela School. They are with their teachers, Sean Chase, Pat 

Kaminski, and Laurianne Jacques, and with their chaperons, 

Jocelyn Denham, Marlene Sisk, Yvette Pidhorodetsky and Ann 

Zerr. 

 

Now they are here to spend some time in the gallery and then 

have a tour of the building. And I’m looking forward to meeting 

with them later on because I’m sure they will have a lot of 

interesting questions for me. 

 

Please join me in giving them a warm welcome. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today a group of 

us met with the Saskatchewan Council for Community 

Development, and Linda Pipkie, the executive director of 

Saskatchewan Council for Community Development is in your 

gallery. And I’d appreciate it if other members would join with 

me in welcoming her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome Linda here today as a long-time member of my 

constituency, and ask that through you to the Assembly that 

they would welcome her on our behalf again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

your gallery today I see a friend of mine, professor Joe Garcea, 

of the University of Saskatchewan who happens to be the 

spokesperson for the Provincial Alliance for Education, which 

is a group of trade unions including the faculty association and 

the trade unions involved in the education sector, as well as a 

group of students who are concerned about the future of 

post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like you to welcome them, and through you, my colleagues 

welcome them to the House today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

Mr. Heppner:  I would like to welcome the people from 

PAFE (Provincial Alliance for Education) here this afternoon. 

We had a good discussion with them this morning. They have 

some good ideas on what’s happening in education, what needs 

to happen there, and I hope they have a good time here this 

afternoon as they watch the proceedings and meet with most of 

us. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

introduce to you, and to other members of the Assembly, Tim 

Cooney with Panther resources who is seated in the west 

gallery. And I have to apologize, Mike, I can’t remember your 

last name, but the geologist with the company. They’re here 

today to observe question period. 

 

But I want to say that the oil industry is very important to the 

economy of Saskatchewan, and your company is a big part of 

that. Thanks for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mad Cow Disease 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

extend my condolences today to all the beef producers and to 

anyone involved in Britain’s beef industry. This is an extremely 

frightening time in Britain with a multi-billion dollar industry 

being threatened by the mad cow disease. 

 

Now scientists are exploring the possibility that this disease 

may in some way contaminate humans. Fortunately the 

Canadian beef industry continues to take any precautions 

necessary to prevent the same type of infections in cattle here. 

 

But as a column in the Leader-Post suggested today, there is 

some concern that the government members have been exposed 

to the dementia-causing disease. In light of, Mr. Speaker, in 

some of the budget proposals being kicked around lately, it 

would indeed appear that the cabinet has been exposed to the 

U.K. (United Kingdom) beef. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Community Volunteer 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Mr. Speaker, last week was Education Week 

in Saskatchewan. Monday we honoured six outstanding 

volunteers. Today I do not think it is too late to mention an 

outstanding teacher in my constituency who also happens to be 

an excellent volunteer  or an outstanding volunteer in my 

constituency who also happens to be an excellent teacher. 

 

Paul Runalls from Cut Knife teachers at Cut Knife elementary. 

In addition to his classroom excellence, he is an organizer for 

the upcoming Northwest Children’s Festival  a festival 

expecting 2,500 children — organizer for the school science 

fair, and a workshop presenter for effective teaching methods. 

That would be enough for most of us, Mr. Speaker, but then his 

after-school activities kick in. Mr. Runalls is an ambulance 

attendant, a volunteer for the Twin Rivers Health District, a 

volunteer at Camp Easter Seal, and at Camp Circle of Friends, a 

camp for children whose lives are touched by cancer. When I 

think of Paul, I think of children and of music. He has used his 

musical talent to bring joy and entertainment to children all 

across Canada, including appearances on Mr. Dress-up. 

 

Paul Runalls, with his band, “Prairie Sailor”, has made 

Saskatchewan and Canada a happier place for countless 

children. I am honoured to mention his contributions in this 

Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Melfort Figure Skater 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I wish to share the 

overwhelming story of Marilee McDougal of Melfort. Marilee 

has captured the hearts of everyone who has ever seen her 

figure skate. She began skating at the age of four and has 

proven to many she skates right from the heart. She attends 

MUCC (Melfort & Unit Comprehensive Collegiate) school, is 

12 years old, and in grade 7. 

 

Aside from her love of music, she skates a minimum of 12 

hours a week and up to 20 hours before competition. She has 

captured eight golds, two bronze, one silver medal in her ‘95-96 

season alone. She has made several guest appearances, and in 

‘94-95 was awarded the Skater of the Year Award and placed 

on the president’s honour roll in recognition of outstanding 

achievement in Canadian figure skating as well as the most 

artistic figure skater. In ’95 she was nominated for the Junior 

Citizen of the Year. 

 

All of this has been accomplished despite a rare type of facial 

tumour Marilee has had to overcome. After extensive surgery, 

she still may need laser treatments in her eye area. This has 

never interfered with her enthusiasm and her delightful smile. I 

ask this Assembly to join me in congratulating Marilee for her 

courage and success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Dreams Come True Charity Organization 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

am pleased to announce that in Saskatchewan dreams do indeed 

come true. In fact on Saturday, March 23, a cabaret was held in 

support of Dreams Come True. Dreams Come True is a charity 

organization created and operated by Air Canada employees 

who donate their time and their effort to raising funds which are 

then used to take handicapped, disabled, underprivileged, and 

sick children to Disney World. 

 

This year’s event raised $2,100 which will be applied to the 

cost of taking three Saskatchewan children to Disney World. 

They are Dustin Drake of Marshall, Saskatchewan, who on two 

occasions has donated life-saving bone marrow to his sister; 

Tricia Kelln of Regina, who suffers from leukemia; and Trevor  



540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

Worm of Raymore, who is a burn victim. 

 

Air Canada employees Patsy Alary, Brent Chisan, and Dan 

Thibault head up the Saskatchewan division of Dreams Come 

True. They are to be commended for a job well done. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to add my personal thank-you to the people at 

Air Canada, and God bless them for a wonderful gesture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial A Midget Hockey Championship 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every town in 

Saskatchewan has a hockey arena and every town has a team. 

At this time of the year the battle for provincial championships 

is nearing to an end. Mr. Speaker, last Thursday evening the 

people of Naicam and area observed some first class hockey 

with Naicam AA Midgets playing their first provincial game 

against the Yorkton Terriers for the provincial A midget 

championship. 

 

The Naicam team, coached by Roman and Pat Zimmerman of 

Englefeld, went into this game short three goals. A three-goal 

lead in a two-game total play-off point series usually means a 

win for the team with the goals, but this was not the case on 

Thursday. This group of determined hockey players did not 

regain their three goals until the middle of the third period. 

Goalies for both teams made some spectacular saves. Naicam 

put the pressure on and, with just 38 seconds left in the game, 

they played the scoring goal. 

 

It gives me great pleasure to ask the members of this Assembly 

to join with me in congratulating the Naicam AA Midget 

hockey team for winning the provincial A championship. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Ginseng Farming 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, during Agriculture Week, as 

we recognize the contributions our farmers have made, my 

statement today points out the creativity and ingenuity reflected 

in this sector. 

 

Leadership by farmers in our changing economy has resulted in 

more specialty crops, agricultural biotechnology, game farming, 

manufacturing — I could go on. As one additional example in 

my constituency, a Rosetown farmer, Kent Smith, has been 

growing ginseng since 1991. His first year was a learning 

experience. Growing this herb is very labour intensive. It 

requires different care than other crops, but he saw a special 

opportunity, and he’s taking a risk. 

 

In Asian countries, ginseng is referred to as the elixir of life, 

and its popularity is increasing across North America. Mr. 

Smith has one and two-thirds acres now, and if things go 

according to plan, he would like to add an acre every year until 

he has five acres. He believes he could earn 60 to $90,000 per 

acre based on British Columbia numbers of 3,000 pounds of 

root per acre with the root selling for $30 per pound. 

Mr. Smith demonstrates the spirit that built Saskatchewan and 

that will keep us at the forefront of agricultural change in the 

new century. I congratulate him on his initiative and drive to 

pursue this kind of diversification and wish him the best of 

luck. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Recognition of Activities in Moosomin Constituency 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 

take a moment just to acknowledge the work of individuals in 

my constituency and certainly in the surrounding area. On 

Friday afternoon I took a moment just to stop in Indian Head 

and was invited to come and view their new Sports Hall of 

Fame and Museum. Mr. Ken McCabe has worked very hard to 

gather a lot of paraphernalia and a lot of former hockey 

sweaters and curling brooms and certainly has done a 

wonderful job of building this museum in recognition of the 

sports in the area. And I’d like to recognize the work he’s done 

in that area as well. 

 

And I’d like to take a moment just to acknowledge the work of 

the RDCs, rural development corporation, Gateway RDC now 

known as Gateway REDA (rural economic development 

authority), for all their work in developing the economic 

development in the area of Moosomin. I thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

School Citizenship Program 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week as we 

know was Education Week and the theme of one school in my 

constituency, Lumsden Elementary, was, we love Canada. And 

so it was that last Wednesday was Canadian citizenship day at 

that school. A day during which students, teachers, and parents 

focused with pride on our nation, our heroes and our 

citizenship. 

 

First, in the morning the students hosted a pancake breakfast 

that fed well over 800 people, or close to the entire population 

of Lumsden. Then, Mr. Speaker, 450 kindergarten to grade 7 

students, the staff, and many parents re-affirmed their Canadian 

citizenship. 

 

I was proud to bring greetings on behalf of the government. 

Students sang, read their own poems and essays, and displayed 

artwork on what Canada means to them. 

 

Most interestingly, they created their own wall of fame  a 

wall on which they posted photographs of themselves posing as 

their favourite Canadian heroes. Heroes, Mr. Speaker, who 

were singers, artists, astronauts, athletes, and even politicians. 

 

It was a delightful afternoon and I congratulate all those who 

worked so hard to make it such a successful day. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

Crop Development Centre 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During Agriculture 

Week, I would like to take a moment to recognize the valuable 

contribution of the Crop Development Centre at the University 

of Saskatchewan to agricultural life in this province. 

 

The Crop Development Centre was established in 1971 to 

develop and diversify the Saskatchewan crops industry. It is 

now one of Canada’s leading plant breeding institutions and is 

recognized in many parts of the world for its work in this 

important field. Since 1977, the CDC (Crop Development 

Centre) has released more than 85 varieties of plants  

harrington barley, laird lentil, and calibre oat are just three CDC 

success stores since these plants have become staple crops in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The work of the centre continues as new crops are developed to 

meet market needs in many parts of the world. Biotechnology 

plays an increasingly important role and the centre is now 

involved in many projects on a partnership basis with 

companies in Saskatchewan, other parts of Canada, the United 

States, Europe, and Japan. 

 

During Agriculture Week I’d like to congratulate the crop 

development centre on its successes and its continuing 

contribution to agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology Program Cuts 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have all heard during the past few weeks how SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) is 

expected to come under the chopping block in tomorrow’s 

budget. I have a great deal of concern about the status of many 

of the industrial programs at the centre, in particular the 

pre-employment and specialty welding program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of running this program is $182,000 

annually, but the return on this investment cannot be 

understated. This program has a history of providing 

employment to basically all of its 45 students who graduate 

from the program each year. The vast majority of these people 

work in Saskatchewan, and they pay taxes and they contribute 

to our economy. 

 

Will the Minister of Post-Secondary Education confirm in this 

House today that this program will not be downsized in 

tomorrow’s budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I am under the same constraints as all 

members of the cabinet are in that it’s not up to me to be 

announcing the budget. That will have to wait until tomorrow 

when the Minister of Finance will do that on behalf of the  

government. 

 

I can say though that it would be very unusual if a provincial 

budget were to address one program within one of the 

post-secondary institutions in Saskatchewan. But I say to the 

hon. member, just stay tuned to this channel tomorrow about 

this time. Twenty-four and a half hours from now we’ll have 

the budget laid out and you can then know what the situation is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I say to the minister 

opposite that there will be a lot of people stay tuned for the 

budget address, many concerned students and employers across 

the province. Mr. Speaker, there’s little doubt that all graduates 

of this program will once again find full-time, well-paying jobs. 

Implement manufacturers from across this province report a 

shortage of skilled workers. At the same time, a planned 

expansion at IPSCO will also require people trained in this 

profession. 

 

Why will the minister not provide an assurance that his 

government intends to make a choice that will ensure the 

continued creation of valuable jobs? I think it’s a very 

important issue, Mr. Minister, and I think it’s something that 

possibly should be looked at before the budget is brought down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the member will know that 

jobs is a subject that is very much on the minds of the 

government, as it’s on the minds of practically everybody in the 

province. And we certainly have a great interest in that subject. 

 

The problem that SIAST is having is primarily a result of the 

changes to the federal Unemployment Insurance Act — the 

member will know that. Very serious changes in the way in 

which training is funded have already taken place and is biting 

at SIAST and at the regional colleges. SIAST is attempting to 

cope with these changes, and in that connection is having 

consultations with its staff, with the instructors, with the 

students, and with the employers who have the very interest that 

the member is addressing here today. 

 

I am also meeting with those people as quickly as I can in order 

that I’ll get their perspective. The process will involve SIAST 

originally, the SIAST board of governors, and ultimately the 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t matter 

who we blame for the downsizing or the lack of funds, Mr. 

Minister. The fact is that these programs are important. They 

provide employment for many people in the province and it’s a 

direct benefit to the government. 

 

This own government’s Future Skills job training campaign 

points out the need for more of the kind of training I am 

referring to, not less. Schulte Industries of Englefeld agrees,  



542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

indicating that they are in need of production-line welders. 

Bourgault Industries of St. Brieux indicate that at present they 

can’t get enough welders to meet their demands. Dyna-Fab 

Industries in Watson state that one-half of the welders on their 

shop floor have come through this very program. 

 

Will the minister explain how he and his government can 

possibly justify eliminating a program that provides young men 

and women with valuable skills that enable them to work in a 

valued profession in this province at this economic time, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the government is not 

eliminating any programs. It’s not the government’s decision to 

make, at least at this point. Recommendations have to come up 

to SIAST. 

 

If the member wants to do something useful in connection with 

the matters that he raises, the proper place to make those 

representations is to your federal counterparts. It is Ottawa who 

is changing the unemployment insurance plan and thereby 

creating problems for SIAST. 

 

Now I don’t know why the federal government is doing it. The 

fact of the matter is that the unemployment insurance fund is in 

a surplus position. Changes are not necessary in order to protect 

that fund. They could have continued with their participation in 

training and we wouldn’t have these problems in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Highway Maintenance Depots 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

seems like only yesterday that this government was threatening 

to close down maintenance depots, highway maintenance 

depots, throughout Saskatchewan. And the minister would 

remember a meeting in Val Marie at which he promised that he 

wouldn’t do so. However, the Highways minister finally 

relented after the people affected put a great deal of pressure on 

his office to reverse the decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I received a call today indicating that this 

government is taking these threats one step further. This call 

was from a very concerned equipment operator from the 

Kincaid depot, who informed me that he and his co-workers 

have been notified that because of this government’s budget 

decisions this depot will be closed effective April 1. 

 

Will the minister confirm if this is indeed true? And if so, how 

many other depots across the province are slated for closure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member for his 

question, Mr. Speaker. He knows, as all members over there 

know, that the budget will be laid out tomorrow in just a little 

over 24 hours. And stay tuned and certainly you will get your 

answers at that time. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 

Speaker, February 27 I have a Hansard here where that minister 

. . . and I’m going to quote from it: 

 

. . . I wrote you . . . several times before that with the same 

answer  no. And I don’t know how many times I have to 

tell you, or if you don’t understand the word no, I’ll get a 

dictionary . . . I’ll send a copy of it over (to you). There 

(are) . . . no plans to shut down any maintenance depots. 

 

You had lots of time. Mr. Speaker, if this government proceeds 

with this plan to close the highway maintenance depot in 

Kincaid, crews will be responsible for an area that covers about 

400 kilometres. This, says the equipment operator I spoke to, 

would be unworkable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his biggest concern was not the status of his job, 

but rather the safety of the people in that region. In extreme 

conditions like we’ve experienced in the past year and 

throughout the province, the people of rural Saskatchewan must 

know that their roads will be properly tended to and will be safe 

for travel. 

 

Will the Minister of Highways justify how his government can 

possibly put the people of rural Saskatchewan at risk in an 

attempt to make modest cost savings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I would like to thank the member for his 

question, and again, stay tuned tomorrow and you’ll get 

certainly information then. But what surprises me, Mr. Speaker, 

is the members opposite, like 10 newborn kittens, they’re blind 

because they have such an infatuation with the Liberals in 

Ottawa. 

 

There is no concern over the $106 million taken out of the 

transfer payments for health and education; there is no concern 

for the $320 million per year, Mr. Speaker, that’s pulled out of 

farmers’ pockets with the change of the Crow. There is no 

action; they have not responded to the federal government’s 

decisions in regards to rail line abandonment which will cost 

this province 30 to $50 million additional in road maintenance. 

 

What I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, will they join with us 

to meet those challenges, to join with the people of 

Saskatchewan and meet those challenges, instead of burying 

their heads in the sand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Cost-cutting 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for 

the Minister of Finance. Madam Minister, you have said that 

tomorrow’s budget will reflect the priorities of Saskatchewan 

people. One of those priorities is spending cuts should start at 

the top. The Premier even said so in his $30,000 infomercial. 



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

Madam Minister, we would like to know what measures you’ve 

taken to reflect that priority. Will you be cutting the size of 

cabinet? Will you be cutting the size of the Premier’s staff and 

ministerial staff? And most important, will you and other NDP 

(New Democratic Party) MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) be giving back you $4,400 pay increase? 

 

Madam Minister, are you going to take any of those measures, 

or are you and the other NDP MLAs exempt from the cuts you 

are imposing on everyone else? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer the question 

because it relates to the matter of cabinet. 

 

First of all, I would want to know whether the hon. member has 

written his cheque for $4,400 yet. And I think we’d like to 

know that. And we’d also like to know whether or not the 

member from Kindersley supports the decision of this 

Legislative Assembly to reduce the number of MLAs from 66 

to 58 because, as I recall during the election campaign, that was 

a part of some sort of a revenge on downsizing. 

 

And as regard to the size of the cabinet, Mr. Speaker, we have 

indicated quite clearly to the people of Saskatchewan that as the 

reorganization occasioned in preparing this province for the 

21st century is complete  and it’s going to be completed, we 

hope, as quickly as possible  the appropriate adjustments will 

be made. 

 

One thing for sure, Mr. Speaker, the size of this cabinet will 

never be the size of the Tory cabinet of 25. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, it’s the 

priorities of your government the people of this province are 

interested in. It’s the priorities that you’ve set forward in your 

$30,000 infomercial that you put forward to the people of 

Saskatchewan that people are interested in in this province — 

the priorities in terms of cutting back on the size of cabinet that 

you’ve promised; the cut-backs that would start at the top that 

you promised; the job creation strategy that you promised to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Tomorrow you’ll be cutting several hundred government jobs. 

We realize that your government must make cuts, but we’d also 

like to see new jobs being created for those people that will lose 

their jobs tomorrow. Where is there hope for the people that are 

being laid off tomorrow to find new jobs in Saskatchewan? Our 

province has been averaging 2,000 fewer jobs every month 

since last June. And last month the number even doubled to 

4,000. 

 

Mr. Premier, what measures will there be in tomorrow’s budget 

to stimulate the economy and create jobs? Or is that simply just 

another priority that you and your government have forgotten? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

talks about what will be included in the budget tomorrow to 

stimulate job creation. I want to say that in dealing with the 

business community in the province for the last five years now, 

the biggest thing, they have told us, to stimulate jobs is to 

balance the books of the province. The single biggest thing is to 

balance the books of the province. The second most important 

thing is to create a positive atmosphere  is to create a positive 

atmosphere for economic development. 

 

There’s two things, Mr. Member, that you don’t understand. 

One is that your government, the Devine government, built up 

the largest per capita debt anywhere in this country. You folks 

did, single-handedly. And even today you are harming the 

economy by the continual gloom and doom. The two items that 

need to be done to create jobs, you’re the author of  gloom 

and doom and huge deficit. So I want to say tomorrow’s budget 

will be very . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Now having put the 

question, I think hon. members owe it to the minister to listen to 

the answer, and the Speaker is having a difficult time . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  I only listen to the question. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. And I don’t appreciate that. I will go to 

the next questioner. 

 

Home Oxygen Program 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, our office has received 

several complaints about the upcoming changes to your 

department’s SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) 

home oxygen program. These changes will force most home 

oxygen recipients to change from the liquid oxygen system to 

the condenser system. 

 

Many oxygen users we have spoken to are complaining that the 

condenser system is too heavy and awkward for them to handle, 

and the tanks last only half as long as the liquid tanks. 

 

Your department will also be restricting oxygen subscribers to 

10 tanks a month. One of my constituents, Evelyn Perrin of 

Maple Creek, estimates she will need 25 tanks to stay healthy 

and active. Now the 10 tanks that you are supplying will force 

her to do little more than to sit in her home in a chair. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell us why you are forcing oxygen 

rationing on those who need it the most? And how does it fit 

into your department’s concept of wellness to force people to 

become prisoners in their own homes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the House 

that I have been meeting with the Saskatchewan Lung 

Association with respect to this issue as well as having 

departmental officials talking to industry. And I want to inform 

the member that no one who needs oxygen is going to be 

deprived of oxygen, and let there be no doubt about that. 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

It is true that the system is changing somewhat, Mr. Speaker, 

but we’re going to provide oxygen to people at a lower cost to 

the taxpayers and, Mr. Speaker, at a lower cost to the users. It’s 

a very logical thing to do. No one would disagree with it except 

the members opposite. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Health. Minister, our people need more than hot air 

from you. They need oxygen. 

 

That response simply is not good enough for people like Mrs. 

Perrin. They aren’t about to be shut away and locked into their 

closets or into their houses. In spite of the fact that she is 

awaiting a heart-lung transplant, Mrs. Perrin is able to go out 

still and help on her family ranch with the branding and such 

other activities on the home operation. 

 

Now she needs to do that with the liquid oxygen system. The 

other one won’t work. And as Mrs. Perrin puts it, Mr. Minister: 

I’ve got two grandkids to chase; I can’t afford to just lay down 

and die. 

 

Mr. Minister, the extra oxygen tanks that Mrs. Perrin needs to 

remain active and healthy will cost about $3,600 this coming 

year. That’s just a little less than the $4,400 pay hike that you’re 

going to put into your pocket. So, Mr. Minister, which do you 

think is the better use of the money  going into your wallet or 

going into the air that Mrs. Perrin breathes in order that she 

might live? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to advise the member in the House, 

Mr. Speaker, that for most oxygen users, the cost will be 

reduced. And what we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is concentrate 

on improving the system for oxygen users. There are a few 

things that can be done. 

 

One is that we should be requiring the industry to provide 

oxygen conservers to people. If people had oxygen conservers 

they would not need as many tanks. The other thing we should 

be doing is improving the technology and taking a look at 

having the tanks made out of aluminum. 

 

The industry is working on those proposals. These changes are 

going to be made as of June 1. And in a very proactive way, Mr. 

Speaker, we can improve the system for people and provide 

oxygen to people at a lower cost, and that’s what we’re going to 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP’s budget of last year laid out job creation forecasts for 

1995 and ’96. Over this two-year period the government 

predicted that 8,000 new jobs would be created, an average 

annual increase of about .9 per cent. This government also went  

on to boast that it’s forecasts were sound and were much more 

realistic than those of the major banks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to the latest labour force statistics, only 

about 3,300 jobs were created last year, many of those part time 

and low paying. Will the Minister of Finance explain how her 

government failed to meet this modest target when jobs were 

apparently the number one priority in her last budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that job creation is very, very important in the 

province. And I want to say that since the Partnership for 

Renewal document  and I’ve said this a number of times in 

the House  was released in 1992, in the fall of ’92, an 

average of 3,000-3,500 jobs per year were created  3,500 jobs 

a year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . by the end of the year 

2000. Now if the member opposite from Kindersley, who yells 

from his seat uninterrupted, Mr. Speaker, would listen, he might 

get the answer to the question  3,500 a year have been created 

. . . 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 

not only failed to meet it’s own measly targets, but its job 

creation record was less than half the Canadian average last 

year. A survey from Sask Trends Monitor questions this 

government’s ability to make good on its word, indicating that 

the sectors which provided new jobs last year all slowed down 

in the latter part of 1995. And it goes on to state that 

Saskatchewan needs, and I quote: “a new engine for growth in 

1996.” Furthermore, the Bank of Nova Scotia predicts .6 per 

cent job growth this year. 

 

Will the Deputy Premier admit his government failed to hit its 

1995 targets and is on the same path for 1996? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that 

member opposite from Thunder Creek that in fact we are on the 

same track of creating 3,500 jobs a year. These are the 

projections from the business people of the province and the 

working people of the province as they put forth in Partnership 

for Growth. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a Leader-Post 

document, as questionable as that may be, but I want to say to 

the member opposite, in this article it says this about that 

member from Thunder Creek. 

 

The Crown Life president also says Aldridge’s continual 

refusal to meet with him and other company officials 

shows wilful disregard for the interests of Crown Life and 

the people of Saskatchewan and over 1,000 Crown Life 

employees. 

 

One thousand jobs you put at risk and you have the audacity to 

stand here in the House and say, what you will do to create 

jobs. I say to you, follow the advice of the president of the 

Crown Life and try a little positiveness in this approach and  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

you might get some jobs. But this continual gloom and doom 

does more damage to job creation than anything else you might 

do from that side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier forgets that 

it’s his government that is putting us through the Haro-ing 

experiences that we are having in this province right now. Mr. 

Speaker, the government has clearly failed to meet what can 

only be referred to as soft job-creation targets. 

 

The Sask Trends Monitor survey I referred to earlier shows that 

this is just the tip of the iceberg. It shows that the number of 

people underemployed, or those seeking full-time employment 

but only presently working part time, has grown by 50 per cent 

in the past six years, to a level of close to 35,000 people now. 

 

Will the minister explain when he and his government will get 

down to work and provide the people of Saskatchewan with 

some more substantial . . . something more substantial than the 

catch phrases and the glossy job-creation documents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing. When 

you go out to rural Saskatchewan and go out to the many 

openings that are occurring in the province, there’s a lot of 

optimism about farming, about manufacturing, about 

processing, and the only place where there seems to be a 

harrowing experience is in the Liberal Party these days. And 

there’s a good reason for that. 

 

With the approach of that member from Thunder Creek and the 

member from Wood River and their approach to the style of 

politics we see in that party, it is no wonder that they’re having 

the difficult time they are in trying to get questions written, let 

alone read here in the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Plains Health Centre Closure 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

weekend Regina’s three hospitals will be conducting a CAT 

(computerized axial tomography) scan blitz to enable these 

facilities to try and make some headway on the growing 

waiting-list of people requiring CAT scans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this list currently totals more than 500 in spite of 

the fact that each of Regina’s hospitals has a CAT scan 

machine. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. I ask all members 

to come to order so that I can hear the hon. member from 

Humboldt put her question, and I’ll ask all members to 

cooperate with that. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, this weekend Regina’s three 

hospitals will be conducting a CAT scan blitz to enable these 

facilities to try and make some headway on the growing  

waiting-list of people requiring CAT scans. Mr. Speaker, this 

list currently totals more than 500 in spite of the fact that each 

of Regina’s hospitals has a CAT scan machine. 

 

If this government gets its way and the Plains Health Centre is 

closed, there will be only two CAT scan machines in this city. 

Will the Minister of Health explain how he can stand in this 

legislature and state that the closure of the Plains will not result 

in the lower level of health care for the people of southern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  You know, Mr. Speaker, I hardly know 

how to answer that question, and I’ll tell you why. I’ll tell you 

why, Mr. Speaker, because the members know that the services 

that are provided at the Plains hospital are going to be provided 

at the other two institutions in Regina. And the member gets up 

and tries to say to people, if the Plains shuts down, the CAT 

scan goes. Well that’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if that member and that party were concerned at all about 

the welfare of the people of this province when it comes to 

health care, they wouldn’t have been getting up in this 

legislature yesterday and saying that we should have a U.S. 

(United States) style medicine system, Mr. Speaker. They 

wouldn’t have been advocating that at all. 

 

And I say to that member that they opposed medicare 30 years 

ago, and they can come into this House and talk about getting 

rid of our public medicare system all they want, Mr. Speaker, 

but that’s not the policy of this government. We’re going to be 

providing services to the people within medicare, not a private, 

two-tiered system as those members want to advocate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a CAT scan 

provides a very valuable service by determining, among other 

things, if tumours are present in a patient. The time a patient is 

forced to wait may determine whether such a tumour is 

operable or inoperable. In other words, it may be the difference 

between life and death. 

 

Will the minister explain where he and his government are 

drawing the line between a safe and an economic health care 

system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the last refuge of the Liberal 

Party when it comes to debating health care is scare tactics. In 

1962 when medicare was introduced, they said that the doctors 

and nurses would leave the province. Of course it didn’t 

happen. Yesterday they were saying the same thing. Today 

they’re saying people aren’t going to be able to get CAT scans. 

 

Well yesterday, Mr. Speaker, they were in this House saying 

that the specialists were leaving because the Plains Health 

Centre is being consolidated with other hospitals in Regina. 

And yet I find out from the Regina District Health Board that  



546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

the number of specialists in Regina has gone up in the last few 

years, as I indicated yesterday. 

 

Yesterday they say that 200 people are going to lose their jobs. 

But I find out from the Regina District Health Board, as I said, 

that those jobs are going to be located in the other hospitals. 

 

Today they say that you’re not going to be able to get a CAT 

scan. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that maybe the member needs to 

have her head examined. And if she does, we’ll have a CAT 

scan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  With leave, for the introduction of guests. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The hon. member has asked for leave 

to introduce guests. But before I put that question to the House, 

I do want to remind the minister that in his final remark before 

he took his place, he was very near the edge in his comments. 

Order. Order. Order. Order. The members will come to order. 

Order. Order. 

 

The Speaker is commenting on a comment he heard. Order. 

And I simply want to caution the minister. And I know that the 

minister has respect for the House and all hon. members, and to 

be cautious in his reference to other members in the future. 

Order. Order. 

 

The Leader of the Third Party has requested leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as you 

well know, the federal Conservative Party is the only political 

party to date that has achieved gender parity. 

 

Along with federal PC (Progressive Conservative) leader Jean 

Charest, Ms. Elsie Wayne has worked very hard on important 

issues as far as federal unity and of course has worked very 

hard on behalf of her constituents from St. John, New 

Brunswick. 

 

I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Ms. 

Elsie Wayne, who is seated behind the bar. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  As well joining us, Mr. Speaker, seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery, we have with us as well, Mr. Jeff Ferguson, 

her legislative assistant, as well as Ms. Lynn Agnew from 

Saskatoon here accompanying Ms. Wayne here today. And I’d 

ask you to welcome them as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the 

Assembly to welcome several constituents of mine from back 

home. 

 

We have the chief of the Clearwater Dene Nation, Roy 

Cheecham, up in the east gallery. We also have Armand Murray 

with the Metis Nation local in La Loche; and they’ve got 

several of the elders from their communities as well visiting the 

city. 

 

So I ask the Assembly to please make these guests from the 

North welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  On behalf of the government, I’d 

like to welcome Ms. Wayne to Saskatchewan. And I 

congratulate you as being a member of a party which has 

achieved gender parity, although it’s not exactly the route that I 

would choose to get there. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 

introduce to you and to other members of the House, seated in 

your gallery, two people from the Saskatchewan Council for 

Community Development  Mr. Mich Ozeroff and Linda 

Pipke. Would you join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet again? 

 

Mr. Belanger:  With leave, to introduce more guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to 

say that we’re surrounded by people from the North this 

afternoon. 



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

We have some council members from the village of La Loche. 

And we have the mayor, Willie Janvier, with some of his 

councillors, Lester; and we have Doug Gailey, the 

administrator; J.J., Verle Sproulle, Mr. Laprise, and I don’t 

know the last guy there, Donald Laprise, I believe. 

 

And they’re all councillors from Garson Lake and the good old 

town of La Loche. And I ask the Assembly to please welcome 

these very special guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements 

and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to move the first reading of a Bill respecting Conservation 

Easements and to make consequential amendments to other 

Acts be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 55  An Act to amend 

The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend The Municipal 

Employees’ Pension Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 56  An Act to Protect the 

Public from Convicted Pedophiles 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to Protect the 

Public from Convicted Pedophiles be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 57  An Act to repeal The 

Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to repeal 

The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

and to make a consequential amendment 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment  

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 59  An Act to amend The Balanced Budget Act 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend The 

Balanced Budget Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move the first reading of 

a Bill to amend The Crop Insurance Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No 61  An Act respecting the Practices of Professional 

Engineering and Professional Geoscience and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that the first reading of a Bill respecting the Practices of 

Professional Engineering and Professional Geoscience and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

rise under rule 19(1). 

 

The Speaker:  The rules permit the member to just advise 

the Assembly in a single sentence what the intention is under 

rule 19(1) if he wishes. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Plains Health Centre 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I rise under rule 19(1) 

to engage in a priority of debate motion regarding the saving of 

the Plains Health Centre. 

 

The Speaker:  This morning the Opposition House Leader 

delivered a notice for priority of debate to the Office of the 

Clerk, as is required under rule 19(2). It is the Speaker’s 

responsibility to determine whether the matter should receive 

urgent consideration and be permitted to proceed. Having 

reviewed the member’s case, I am now prepared to rule on the 

matter. 

 

As required by the rule, the member has established that the  



548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

matter of the closure of the Plains Health Centre is of public 

importance. However, under rule 19(5), to determine whether 

the matter is urgent to be discussed, the Speaker is obliged to 

pay regard to the probability of the matter being brought before 

the House within reasonable time by other means. 

 

The Opposition House Leader states in his case that tomorrow 

the Minister of Finance is scheduled to present the provincial 

budget to the Assembly. Therefore today is the final opportunity 

for the Assembly to consider a resolution before the Health 

department’s budget is finalized for the upcoming year. 

 

I wish to draw to members’ attention that there have been many 

opportunities over the past several weeks to raise this matter in 

the normal course of business. I also wish to the draw to the 

members’ attention that the presentation of the budget does not 

constitute any sort of final decision on the government’s annual 

spending estimates. The budget does initiate the ancient 

parliamentary right of grievance before supply. 

 

(1430) 

 

I submit that on a matter of parliamentary principle the budget 

is not finalized until this Assembly passes into law an 

Appropriation Act. Therefore it is in this light that the Speaker 

must consider whether the matter could be brought before the 

House within a reasonable time by any other means. 

 

I advise the Opposition House Leader that the budget debate 

process, during which time he or any other member could move 

a non-confidence amendment, is an important and effective 

opportunity to forward the case presented to me this morning. 

 

Secondly, through the consideration of the Department of 

Health estimates, members are afforded an opportunity in 

Committee of Finance to raise such matters. 

 

Finally, until the conclusion of the grievance before supply 

process, members will also have access to all the regular means 

available to put issues before the Assembly. The member could 

give notice of a motion to urge the government to amend the 

estimates to address this problem as he sees fit. 

 

For this reason, it is the Speaker’s decision to deny the request 

to set aside the regularly scheduled business to proceed with a 

priority of debate. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker:  Question 24 is converted to motions for 

return (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to have with me today 

my officials, Darcy McGovern from the legislative services 

branch; Linda Ens from legislative services; and Al Dwyer who 

is the director of the consumer protection branch. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would certainly 

like to thank the minister for the introduction of this Bill and 

join in the welcoming of the officials here today. I think that in 

the initial discussion about the Bill we’ve indicated our general 

support in terms of the overall thrust in what you’re trying to 

attain in terms of the general direction of this Bill. 

 

Having said that, there are certainly some clarifications that we 

need and some suggestions perhaps that we’ll make along the 

way. And if I could, I’d like to go through this. 

 

In section 4 of the Act it strikes us as an attempt to close some 

of the loopholes of The Direct Sellers Act regarding who needs 

to be licensed to conduct direct sales. The Direct Sellers Act 

had a lot of exemptions which allowed various types of 

businesses which were required to be licensed under other Acts 

to exempt from registration and licensing under The Direct 

Sellers Act. 

 

This meant that those businesses were not held in the strict 

standards set out in The Direct Sellers Act. Quite often 

businesses that were involved in direct sales had a tendency to 

licence themselves under the other legislation rather than under 

The Direct Sellers Act. One of the goals that became apparent 

when you read this Bill is to plug those loopholes. The question 

is, whether this Bill, particularly section 4, effectively closes 

those loopholes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think you have anticipated the 

desire that we have, which is to close the loopholes and we’ve 

specifically referred to a couple of things that have been 

problems over the years. And then I think specifically on the top 

of page 3, the section there does clear up the fact that sort of 

cover all the people who would in some way try to register 

under a different Act so they didn’t have to register under this 

Act. But you’ve anticipated what we are trying to do and we 

think that this can do it. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Section 6 of the 

Act sets out what needs to be included in a direct sales contract; 

the rights of cancellation must be spelled out in the contract. 

Will the minister and your department have a typical contract or 

model so that earnest and reputable direct sellers who want to 

be in full conformity with the law can have guidelines as to 

what there’s required in terms of the way their contracts are 

written? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This particular section I think, does do 

what you are considering, which is to provide some kind of 

conformity. Part of the reason for this is that the internal trade 

agreement has set out in it some standard clauses relating to . . .  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

Well not in the agreement itself, but in the business itself they 

are attempting to have uniformity across the country. 

 

And so for example, cancellation clauses right across the 

country would be the same, which would then allow any 

particular direct seller to be able to use the same forms right 

across the country. And it might not be that the whole contract 

is exactly the same in each industry, but practically, the idea is 

that if a person’s selling a particular product they could use the 

same contract in as many of the provinces in Canada as 

possible. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Chairman, I’m asking on behalf of the 

individual who may not be very learned in matters legal and 

interpretation of exact, specific clauses of an Act. In terms of 

saying to them, if I wanted to become a Watkins salesman in 

my next life  after 20 years in the legislature of course  

would I be able to get help in having a sample contract so that I 

wouldn’t have to try to get into an expensive legal kind of a 

study in order to make sure, with my good intentions, that I’ve 

conformed to the spirit and letter of the law in terms of 

contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Now if I understand the question 

correctly, you are concerned about being a direct seller  

probably not of a product like Watkins because Watkins would 

have their own lawyers who would set out contracts for you, but 

more if you had developed the product yourself and were going 

to sell it throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

I think what you would find is that the Act is really set out to 

protect consumers. But by protecting consumers, it also goes to 

the person who would be a seller and says, well look, these are 

the things that you need in the Act. Look in the section. And I 

think practically, you would get some very good advice about 

how to set up your contract. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, under section 7 of the Act, it talks 

about the licensing of direct sellers and the name that they must 

use in order to get licensed. The Bill says that sole 

proprietorships and partnerships must be licensed under the 

same name that they used when they registered under The 

Business Names Registration Act. This makes sense. 

 

But has any thought been given to simplifying the process so 

that a person, a sole proprietorship, or a partnership, register 

under The Business Names Registration Act, they can also 

obtain a licence under The Direct Sellers Act at the same time? 

If businesses could register under both Acts at the same time, it 

might be simpler for the business and more effective for the 

government. 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think what you’re talking about is sort of 

one-stop shopping; I guess that’s the term. And right now we’re 

working towards that. We don’t have it quite yet because there 

are some different requirements under each of the Acts. But that 

clearly is one of the things that we’re looking at as we look at 

all of the types of legislation, is to see if there are some ways 

that one could enter into business without having to sort of  

comply with many different Acts. But no, we’re not quite there 

yet. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Section 10.1 of the Act sounds good, but I 

think it could be improved, as I understand it. It provides for 

identification cards to be carried by direct sellers and those who 

are employed by them. Will these cards have pictures of the 

person in order to help avoid confusion and potential abuses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That particular question, of whether to 

have a photograph on the ID (identification) card, is one that we 

are, you know, continuing to consult with businesses about. 

One of the things we don’t want to do is make it so that it’s so 

expensive that for some of the smaller sellers it would be an 

expense that was greater than they could afford. But I think 

practically we’re working in consultation with business people, 

and I think our desire would clearly be to have the photograph 

there. But we don’t want to force that if it’s going to cause 

undue expense. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, a suggestion that might be made 

in that regard — there’s a lot of SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) licensing things, and I believe the fee 

for a photograph on a licence is something in the order of $12, 

so I don’t think that that would be prohibitive. 

 

I’m more concerned about . . . John Doe may not mean a whole 

lot with all the credentials when he goes up to sell siding to a 

widow in Plunkett, Saskatchewan, where if it’s John Doe and 

there’s a picture of this individual, that gives a lot more 

credibility. And I think a lot of the vulnerable people are the 

ones that were intended to be protected in this Act, and I don’t 

think $12 would be a great fee, especially since those services 

could be easily made available right across the province. And I 

would wonder if you would consider that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I accept that suggestion as a very 

good suggestion. Like I say, we’re in the process of 

consultation with the people who would be affected by the 

legislation. And I think it’s our desire that that’s what would be 

there, but we haven’t basically directed it in the legislation at 

this point. But I agree with you that we could possibly use the 

SGI licence photography system, and so it’s a good suggestion. 

It’s one that we also are working on. I appreciate the 

suggestion. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, and excuse my naïvety on this 

stage of it, but would some of these things be a thing that you’d 

consider to make a friendly amendment or things of that nature, 

so that if we are in agreement in terms of a helpful suggestion 

that would improve this Bill, is it possible, logistics wise, to 

agree to have that kind of a positive amendment entered into it 

before we get actually to the final third reading of the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think if you look at 10.1(2)(d), that is 

something that could be included in the regulations as 

information, and I means that’s kind of how . . . We were going 

to go and consult and say, well what other things would be 

important to have on this kind of an ID card. And we could do 

it there. 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. Section 36 of the Act 

sets out much greater penalties for people who have 

contravened the Act. The maximum fine for an individual 

committing a first offence is $10,000 or one year’s 

imprisonment or both. For a second offence an individual may 

be liable for a fine of $25,000 or another year of imprisonment 

or both. 

 

While they sound very harsh, and in many instances when 

people have been very seriously jeopardized in terms of their 

financial security by these kinds of things, very often that the 

courts have no momentum or impetus to enforce minimum 

numbers. And while maximum numbers are good to have on 

statutes in terms of the overall direction, unless there’s some 

direction in terms of minimum, it could be actually ineffective. 

 

Would you consider inserting minimum fines of at least $500 

for a first offence and perhaps a $1,000 for a second offence, 

some type of a minimum that makes sure that there’s real teeth 

in reality in this clause? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think what you’re seeing here is a 

reflection of legislative drafting based on previous experience 

in other Bills. And what happens when you have a minimum 

and a maximum sentence, often the decisions of the court tend 

towards the minimum. And when you don’t have a minimum 

and just the maximum, then often the penalties are a little bit 

higher. So that’s kind of the rationale behind it. 

 

I think also too there may be situations where you would want 

to find that there was an offence, but because of all of the 

circumstances, you would want something more in the nature of 

a reprimand than a fine, too. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you. The terms of licences under the 

Act will be reduced by this Bill from five years down to just 

one year, I believe. This means that an honest, law-abiding 

direct seller  and there are probably many in the province  

will have to renew this licence every single year. 

 

A number of questions around this. First of all, is there any 

thought to having a licence that is easily renewable or longer 

term, as long as no violations or complaints are in place, firstly. 

Secondly, has there been a cost analysis, what it might mean to 

have the direct sellers renew this annually when there are no 

violations and really no kind of flagging that indicates that 

licence shouldn’t be renewed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I would like to explain this by 

saying that we used to have an annual system and went to a 

five-year system, and what’s happening is that people who 

maybe were in the direct selling business for a couple of years 

out of the five years would have to go back an apply for a 

refund. And so that’s become a little bit of a difficulty. 

 

The other thing is, from the actual administration of the 

program, there are people who might want to be in direct sales, 

say as a summer job as a student or over a shorter period of 

time. They have to put more money out for the five-year licence 

and then have to apply to get the money back. 

Also, administratively from our director who is in charge of 

this, it’s been quite frustrating because they have these five-year 

licences sort of hanging out there of people who aren’t using 

them, and they don’t know when they might show up again. 

And it’s just a lot easier if after each year then they can say, 

well whoever wants to go out say for another summer of selling 

something, well then they apply for a new licence. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I’m assuming in your answer that 

you may have already answered this, but I want to ask it just to 

be sure. Have the administrative costs from your department, or 

from the department standpoint, been calculated into this whole 

process of the annual licensing compared to the five-year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  My understanding is that it’s basically 

awash. I mean it’s not going to cost any more; it’s not going to 

cost any less. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  In the determination of the licence fee itself 

for the individual that’s doing the direct selling, is that going to 

be a flat fee that’s just a one-time fee or would you explain 

please what you consider as a fee for a direct licenser? 

 

And what I’m concerned about particularly is if I’m that 

Watkins salesman or if I’m . . . that may sell, you know, 

cinnamon and ginger and few things that may amount to 10 or 

$15, as compared to someone that’s re-siding a whole house 

that could be thousands of dollars, is there any relationship 

between the value of what I’m selling and the fees that are 

charged? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think your question includes the 

question of what the fees are, and right now, with the five-year 

fee it’s a $125, and the proposal would be that it would go to 

$25. Also there is an exemption on direct sales; if your average 

direct sale is under $50, then you don’t need a licence. 

 

So that covers your, you know, cinnamon and spice 

salesperson. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Another part of the question, Minister, 

would be a great number of businesses in communities are very 

concerned that very often they have a stationary business, if you 

like, that offers a product range for sale and that they have 

municipal taxes and education taxes and overhead and all the 

rest of the costs associated with offering that service to a 

clientele base; where a direct seller may be able to operate out 

of the back end of a van and is talking about a 25 or a $125 fee. 

And I wondered if there’s been any thought in terms of building 

that kind of relationship in some way so that a comparative or 

competitive, level playing-field may be established. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This is an issue. And I assume you’re 

talking about each municipality setting up a fee for direct sellers 

in their community as one way of dealing with this. And one of 

the concerns is that if every area set up a fee and a person was a 

direct seller and that was their business, they would not 

probably be able to afford travelling very far away from where 

their home base might be. 

 

But what is happening is that we have been consulting with  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 

with Municipal Government about this issue of making it fair 

between the person who has investment in a store and a place of 

business and pays the local taxes, and the direct seller. 

Sometimes what happens is the direct seller is related to a store 

or business that is paying taxes in one place, but they may not 

be paying in the town or city, you know, two or three down the 

road. And so it is, I guess, a balancing act to try to figure out 

how to do this, and the consultation is continuing with SUMA 

and SARM and with Municipal Government. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I think that if you 

heard our line of questioning yesterday and some of the issues 

 or the day before; I kind of lose track  is that one of the 

concerns we have is leaving too much out of the Act and too 

much into regulations. And I know that that’s always a 

balancing act as well, but a wise old uncle of mine always said 

that the devil is in the details. And that’s where you can really 

get tripped up, and you end up not being able to debate that and 

put it in front of the scrutiny of the House and the legislature. 

 

So while I recognize that dilemma and the need for 

consultation, I also want to register the concern that we don’t 

leave too much to arbitrary regulations, as much as I very much 

respect the wisdom and the good judgement of the members of 

your team there, and the officials, to do it right. I want to say 

that that’s an ongoing concern. 

 

In the Bill, very often . . . I mean there’s direct sellers who are 

better than others and in the short term at least, nature takes 

care of itself and the poor ones fall by the wayside. I’m a little 

bit concerned about the very slick, very, very high polished, 

very high pressure kind of a person, and I’m concerned that is 

there any provision in the Bill whereby a direct seller would in 

some way, could, have the consumer waive their rights or waive 

proper protection under this? Has that been fully and 

completely sort of protected under your Bill as amended? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  As with the existing legislation, there’s no 

way that you can waive the 10-day sort of period in which you 

can review your sale, or any of the cancellation provisions. So 

practically, I think the answer is that the full protection is there 

right in the statute. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I think that there’s been reported 

recently some pretty notable cases of direct sales via fax or via 

long-distance telephone solicitation and things of that nature, in 

terms of promises of trips or holidays and free pens and this or 

that or whatever, being the come-on. And I think people have 

come forward and the police have expressed some concerns 

about people who have been taken to the cleaners in this way. 

Does this legislation provide for the definition, if you like, or 

some way of including direct sells other than face to face? 

 

(1500) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think, if you wish to turn to page 8, 

which would be section 22 amended in (1)(b). There it provides 

the . . . it’s right at the top of the page on page 8 at the bottom: 

(1) A direct sales contract is cancelled where: 

 

(b) the purchaser provides notice of cancellation to the 

vendor and the vendor or the vendor’s salesman made 

the offer for sale or the order to purchase by means of a 

telephone call from outside Saskatchewan to a purchaser 

resident in Saskatchewan. 

 

So if somebody calls and says I’ve got a great deal for you. 

Now one of the difficulties . . . I mean so basically you can 

cancel that at any time. If you’ve made that kind of a contract 

over the telephone you can cancel. But where the difficulty 

arises is if you make the deal, then pay the money, and your 

money goes somewhere else. Then we have a difficulty, as the 

province of Saskatchewan, going to Montreal or New York or 

wherever to enforce getting the money back. And so part of the 

difficulty of dealing with that involves just the legislative 

jurisdiction of our province. It ends here. 

 

Now this is the type of problem that is attempting to be 

addressed through interprovincial cooperation, and also I think 

through education. So people I guess would be warned about 

making deals with companies like this outside of the province. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I can’t search for the answer quick 

enough and that’s why I’m glad your folks are there. 

 

What about someone that would set up a direct solicitation firm 

or company within Saskatchewan. Does that person then fall 

under the definition of a direct seller that’s making either 

telephone or fax solicitations within the province or that would 

have its company originating in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I have a copy of the Act here and we’re 

amending this Act. But this part is not going to be amended. 

And the definition of direct seller in section 2 includes a person 

who by telephone offers for sale or solicits orders for future 

delivery of goods or services. So that’s within the province. 

 

And then what also happens is that when they’re licensed under 

this Act they have to put up a bond, so that there is a bond 

provision to deal with the telephone solicitation within the 

province. So we actually have the bond there. That’s different 

from the Quebec or New York situation where we can’t get a 

bond on those people. And it may be through some kind of 

interprovincial or international cooperation that may happen, 

but we don’t have that system yet. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I think that answers 

the questions that we had. And I would like to express our 

appreciation for your officials. And if there’s other members 

that wish to engage in this question period, I thank you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in my 

previous life as an insurance agent in my community, many 

people would come to me with great concerns of direct sellers 

from out of province, who were promised the deals, who sent 

money. And I dealt with a lot of even my own clients who lost a 

lot of money by having sent, as silly as it is, signed cheques that 

were blank to a firm in Quebec. 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

And then when I dealt with trying to find out who they were, I 

found out that they were answering machines. They were an 

answering service. Not an answering machine; they were an 

answering service. There’s no legal entity. 

 

I tried to go through Consumer Affairs and try to find out a bit 

about them. I even questioned the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) to try to solicit their help. And they really said 

that, you know, it was like buyer beware kind of thing. 

 

And I really feel that that group of people is so vulnerable by 

that slick operating group outside of the province that can sell, 

you know, anything and everything if they get an ear to listen to 

them. How can we prevent that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This problem that you’ve identified is one 

that’s quite clear that it is a problem right across the country. 

There are a couple of projects actually that are attempting to 

address this sort of interprovincial situation. 

 

One of them is that they are looking at amendments to the 

Competition Act, which is federal legislation, which would take 

on this particular issue as something that maybe they could 

solve. There haven’t been any sort of clear pictures of how they 

might solve it, but there are some possibilities when you have 

federal legislation. 

 

A second project is something called Project Phone Busters out 

of Ontario, which is a cooperative effort primarily between, I 

think police departments, enforcement agencies, which we are 

also participating or cooperating in. 

 

And it’s a method whereby when those calls come in, you can 

get the information into the system, into this Project Phone 

Busters, and they can hopefully track and find the answering 

machine or the person who takes the messages off the 

answering machine much more quickly than you could as an 

individual. So that’s something that’s happening. 

 

I think practically, once again the biggest and best way of 

dealing with this is better education and making sure people 

deal with local, reputable businesses as opposed to these kind 

of sort of miracle sales kind of things. And then in the final 

analysis there is . . . it’s fair comment to say that buyer beware 

is still something you need to worry about. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate the 

comments. 

 

I know when you talk about education is the best policy, and I 

agree with that fully. And I’ve had people come to me and ask 

me, should they send this cheque for $450, and I’ve said no, 

please don’t. And they have had a return call and they have said 

no, I am not going to send it, don’t bother me. Then a month 

later they get the same call from the same firm but the pot has 

been sweetened and they come back and say, gee, you know I 

think I should do that; they’re asking only for 425 this time. 

 

And you try to educate them, but yet they believe that that is 

something that is of value to them. And how can you . . . you 

know, education versus what they see as value sometimes has a  

fine line. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the advice here is if it looks too 

good to be true it probably isn’t true. But also I would strongly 

encourage you and anybody that you deal with, if you get these 

kind of calls, on the first time around that you make . . . you 

know, give a call to the department and to the director, Mr. 

Dwyer, in consumer protection because then he can feed the 

information in very quickly to this Project Phone Buster system 

and they can maybe actually go and prevent any more calls from 

coming in. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Just one final comment. You say 

that you’re talking about a federal program, the consumer . . . or 

did you refer to it as the Competition Act? 

 

An Hon. Member:  The Competition Act, yes. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, so this is something that is being 

looked at right now and something that will encompass western 

Canada, all of Canada, in terms of how we can deal with these 

kind of people? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This is a federal legislation. And you 

know, we often hear about it with prosecutions. I think the most 

famous one was the dredging case, you know, if you remember 

that. So that legislation deals with competition and fixed bids 

on projects, things like that. 

 

But we have, through the discussions on an interprovincial, 

national basis, we have an understanding that they are looking 

very seriously at trying to deal with this particular issue under 

that Act because they want to do something to help people, and 

that’s a place where they think they might be able to add an 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  My colleague made one suggestion about the 

photo ID and I wonder about whether or not we should include 

on something like that identification card a number, or on the 

contract itself, whether we have a number of The Consumer 

Protection Act. Because the people who are signing these 

contracts with the siding salesmen or whomever, they don’t 

know who to contact. And yes, they know about the provincial 

inquiry number, and that’s where the MLAs get the calls as far 

as who they should contact. Maybe that’s something you might 

include . . . write directly on your contract. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that’s a good suggestion. The only 

slight problem with it would be, is that we know that a lot of 

the direct seller companies are trying to set up the same contract 

for across the country. And so to have the Saskatchewan 

number on there would add an extra expense in the printing, 

unless we had all provinces’ provincial numbers. 

 

So I think it’s a good idea and the officials will take that and 

hopefully include it. And I think your suggestion also was that 

it wasn’t just on the contract but it would be on the ID card, 

which is a Saskatchewan card, and so practically it would seem 

like we could put it on there quite easily. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, and welcome to the staff of the  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

minister’s. Thank you for helping us read through some of 

these. I have just a couple of questions. 

 

On section 22 amended, number (c), it says: 

 

the purchaser provides notice of cancellation to the vendor 

within one year after the day on which the purchaser 

entered into the contract . . . 

 

So that leads me to believe that a sale could be cancelled within 

one year. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, that’s correct. As set out in the 

conditions below that, yes. 

 

Ms. Draude:  My question then is actually, on part (ii) 

underneath that it says the goods and service to be supplied 

under the contracts, if they’re not supplied within 30 days it can 

be cancelled. So if that’s true, what if they don’t complain? Do 

they have a year to complain if they haven’t cancelled it within 

30 days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think how it’s supposed to work is that 

you enter into a contract for delivery of some goods on April 1 

and the goods are supposed to arrive on July 1. If they don’t 

arrive by July 1, or 30 days thereafter, then you would have the 

right to cancel the contract even though it might be September; 

and you would have one year up until April 1, ’97 in which to 

cancel the contract. 

 

Ms. Draude:  As a business person I’m trying to think of 

what would happen if I had hired somebody and I thought they 

were doing something and I thought the contract was all 

completed and I find out just about a year later . . . and maybe 

this isn’t where I’m coming . . . 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I think the answer to your question 

would be is, if you didn’t deliver within 30 days of the day that 

you said you would deliver, then you would have to worry 

about cancellation of the contract. But yes, and practically, if 

you were delivering some product to that person and they didn’t 

pay you, well they’d have to give you the product back and 

cancel the contract that way. 

 

But I think the whole idea is that there is a protection for the 

consumer, but also I think too if you look at the legislation, 

there is a protection for the seller as well. So that if the seller 

delivers the goods within the time that they were supposed to, 

then the contract can’t be cancelled because they only have 10 

days in which to get out of the contract, you know, at the 

beginning of the contract. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Another question I had is, is telephone service 

that’s sort of solicited over the phone . . . and I’m saying like if 

somebody wants to sell me Sprint service, not SaskTel, is that 

covered under this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This legislation applies to door-to-door 

sales. But it’s telephone solicitation  is that your question?   

from Sprint. Yes, if they phone directly they’d get caught with 

this same provision. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I’d just like to get some clarification on what 

constitutes an unscrupulous business practice as opposed to just 

a misunderstanding. Like some of the things you talk about 

here, like you’re obviously not going to make 100 per cent of 

your customer base happy on certain things that you sell, be it 

door to door or be it through the telephone. How would your 

department . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think maybe I can answer that when we 

deal with the next Bill, because I think you’re on to The 

Consumer Protection Bill; we’re still dealing with The Direct 

Sellers Bill 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 10  An Act respecting Marketplace 

Practices, Consumer Product Warranties 

and Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, and your 

officials, I would like to welcome you, welcome your officials. 

I want to say first of all, how happy I am that the Liberal 

members were good enough to allow me to speak first on this 

because we have some obligations with another member in a 

few minutes, and there are a couple of things that I did want to 

say. So I appreciate that. 

 

And I also want the minister, because you’re new to the 

Assembly this year, to let you know that we are happy to see the 

private member’s Bill that I personally introduced last year 

appears to be included in this Bill. And we’re happy that, even 

though it didn’t happen last year when probably it might have 

been more timely, that at least now it is going to happen and we 

will protect the people of Saskatchewan in the future, from 

some of these problems. 

 

Just to make sure that the way that you have written it does 

cover the things that we were concerned about at that time, I 

want to specifically ask you a couple of questions; go right to 

the back of the Bill and talk about the unsolicited credit card 

portion and the unsolicited goods part. And does that include 

then, the problems that we were seeing in Canada with regards 

to people like the Rogers television company where they were 

negative billing, as the term was called? 

 

And of course we had an example of that happen just to the 

north of the city here in the Lumsden area last year. And of 

course that’s what triggered our thoughts that we needed to 

have some protection. 

 

And in that process, as you will recall, TV companies are 

allowed to bill people for extra services which they hadn’t  



554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

required or asked for. And if they didn’t take the extra services 

and pay for it, they lost the services that they were presently 

having. They didn’t want to lose the service they presently had, 

but they didn’t want to buy more. But they really didn’t have a 

choice. 

 

And so we viewed that as being an unfair practice. And so did 

of course other people in other jurisdictions. And there are laws 

throughout the country now that prohibit that kind of action. 

And there was a major backlash against that by people in 

eastern Canada. 

 

So I’ll simply let you answer that question, Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I thank the member for that question 

about this negative option marketing. And I think the simple 

answer is that we have not gone the full distance of banning 

negative option marketing. The only provinces that have done 

that are British Columbia, Quebec, and Nova Scotia. 

 

And we’ve been looking at it very carefully. It’s been part of 

the consultation as we’ve gone up to introducing this legislation 

this year. But there were a number of concerns about whether 

we should go the full way of banning negative option 

marketing. And at this point we’re not in a position to proceed 

with that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, I’m unhappy of course to 

hear that you haven’t decided to address what is a very real 

problem in the world around us and one that, as you say 

yourself, has been addressed by three other provinces already. 

 

I guess, simply put, I would have to say that that’s one of the 

problems with letting a rookie into cabinet who doesn’t really 

understand what his job is. And I think maybe it’s time that you 

took a look at some of the facts. And if you’re going to 

represent the province in such an important portfolio as 

Minister of Justice, you better get your act together and start to 

do what the people have requested and need. 

 

You certainly haven’t addressed the issue at hand. And you 

certainly display, I think, a rookie attitude towards your job 

when you have something as important as this that you let slip 

through your fingers at a time when you’re going to open up a 

Bill that has as much in it as Bill 10 has in it, and then you 

missed the target on the one very important thing that should be 

in there. 

 

So Minister, I want to let you know that we’re giving you 

forewarning that we’re going to be watching your activities in 

your portfolio from now on, because it appears to us that you 

have displayed a blatant disregard for the necessity of the 

importance of your job and the way that you should view it, and 

the kind of work that you should put into a Bill before you 

simply throw it before the people and before this Assembly to 

try and make it look like you’re doing your job when in fact you 

haven’t. You missed the target altogether. 

 

Now you can chew on that for awhile. I want to ask you a few 

more questions about some of the things I think you may have 

missed in this Bill. When a company simply advertises,  

something like, your satisfaction is guaranteed, what would this 

Bill do to protect a customer that bought an item that was 

defective and they wanted their money back? Does this Bill 

protect people in our society from that kind of advertising, and 

what power does it give to the consumer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d like to thank the member for his 

question, and I think I would like to maybe encourage him not 

to skip lunch, as it seems to do a great deal of damage to his 

ability to think about problems and issues here. And it may be 

that that’s the engagement that he’s late for, and I don’t plan to 

hold him up. 

 

What I would say though is, on the negative option marketing 

 I’ll continue with my response there  one of the 

difficulties that we have as it relates to that, relates to the whole 

problem of the banking industry and the credit union business 

and the renewal of mortgages and renewal of insurance policies, 

because it’s quite difficult to word something to catch the kind 

of problems that this member was concerned about without also 

disrupting traditional practice within the banking and insurance 

industry. And that’s why we haven’t proceeded with this as 

quickly. 

 

And so I think any comments about sort of experience in this 

area may be totally inappropriate and more related to his lack of 

lunch than anything else. 

 

Now what I would say, the next question about the product that 

is not, sort of, effective for whatever use it was sold, there is 

adequate protection under The Consumer Products Warranties 

Act, which is separate legislation. Well I guess it’s part of this; 

it’s now included as part of this one. And in that legislation 

there’s a statutory warranty which would cover the problem that 

you’re concerned about. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 

the fact that you would come into this Assembly and now tell us 

that you can’t enact legislation that protects people from a 

specific problem does in fact exemplify my point, which is that 

your lack of experience in this department has thrown you in 

the middle of a game that you weren’t prepared to play. 

 

You simply have to enact in legislation the specific point on a 

specific issue. You don’t have to let an Act cover all of the 

circumstances in the world. It doesn’t have to be that general or 

that broad. You can specifically say a certain thing will not be 

allowed in our society. I don’t think that’s all that hard for even 

a farmer to figure out. 

 

Now as the Justice minister, I really do believe that you would 

have at your disposal, not only the ability from your past 

educational training, but also the facilities through your 

department to send over to these other provinces like Quebec 

and even have it translated into English and find out how 

they’ve handled these situations and what kind of wording they 

use in order not to disrupt all of society, as you have alluded to. 

 

So, Minister, I think quite frankly when you put together an Act 

like this, and it’s going to sit here and be the law of the country 

and the law of the province rather, for I don’t know how many  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

years, because it’ll probably take you five years to get back to 

this again, you open up the legislation, you put all this work 

into it, then you missed the important points. You’re spending 

hundreds of thousand dollars worth of researchers, worth of 

people putting together paper booklets, sending this stuff all 

out, and you missed the very important points. 

 

And I think that’s a travesty of justice in our society, that a 

government would allow you to waste our time by putting out 

amendments and Bills that really don’t effectively consider all 

of the problems when we have effectively, I think, as an 

opposition over the past four years, pointed out for you what 

you’re job could and should include, and what your legislation, 

very pointedly, should have included in it. 

 

And I think that that, as I will repeat again, may be a fault of 

government that allows rookies to come right into cabinet 

without ever having any experience. 

 

(1530) 

 

But anyway, as for my lunch, I have some Smarties and I’ll 

share them with you and maybe we’ll both get a little brighter 

as we go. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to have the minister consider this 

Bill. It’s a long one. It’s a big one. It’s taken a lot of money, a 

lot of time, to put together. And I’m going to challenge you, 

Minister, to do the right thing by the people of Saskatchewan 

and specifically put in some amendments to straighten up the 

mess that you’ve got in this Bill. Because quite frankly you’ve 

missed the mark in it. You haven’t done nearly what the people 

of Saskatchewan expect in terms of what they are going to be 

protected against in the future and in the reality, as the Premier 

likes to point out, of the 21st century that we’re supposed to be 

coming into. 

 

So why don’t we simply put in some amendments to this Act 

and clean up some of these problems that have been pointed out 

to you? 

 

Now obviously you’re going to find some flowery way to get 

around that because a snowball has a better chance of surviving 

in Hades than we would ever have of making a suggestion that 

you would take. But on the other hand, maybe there is a need 

for you to be re-elected some time down the road, or maybe you 

would want at least your government to survive another election 

and perhaps it’s time that you start putting laws in that 

genuinely reflect the needs and the concerns of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’ll let you be challenged by that and go on to ask you 

another, more specific question. Now you didn’t answer the last 

question, incidentally. I did manage to get that through my 

hungry mind here  how you managed to evade answering the 

question and talk about things other than the question. But I 

will challenge you to answer another one. 

 

Now in the situation where people are billed for things, services 

that they haven’t received or aren’t necessarily agreeing to get, 

and where they are billed for a service like that by someone  

who owes money to them . . . and I’d better get more specific in 

order to clear this up. I can give you a clear example. 

 

A farmer phoned me the other day and said the Canadian Wheat 

Board had deducted from his final payment cheque so many 

dollars. He said he never authorized it; he didn’t ask anybody to 

take that off; he didn’t want that money taken off; and yet it 

was taken off. And the explanation was that the money is to go 

for goods and services in terms of spending the money on 

research or something else. 

 

That farmer said that he didn’t feel that the law should allow 

people to do that to him. So does this law protect people from 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Now my understanding of the question is 

you’re talking about an individual  this is consumer 

legislation  and you’re talking about an individual farmer and 

you’re wondering if that individual then has protection under 

this legislation over and against the Wheat Board. And are you 

talking about like a check-off kind of system that’s introduced, I 

assume, by federal legislation or however they do this? 

 

But basically this is to protect consumers, and I’m not sure . . . 

Maybe you should give me a little better explanation of what 

the question is and then we’ll see if I can answer. But I think 

practically this legislation is dealing with individual consumers 

as, you know . . . But maybe you should give me a little more 

information. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well you’re very probably right that this 

legislation likely doesn’t protect people from that kind of thing. 

That’s why I asked the question. 

 

The problem, of course, is that the producer of agricultural 

goods sells them, but he is also a consumer in that his money is 

being deducted from his cheque to buy things for him as a 

consumer, a consumer of research. He’s asked to pay for it as a 

consumer of needing that research. Research becomes a 

consumer item then. 

 

And if that money is deducted from his cheque to pay for that 

consumer item without his express desire or his request or his 

agreeing to it, then he feels as an individual that his rights have 

been infringed on. 

 

Whether or not there is some federal law that could cover this, 

I’m not exactly sure. But my understanding was that it wasn’t 

passed through a federal legislation; it was simply some kind of 

an agreed-on thing that the Canadian Wheat Board decided to 

do. 

 

This is only one example. There are some other examples, but 

I’m going to stick to this one even though it’s one of the kind of 

looser ones. But that’s the kind of protection this particular 

individual is asking if he has. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think it’s possible to answer that 

without looking at whether the Canadian Wheat Board Act or 

the legislation that creates that also has the ability to create 

regulations which sets up a check-off system; that’s under  



556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

federal law. This particular legislation, I think, practically isn’t 

meant to deal with that situation. And if that was something, I 

think it would be more appropriate to deal with the Wheat 

Board legislation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, let’s get a little more specific 

and down home then. Suppose the co-op in Saskatchewan, 

Pioneer Co-op in Gull Lake, decides that they have a dividend 

and they issue a dividend for the end of the year but they take 

half of that dividend off to do research on behalf of the 

customers. 

 

Then they are deducting . . . And this hasn’t happened. This is 

just an example; this is nothing that has happened. This is truly 

hypothetical, so don’t get the co-ops all mad at me. But I want 

to get it close to home so you’ll understand it, and co-ops are 

something you folks are supposed to understand. So if they did 

that kind of thing, would that be legal or would it be covered 

under this law? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think what you’re attempting to do here 

is obtain some free legal advice and I’ll answer it. I don’t think 

this legislation deals with that, but practically, if you were 

dealing with a co-op and there was a system within the co-op 

whereby in the contract where you became a member, the board 

of directors had the power to access special levies against 

dividends for purposes of purchasing some kind of research, 

then that’s how one would do it. 

 

Now if there wasn’t that clause in whatever membership form 

that you sign, then practically you would have a claim against 

the co-op to get your money and you would, you know, pursue 

that claim with either Small Claims court or the Court of 

Queen’s Bench. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you for the free advice and value 

it according to how much I paid for it. Anyway I always have 

my interest peaked, Minister, when I open up a book like this 

and see one of the top items is “family farming corporation” 

and on page 18 that heading is at the top of the page. I wonder 

if you’d explain how this Act affects family farming 

corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Could you please tell us what page you’re 

referring to or what section? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  We were just having a little conference, 

Minister. I take it that you were asking about the question again. 

Page 18 in your Act at the top of the page is where we were 

looking and under item (g) there is reference to the “family 

farming corporation” and I wonder how this Act affects family 

farming corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If the member would refer to page 17, the 

top of page 18 defines “family farming corporation” so that 

term can be used on page 17 in the definition of “consumer 

product” and in part (ii) of that “consumer product” definition 

it: 

 

(ii) . . . includes any goods bought for agricultural or 

fishing purposes by an individual or by a family farming  

corporation but does not include any implement the sale of 

which is governed by . . . The Agricultural Implements Act. 

 

So it’s saying that if a family farm corporation purchases 

something in their agricultural business, then this Act would 

apply because that would be a consumer product. And it 

wouldn’t apply if it was not a farming corporation. So basically, 

family farming corporations are included as consumers under 

this Act, as opposed to if you had a commercial operation in a 

small town, or even, I suppose, not a farming corporation that 

you are operating from your farm. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. Because the Liberals 

were so good to let me in I’m going to allow them to carry on 

with the debate and the questioning, and I thank them once 

again for their cooperation, and I thank you for some of your 

answers. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would just like to refer 

you to item no. 3, under part II, “Marketplace Practices”. Okay. 

You have stated here it is an unfair practice to do or say 

anything, or fail to do or say anything, if as a result a consumer 

might reasonably be deceived or misled. 

 

I’m just wondering if the member can tell me, you know, how 

on earth could this be monitored in realistic ways. I mean who 

is going to be able to prove that something has been said or 

done at the time. And how could you actually make any 

reasonable headway with that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that the simple answer to your 

question is that if a matter cannot be resolved through 

mediation or, you know, some kind of a discussion between the 

consumer and the business, then it would go to a mediation 

with the director of, the person in charge of, the consumer 

protection branch. But in the final analysis, if there was a 

disagreement on what the facts were, a judge would decide. 

 

Because this legislation has, as its ultimate remedy, a matter 

being, you know, evidence led in court and then a judge saying, 

well I’ve heard two stories; I believe this one. So that’s where 

the answer to your question would be. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I just would like to refer to the same 

page, item no. 4(d). 

 

The Act includes several examples of unfair business practices 

to which the Act applies, including charging a fee for goods or 

services that grossly exceeds the price at which similar goods or 

services in similar consumer transactions are readily obtainable 

by similar consumers. 

 

I guess that takes a lot of delving into, but I have to ask what 

criteria will be set out to determine if goods grossly exceed the 

price of similar goods? What constitutes “grossly exceeds,” and 

who determines where the line is drawn? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the clause that you’re looking at 

here relates to the area where we’ve had the most difficulty, 

which is that between sort of criminal fraud and some kind of 

unfair practice. And this goes right to the heart of those  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

questions where we’re dealing with people, for example, who 

are doing home renovations and for, like, a $2,000 job that five 

contractors would all come within $500 of 2,000, a person is 

charged $15,000. This particular clause is set out there to deal 

with that specific situation or other similar ones. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Okay. Would there be anything stated out sort of 

as guidelines of where you would determine grossly excessive 

situations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think where you would go is where you 

would go in any lawsuit where you were trying to lead evidence 

about this kind of thing. You would go to the market-place. 

And if I had a case like this and was trying to prove it, I would 

bring in these four other contractors who have said yes, we 

went out to that house; we saw the work that was done. Our 

estimate of the cost is 2,200; 2,400; 2,100. And then you 

actually have the bill that the vulnerable person paid, and it’s 

13,000. The judge would say well, based on the market-place, 

the price should have been 2,500 and therefore the price that 

was actually charged of the person who was being dealt with 

under this Act was way out of line. 

 

(1545) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I recognize that the Act is certainly for 

fairness, but I’m wondering if some people may not say that 

this is sort of working towards a price control that they’re a bit 

afraid of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s clearly not the intention of this, 

and it’s one of the reasons that in the lengthy consultation that 

took place before this Act was brought into the legislature, it 

involved both the consumers association people and the 

small-business people through a number of different groups. 

And one of the issues obviously was whether it would be some 

way of lessening the competition. 

 

But I think the clear consensus of everybody was that there 

were some people out there who were stealing or ripping off 

people because they were not providing, for a fair price, the 

work that was requested. And so there’s no intent at all to 

somehow limit the competition. I think it’s just . . . the idea is 

fairness in the market-place, and as far as I can understand, all 

of the commercial people are quite pleased with that. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

under this section when you talk about the unsolicited goods 

and credit cards, the question that I have around, is this section 

looking after the . . . something as simple as membership in a 

book club? Membership is cancelled six months ago by a letter 

written to the company and then the company continues to send 

the particular book or records or whatever. Is that now in the 

category of unsolicited because you have cancelled the 

membership? You know, having met the obligations of that 

membership, is that now an unsolicited thing? 

 

And what is the responsibility of the individual who has now 

received that unsolicited book or record or whatever? Is it now 

the obligation of that individual to send them back? I’ve had a 

lot of questions asked by some of my constituents around that  

particular topic. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think what maybe should be recognized, 

that this is the same Act that’s been in Saskatchewan since 

1971, and basically the answer is there at the bottom of page 

32: Where unsolicited goods are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

right at the bottom of page 32, 73(2): 

 

Where unsolicited goods are received, the recipient has no 

legal obligation to the sender unless and until the recipient 

acknowledges to the sender in writing his or her intention 

to accept the unsolicited goods. 

 

And practically, you know, I think that’s fairly clear. There’s no 

obligation to do anything with them. But most of the time, I 

think people will send them back, just say, return to sender, or 

something on them. But there’s not even obligation to do that. 

But this is the same legislation we’ve had for 25 years. It’s just 

now incorporated into this new, omnibus Bill. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  What number of Acts are we combining in 

this one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think if you look at the next page there, 

page 33, you’ll see that we’re repealing The Consumer Products 

Warranty Act and The Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards Act. 

So those two Acts are being repealed because they’re being 

incorporated in this new consumer protection Act. There’s 

basically a third Act, which is the whole new section on fairness 

and consumer transactions. So we’re replacing two previous 

Acts and then adding the whole section on consumer protection. 

So it’s kind of like there’s three Acts in one. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome, Mr. 

Minister. It’s a pleasure to be able to ask you a couple of 

questions on this Bill. 

 

First I will make just a bit of a statement again regarding section 

71, which is the regulations, and refer you to 71(a) where it 

says, “defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 

word or expression used in this Part . . .” 

 

I will note again my displeasure with the regulations and ask 

that you would . . . again urge you or your counterparts as well 

that we would have a chance to look at the regulations and 

debate them in this forum. And possibly at the end of this Bill, I 

might be making an amendment to that. 

 

However, you hit on the part where we talked about family 

farming corporations on page 18. I just have a couple of 

questions on that, if I could. Mr. Minister, I’m wondering why 

you distinguished family farming corporation from farming 

corporation? Is there a difference there? And if there is, why 

aren’t they distinguished? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think this definition and this part of it is 

the same as what has been in that previous Act since 1976. And 

practically, what we’re looking at is the consumer aspect as 

opposed to a commercial transaction between two businesses. 

 

And so the one way to deal with that as it relates to family  



558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

farms  they’ve given them a special status as family farming 

corporations  is this definition. And that’s unchanged since 

1976. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Is there a definition somewhere of family 

farm then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, the definition is on page 18 at the 

top. That’s the definition  family farming corporation. So 

there’s not a definition of family farm because you don’t need 

that, because a family farm would have individuals there who 

do business. And then they would be covered as an individual. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Every family farm is not a corporation. I’m 

not understanding, I’m sorry. There’s family farms that are 

incorporated and there’s family farms that are not incorporated. 

There’s family farms that have partnerships. There’s family 

farms that are nothing; they’re probably a co-op. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  A family farm that’s a partnership or 

some sort of unincorporated business doesn’t have a problem 

because they fit into the definitions already because there are 

individuals involved. So basically we wanted to extend this 

legislation, back in ’76, because it was our government that 

introduced it then, to include the family farm corporation so 

that they were treated in the same way as the family farm that 

wasn’t incorporated. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So for the purposes of this Bill then, the 

family farming corporation would cover basically anyone in 

farming other than a commercial operation. Is that what we’re 

saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, that’s correct. Under the consumer 

products warranties part, which is part III. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Good. So then we have that defined then. 

 

The next question would be, is how this Act would relate to a 

farm product, and I’ll give a personal example from one of my 

constituents. It maybe better explains it. 

 

The farmer bought some seed from another person with a 

guaranteed germination level on it. The seed was not at that 

level. How does this Act relate to that sort of a situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that situation would be covered 

because it was a product that was not sort of fit for the use it 

was intended. It didn’t meet the specifications in the contract. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Would it matter, Mr. Minister, if the seed was 

bought from a private, another private farmer, under the family 

farming corporation, or if it was bought from a commercial 

enterprise? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  It wouldn’t be covered because it has to 

be purchased from a commercial operation. So this legislation, I 

guess, is there to protect the consumer over against the 

commercial operation. But it doesn’t cover transactions 

between two individuals. 

Mr. McLane:  I guess when I was talking about a 

commercial enterprise I was referring to large seed operators 

such as Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, Cargill. How does that 

relate to a, I guess, to a private seed registered grower . . . a 

private registered seed grower? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that a private registered seed 

grower would be a commercial operation and so therefore they 

would be covered by this legislation. I think the other thing to 

remember is if this consumer products warranty portion of The 

Consumer Protection Act is held not to apply, you still have a 

remedy in court under, you know, on a contract that was 

breached. There are many remedies at common law which 

would help you in that situation. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I’ll just remind the minister that 

given the times on the farm, things are tough, and we can’t 

always afford the expertise of people of your profession so we 

try and go things as most economically as we can. 

 

Just another short question. In the last couple of years we’ve 

seen yellow-type trucks driving all over the province, out into 

the rural areas, delivering ice cream products. I’m wondering 

how this Act would relate to the seller of those products to 

individuals who purchase them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, I think . . .I mean the main legislation 

that would affect that type of operation is The Direct Sellers 

Act, which we discussed previously. But if there were 

something within the transaction that was unfair or was a 

problem, then this legislation could also apply. But the actual 

regulation of those people is under The Direct Sellers Act. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Under no. 29, the unfair practice outside of 

Saskatchewan, I understand that this Act will allow the director 

to take action against a supplier on behalf of a consumer 

outside of . . . where the practice occurred outside of 

Saskatchewan. Is this a reciprocal Act? Does it work the other 

way as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think what I can say is that our goal is to 

have reciprocity with every province in Canada and maybe with 

some of our border states. This clause is put into our Act as sort 

of an incentive to other provinces to do the same thing. But at 

this point, we’re the first one with this. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Right now we are the only one that it’ll work 

with. 

 

Okay. I have another question and this is kind of . . . If I would 

buy . . . does this Act also cover second-hand cars that I’d buy 

from my colleague? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I guess the only way it would apply to a 

purchase of a car from him is if he had a business and it was a 

commercial operation to sell vehicles. But it doesn’t relate to 

deals between individuals. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there anything that . . . so there isn’t any . . . 

This doesn’t help us at all then. Is there any legislation that 

would help people if I would buy a car that had been in an  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

accident? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No. I mean I think there your solution is 

in a claim on a contract under the common law so that you 

could go to court. I mean there are many remedies, but it’s not a 

legislative solution. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Another question I have. I understand that this 

is joining three Acts together, so that must mean . . . I don’t 

know if it’s three different departments, but the Act says now 

that a director will be appointed. Does that mean that now 

there’s just going to be one for all three of them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We have only one individual, right here, 

and he’s had all those three jobs and he will continue to have 

them, only it’ll just be one job now. 

 

Ms. Draude:  And I just have one last question. I’m going 

backwards here. On no. 10(3) it talks about, in an investigation, 

the director, with the consent of the supplier, could at any 

reasonable time enter the business premise to look at their 

books, papers, and so on. 

 

Does that have to be agreed on? Like is there some legislation 

that allows them a certain amount of time, so somebody can’t 

come into my house at 2 in the morning? 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the key part of that clause is “with 

the consent of the supplier.” So that the supplier is the business 

that the complaint was made about. And so practically it would 

be a cooperative effort. And so if the supplier said they needed 

24 hours to get the papers in order or something, that would 

probably . . . would happen. But the director can’t go in there 

without consent. 

 

Ms. Draude:  What if I wouldn’t ever consent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Then if you wouldn’t consent, then you 

just move down to section 13 where the director can issue a 

warrant. He can apply ex parte to a justice of the peace or to a 

judge and get a warrant to enter. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to your 

officials, Mr. Minister. 

 

I have one question, and please forgive me if it may have been 

asked earlier, but does this also include the advertising by 

product sellers in areas of misleading advertising? Is this 

covered as well under this particular Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I can refer the member to page 4 in 

the Bill where it talks about: 

 

6(g) representing that goods or services are available or are 

available for a particular reason, for a particular price . . . 

 

So you basically, that would include advertising. And then 

there’s a protection in section 35 which says that if a radio 

station or a newspaper publishes an ad that’s inaccurate, well  

it’s not the person who . . . it’s not the radio station or the 

newspaper that is charged under this Act. It would be the 

people who supplied the copy for the information that would be 

covered by the consumer protection legislation. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And the onus would 

then be on the person, the aggrieved party, to supply all the 

detail and report it accordingly. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, that’s correct. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 

Minister, and as well to your staff. Northern Saskatchewan 

again, we’ll go back  way, way back to northern 

Saskatchewan. I think I’m going to have a habit of doing that in 

the House. And one of the points I want to raise is that there is a 

lot of concerns and questions in reference to some of the 

unscrupulous business practices that many Northerners also 

suffer from various different businesses in the province. 

 

The sale of cars for example, many of my people come from 

northern Saskatchewan. They purchase vehicles. What, if 

anything different, does this law do to protect the consumer 

when they purchase vehicles from what’s already existing 

through the small claims court process and what not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is that 

when a person buys a vehicle from a business, then this 

provides quite a number of remedies for the consumer who’s 

purchased a vehicle whether there’s some problem with the 

vehicle. The first remedy, obviously, is through some kind of 

mediation. If that doesn’t work, then the director can step in and 

look at the transaction. 

 

What it doesn’t cover is where somebody goes and buys a car 

privately. And so that’s difficult and this legislation doesn’t 

cover that situation. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The second part of the question is the North 

does suffer through a great amount of power outages, in terms 

of the power being interrupted. And the example of myself as a 

home-owner, if I have say a deep-freeze full of food, or a water 

heater that as a result of the power outage or the power surge  

would then SaskPower be responsible for taking care of the 

damage caused by the interruption, in essence the poor service 

of that particular industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think you’ve raised a good question. I’m 

not sure the Act applies directly, because SaskPower has 

supplied the service, or hasn’t supplied the service, when the 

power outage is there. And what you’re looking at then is the 

damage that’s caused because that service hasn’t been supplied. 

 

I don’t think the legislation would go that next step unless there 

was some unfairness to the original service contract. Once 

again, I think your remedy would be in a claim for damages  

a tort claim for the damage that was caused because the power 

was out. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I raise that matter because it has been an 

ongoing problem for many years and I talked about, not only 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

the private home-owners, but the business concerns. I talk about 

the community concerns, as many municipalities do use power 

for their water and sewer systems, use power for their arenas, 

and so on and so forth. And as consumers, you would suspect 

they would have the same protection with this law as a 

consumer on the street. 

 

And it goes back to my second point. It’s nice to have these 

type of Bills presented in the House, and I applaud the intent of 

the program to protect consumers from unscrupulous business 

practices. 

 

The second point I want to raise is that again, going to the far 

northern communities, many times consumers let these things 

go. How will you make sure that they have an avenue to 

proceed with their justifiable complaint against a business that 

isn’t practising business properly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to that is that the 

businesses have worked with us in this legislation because they 

wanted some very clear rules about what was fair and unfair 

and to catch some of the grey areas where it wasn’t entirely 

clear whether a consumer could proceed with a complaint. 

 

Some of the specific problems relating to the communities in 

your part of the province may be related . . . Are they related to 

people who come in and sell things and then leave the 

community, or related to the businesses that are located in the 

community? Because I think there are two different answers to 

your question, depending on whether it’s the businesses that are 

there or some kind of travelling business person or direct seller. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I’m still not clear on the answer, but the 

question I have is, if I am . . . say I’m Ron Osika in downtown 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and I bought a car up in Saskatoon and the car 

wouldn’t run after a couple of weeks. How will I get my money 

back or get some kind of thing going without knowing, without 

being aware of what avenues are out there for me? That’s my 

point, is how will people in the far northern communities be 

able to respond? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think if the question is about how 

one will educate the public, that there are some remedies. Then 

I think practically there are the types of education that go 

through the MLAs’ offices and other places like that. But also I 

think the businesses in Saskatchewan that we have consulted 

with are very interested in getting together around educating 

people about this legislation. Because it’s better for them if 

people understand what their rights are, and so that the ones 

who aren’t following the rules or who are unfair, like your seat 

mate there, that maybe they will be routed out and we’ll send 

them to Alberta or some other place like that. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  What’s the interpretation of the word 

“business” in this particular Act? Is it a large business, a small 

business? Is it government business? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think if you look at the top of page 3, the 

word “supplier”, and the definition there is: 

 

. . . a person who, as a principal or agent, carries on the  

business of: 

 

(i) selling, leasing or otherwise providing goods or 

services on a retail basis; 

(ii) manufacturing, importing, producing or assembling 

goods; or 

(iii) distributing goods or services; 

 

So that’s . . . you know, it’s a very broad definition and does I 

think catch most of the people that we would want. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So I guess the Act does include the forestry 

companies and the mining companies of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well if you ended up purchasing some of 

their products or other services, yes. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Just one question, Mr. Minister, on the 

regulations if I could again. Could you just explain to me 

possibly how the regulations will work for this Bill, how they 

are reviewed, who has a chance to look at them and discuss 

them, and who reviews them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think what I can say is that the working 

group that helped us over the last number of years in preparing 

the legislation will continue to work with us in developing the 

regulations, so we will have the officials in the Justice 

department working on this together with them. 

 

As well, there will be broader consultation throughout the 

Saskatchewan community, and that includes quite a number of 

groups  I’m sure all of the groups that we consulted with 

before. And I think practically, if you wish, if there were some 

members of your caucus who wish to be part of that process we 

would be happy to include you in some of these meetings. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, has there been any 

work done on the regulations to date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think what I can say, there are 

regulations under the two parts of the Act that were here before. 

And the regulations under the new, sort of, consumer fairness 

part have not been developed yet because we’re not in a 

position to do that until we pass the Act. I think practically, 

some of the same kinds of issues that were dealt with in those 

other pieces of legislation would go into these regulations for 

this part as well. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, is there a standing committee or 

a committee that looks at, as a group, looks at the regulations to 

all the legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. There is a committee of cabinet that 

has that specific task. 

 

Mr. McLane:  The committee is just . . . define that, is a 

committee of cabinet ministers. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are some MLAs that are part of that 

committee as well. But that’s basically . . . they look at what the  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

people in our Justice department have drafted and worked on 

and done the consultation on. And then they go to this 

regulation review committee, who in turn they make 

suggestions. And often it goes back quite a number of times. 

 

And I guess my suggestion on the consultation would be that on 

some of the issues, if members of your caucus wish to be part 

of that, we would include you as one of the groups. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I appreciate the offer, Mr. Minister. Just a 

question. The committee that makes the final decision on the 

regulations for all the pieces of legislation is the cabinet 

committee. Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well the people who make the final 

decision would be the cabinet. And so the committee, the 

regulations review committee, reports to cabinet. They say, we 

think this is what the regulations should be. But at the cabinet 

stage, it still can be further discussion and changes at that stage. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So then the cabinet does have the final 

decision. If they don’t like the regulations that are proposed by 

the study group, then they would have that right to change the 

regulations to their whim? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that’s accurate because they bear 

the final responsibility for whatever the effect of that particular 

regulation might be. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just 

a quick clarification on page 28. And I know this may not be an 

amendment; it may be in the Act that is already in existence. 

 

Reference to 63(3) part (a), when you talk about the consumer 

now eligible to recover damages for losses, are you talking 

about additional expenses, transportation expenses, the kinds of 

things that they may be entitled to claim as legitimate expenses? 

How can I as a consumer be . . . What will be the definition of 

the additional losses that I may sustain? I just want clarification 

on that, if you might. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Under this particular clause, what would 

happen is you would make a claim for what your losses are. 

And practically you might set out, you know, if you were 

injured by a product for example, you might include some 

hospital bills or transportation, doctor’s fees, chiropractor’s 

fees. It could be a loss of clothing. You would set out all of the 

different claims, much as you might do in any lawsuit. 

 

The final decision on what items you would have paid for 

would be by a judge if you couldn’t work it out with the 

corporation that you purchased this from or the business you 

purchased it from. Usually at that stage you would be dealing 

with an insurance company or an insurance adjuster. And so it 

would be much like making, I think, an insurance claim. You’d 

be working with the people who have the job of assessing what 

the losses are. But if you disagreed with all of that, the final 

arbiter of the whole thing would be a judge. 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

you’ve imposed a great deal more responsibility on the director 

by taking on now the three Acts into one being combined. May 

I ask, and perhaps it was asked before, how many people are 

now available to assist the director in carrying out the 

investigations that may come under these particular Acts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The present, sort of, compliment. So there 

won’t be any new people added in this particular section of the 

department. It’ll include the director and an assistant, and then 

five investigative officers. And I think, my understanding is 

they work pretty much as a team so that you effectively have 

seven people who are on the front line of these things. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I ask that question 

because I know that the case-loads for departments such as that 

can be quite extensive. And I’m wondering if they do have 

adequate resources to meet perhaps the demands of consumers 

who may be affected. 

 

It comes to mind, currently I do not believe we have access to 

any consumer protection processes that are directly related to 

federal statute responsibilities. I’m thinking of predatory 

pricing. Is that included anywhere in . . . is there anyone in the 

department here within the province that would assist people 

who may have that type of a complaint? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer is that our staff will 

provide assistance in that area. But it is federal . . . it’s the 

Competition Act that we were talking about earlier that applies. 

And we can provide advice on that because it’s a concern for 

consumers and other businesses. But also they do have a federal 

1-800 number which allows you to get access to somebody, and 

our staff know about that. 

 

The other thing I would say is that one of the real advantages of 

this new legislation is that because we have the cooperation of 

the consumers’ association and the small business groups, 

there’s a fairly strong sort of encouragement in resolving many 

of the disputes directly between the consumer and the business. 

And so basically the role of the people in the Department of 

Justice is sort of one step back, if it can’t be resolved at that 

level. 

 

And we think that that’s going to be a positive thing because we 

know that the small businesses want to resolve disputes without 

causing a great deal of concern within the business community. 

We also know that most consumers don’t want a big hassle, 

they just want things to be put right. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one other 

question relating to how the department operates. Is the 

department located primarily or mainly here in Regina, or do 

you have offices and accessibility to your department in other 

areas of the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The present office is in Regina. I think 

they’re downtown by the public library I think is where they 

are. But what happens is they routinely get inquiries through the 

public inquiry lines, so they respond to issues all over the 

province. 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

The other thing is that the investigative officers, if necessary, 

will go anywhere where there’s a problem. I imagine, you 

know, the example of some of these problems with home 

improvements, I mean they’d have to go out and see where the 

work was done and look at some of those things. 

 

But I think practically, the plan would be that the department 

would not be sort of an intrusive force into the business. The 

idea is that they’re there as a backup but that there would be an 

encouragement that consumers and small businesses or 

businesses would try to resolve things themselves first. And 

then the director and his staff would only step in as a secondary 

measure. And, you know, we’ll see how that works. 

 

I think part of what’s going on here too is that we are giving 

some more powers to the director to deal with some of those 

cases which were traditionally in kind of a grey area or in a gap, 

and we’ll have to assess carefully. If the demand can’t be met, 

well then we have to look at providing the proper steps. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, perhaps that may be an 

opportunity for some former police officers to have access to 

help you people out. With all due respect to the investigators 

you have, I’m sure they’re very capable and competent, and I 

appreciate your answers. Thank you very kindly. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  And you would make sure that these former 

police officers weren’t former MLAs to be fair to everybody. 

 

One of the questions . . . we all know that when people are 

indeed in trouble, they generally go to their MLA office. Would 

you feel that having a toll-free number posted conspicuously in 

an MLA’s office regarding the Act as well as a ways and means 

that the consumer can gain support from your department . . . is 

I’m still concerned about the accessibility to your service and 

awareness of what the Bill is trying to do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would like to thank the member for that 

suggestion. I mean we’re basically looking at any ideas that may 

be there to make sure that everybody knows about this 

legislation. I mean that goes everything from making sure it’s 

included in courses at school so that younger consumers can 

learn about this and say this is part of what we have available 

for you in Saskatchewan when you buy your first whatever, 

Walkman, or something like that, all the way to, I think, the 

posting information in an MLA’s office. 

 

We don’t have an 800 number right now that’s specifically for 

this purpose, but the provincial inquiry line is a direct way to 

get into the consumer protection. So that number would be a 

way that people from your northern communities would be able 

to have access quite quickly. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Is that number a toll-free number? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m not sure. We’re going to just see if we 

can get the answer for you on that. I don’t know. I think he’s 

going to go and try it. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The first couple of weeks I’m in the House, I 

stump a minister. I just wanted to know have you had any  

consultation with any consumer protection branches or the 

Better Business Bureau. Like how do these organizations fit in 

the whole scheme of things, because I would think having 

government involved with it tends to sometimes send a negative 

message to business that perhaps we’re over-regulation and 

over-worrying about this thing and that perhaps we should fund 

consumer protection groups at a greater amount to protect the 

people they’re designed to serve completely without having 

government be involved. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  So the question is whether or not we’re 

working with businesses, I take it, as opposed to just 

consumers’ groups . . . or consumers’ groups? Because we’ve 

met with all kinds of different groups. Sort of the main people 

on the consulting group that helped us in preparation of the 

legislation were Mr. Dale Botting with the Canadian Federation 

of Independent Business, I think it’s called, and the other 

woman was Margaret Crowle with the Consumers’ Association 

of Canada. 

 

And the other people who were on the working group were: 

Craig Vickaryous of the Consumers’ Association of 

Saskatchewan, Bryan Walton of the Retail Council of Canada, 

Mary Anne McFadyen of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, and Eleanor Corby from Saskatchewan Education 

 that’s a government official  and then Doug Moen from 

the Justice department and Keith Laxdal from the Justice 

department. There were eight people who were on this working 

group and five of them were from . . . Well I guess we could 

say three were from the business community, two were from the 

consumers side, and three were government officials, out of that 

eight. 

 

And then they in turn consulted with a number of different 

groups, and if you want I can tell you who they are because it’s 

quite interesting. There’s the Regina Police Service, the 

Saskatoon City Police Service, SUMA, Regina Chamber of 

Commerce, Seniors Mechanism, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Canada Post, the Direct Sellers 

Association, Saskatchewan voice of people with disabilities, 

Saskatchewan Home Builders’ Association, Prince Albert City 

Police, the RCMP, SARM, North Saskatoon Business 

Association, Senior Power, the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, 

Consumers’ Association of Canada, Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation, and the Association of Saskatchewan 

Home Economists. So those are all of the different groups that 

the working group then had consulted with. 

 

And I have the 1-800 number for you to write down here  no 

charge anywhere in Saskatchewan. It’s 1-800-667-0666. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, I think with the triple-six number at the 

end of this toll-free line that I know a lot of consumers will still 

have a devil of a time getting to the bottom of some of their 

problems. 

 

I guess I wasn’t too clear on my question to the minister and I 

sincerely apologize for that. I guess my point, to make it clear, 

is do you think that it is probably wise to not have government  



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

involved with consumer protection? That perhaps you should 

give and finance and fund the organizations that are existing out 

there already to better police themselves. 

 

I think if they’re better . . . if they are able to police themselves 

it would be better for the consumer and for the business 

community as a whole. And has your government considered 

that in respect to drafting up this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think what I could say is that there 

was extensive consultation with the business community and 

with the consumer community, and the recommendations are 

what we have here. And I think what you see is sort of a mix of 

what you’re talking about. 

 

It’s very clear that businesses would like the chance to resolve 

the dispute without any intervention by government 

departments. And so this whole Bill or this whole legislation is 

set up so that a consumer can resolve the dispute with the 

business, has sort of the first line of . . . or the preferred 

solution. And so practically, if that happens, then none of this 

legislation takes effect. 

 

If that doesn’t work then they can get involved in mediation and 

that would end up using a private mediator of some kind; there 

would be some arrangement for a mediator. 

 

If they mediate a dispute, then that dispute or the settlement 

that’s as a result of the mediation is then enforceable. So in 

other words that encourages the business to use the mediated 

dispute mechanism because then they know that that will 

resolve the dispute. If that doesn’t work, then the director can 

step in and take any steps that are necessary. 

 

The final sort of level is, if none of those things work and 

there’s still a complaint, then the matter can go to court. But 

obviously the court mechanism is sort of the least preferred. It’s 

our anticipation that the court procedure part under this Act 

would be used quite rarely, and possibly only for education 

purposes to make sure that really bad cases were publicized 

widely. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I just want to clarify again one of my final 

questions here. According to this Act, in reference to the fact 

that SaskPower isn’t involved with this under the description of 

business, then what you’re saying to me today as Minister of 

Justice, that SaskPower could be liable for replacing a hot water 

tank problem created by the outage of power, or the fact that a 

deep freeze full of food that has been spoiled because of the 

outage of power . . .  

 

I think the last time they had a power outage in North was 

eleven and a half hours. And that unfortunately was a day when 

it was only minus 20 out there, and a week later it was minus 

45, so that did create a tremendous amount of problems for the 

consumers of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I just want to make sure the minister is clarifying his position 

today that SaskPower is indeed subject to this Act when it 

comes to the consumer protection of people of northern 

Saskatchewan. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think what I have to say there is 

that this legislation is meant to cover consumers, and if there’s 

a problem related to SaskPower, it’s possible that it could 

apply. 

 

Now I think in every case you have to look at the facts. I don’t 

know if it would extend to the full extent of the examples that 

you’ve given. 

 

That would have to be dealt with under the provisions of the 

legislation. It’s possible that they would; I don’t know. 

 

The Chair:  With the length of the Bill and that, the Chair 

would ask leave that we do it part by part. Is that agreed? 

Agreed. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 77 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 78 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move 

an amendment to the Bill to amend clause 78 of the printed 

Bill: 

 

Clause 78 of the printed Bill is amended by deleting the 

words “on proclamation” where they appear therein and 

substituting the following words therefor: 

 

upon consideration and acceptance by the Committee of 

the Whole of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of 

regulations proposed pursuant to this Act. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:36 p.m. until 4:46 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  8 

 

Osika McLane Draude 

McPherson Bjornerud Julé 

Krawetz Gantefoer  

 

Nays  29 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Wiens 

Shillington Anguish Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 

Goulet Kowalsky Renaud 

Calvert Koenker Trew 

Bradley Nilson Cline 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Langford Wall 

Kasperski Sonntag Jess 

Murrell Thomson  

 

Clause 78 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

Bill No. 31  An Act to amend 

The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’d like to introduce my official, Mr. 

Jim Hall, who is the superintendent of insurance; and Darcy 

McGovern is here as well. 

 

An Hon. Member:  And what’s his job? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Legislative services. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

I’d also like to welcome your people here today. I really only 

have one question. I think this one is very straightforward and 

to the point. I believe it’s a good thing if what I’m seeing is in 

here. 

 

The one question I have is, are there any regulations or 

provisions to be added later? Is what we see what we get here? I 

mean, is this strictly straightforward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  What you see is what you get. There are 

no regulations at all. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I move that it now be read the third time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 10  An Act respecting Marketplace 

Practices, Consumer Product Warranties 

and Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I move that the Bill be read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 31  An Act to amend 

The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 

 

The Speaker:  It has been moved by Minister of Justice that 

Bill No. 31, An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance 

Act be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................537 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................537 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................538 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Pringle ........................................................................................................................................................................................538 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................538 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................538 

  Murray .......................................................................................................................................................................................538 

  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................538 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................538 

  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................538 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................539 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................539 

  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................546 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................546 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................546 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................546 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Mad Cow Disease 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................539 

 Community Volunteer 

  Murrell .......................................................................................................................................................................................539 

 Melfort Figure Skater 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................539 

 Dreams Come True Charity Organization 

  Flavel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................539 

 Provincial A Midget Hockey Championship 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................540 

 Saskatchewan Ginseng Farming 

  Wiens .........................................................................................................................................................................................540 

 Recognition of Activities in Moosomin Constituency 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................540 

 School Citizenship Program 

  Murray .......................................................................................................................................................................................540 

 Crop Development Centre 

  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................541 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology Program Cuts 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................541 

  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................541 

 Highway Maintenance Depots 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................542 

  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................542 

 Government Cost-cutting 

  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................542 

  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................543 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................543 

 Home Oxygen Program 

  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................543 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................543 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 27, 1996 

 Job Creation 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................544 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................544 

 Plains Health Centre Closure 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................545 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................545 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................547 

 Bill No. 55  An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act 

  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................547 

 Bill No. 56  An Act to Protect the Public from Convicted Pedophiles 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................547 

 Bill No. 57  An Act to repeal The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................547 

 Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................547 

 Bill No. 59  An Act to amend The Balanced Budget Act 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................547 

 Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................547 

 Bill No 61  An Act respecting the Practices of Professional Engineering and Professional Geoscience and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................547 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 Plains Health Centre 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................547 

  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................547 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................548 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................548 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................548 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................551 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................552 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................553 

 Bill No. 10  An Act respecting Marketplace Practices, Consumer Product Warranties and Unsolicited Goods and Credit 

Cards 

  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................553 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................554 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................556 

  Krawetz..............................................................................................................................................................................557, 561 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................557, 560, 563 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................558 

  Osika ..................................................................................................................................................................................559, 561 

  Belanger .............................................................................................................................................................................559, 562 

 Recorded division .........................................................................................................................................................................563 

 Bill No. 31  An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................564 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................564 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................564 

 Bill No. 10  An Act respecting Marketplace Practices, Consumer Product Warranties and Unsolicited Goods and Credit 

Cards 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................564 

 Bill No. 31  An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 



March 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................564 


