


















































June 18, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2745 
 June 18, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
The Speaker:  Order. I’ll ask all hon. members to come to 
order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, some students seated in your gallery today  22 
grade 4 students from Sacred Heart School are in the legislature 
along with their teacher, Carey Lawson. They’re spending part 
of the day watching us here and they’re also getting a tour of 
the building. 
 
So I look forward to meeting with you in a few minutes after 
you’re done here. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Privilege 
 

The Speaker:  Order. Before calling private members’ 
motions, I wish to provide a ruling. 
 
Yesterday the Government House Leader raised a question of 
privilege concerning comments made by the Leader of the 
Opposition during oral question period on Friday, June 14. The 
Government House Leader claimed the comments attacked the 
conduct and integrity of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
I’ve now had an opportunity to review the record and consider 
the matter. 
 
Before making my ruling, I remind all hon. members that it is 
not the role of the Speaker to decide if a breach of privilege or a 
contempt of the Assembly has been committed. This is a 
question only the Assembly can decide. It is the Speaker’s role 
to decide whether a prima facie case has been established which 
would justify the matter taking precedence over the other 
business before the Assembly. 
 
I will now turn to the case presented by the Government House 
Leader. The case of the Government House Leader rests on the 
remarks made by the Leader of the Opposition during oral 
question period on June 14. Having reviewed Hansard, it is 
clear that the Leader of the Opposition did attempt to bring into 
question the integrity of the Conflict of Interest and Freedom of 
Information Commissioner. 
 

On page 2623 the Leader of the Opposition accused the 
commissioner of being in conflict of interest for being, as he 
stated, “heavily involved in a company that may have donated 
funds to the New Democratic Party.” The Leader of the 
Opposition then requested that the Premier remove Mr. McLeod 
from his post. 
 
The Speaker reminds all hon. members that the Conflict of 
Interest and Freedom of Information Commissioner is an officer 
of this Assembly, not an officer of the government. As such, the 
commissioner is entitled to the protection of this Assembly as 
outlined by Sir Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 21st 
edition, page 130 as follows: 
 

Both Houses will treat as breaches of their privileges, not 
only acts directly tending to obstruct their officers in the 
execution of their duty, but also any conduct which may 
tend to deter them from doing their duty in the future. 

 
Furthermore, the commissioner, according to statute, can only 
be disciplined or removed from office by an order of this 
Assembly or by the Board of Internal Economy if the Assembly 
is not in session. Simply put, charges ought not be brought 
against any officer of the Assembly incidentally in the midst of 
other proceedings. 
 
This is well established by previous rulings of the Speaker, and 
our parliamentary authorities. I refer hon. members to two 
rulings of the Speaker that are relevant to this case. The first 
case involved a Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk and was 
ruled on June 24, 1987. And the second involved the Provincial 
Auditor and is dated May 23, 1989. I would like to reiterate 
what the Speaker said on each of these occasions. 
 

It is vital, if parliament is to get a fair and impartial service 
from its officers, that these officers must be defended from 
intimidation while conducting their duties. Critical 
comments attacking the competence or the credibility of an 
individual can be construed as a form of obstruction. 
 

In this case, I find the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition 
as being capable of undermining the personal credibility and 
professionalism of the Conflict of Interest and Freedom of 
Information Commissioner. The remarks could draw into 
question the commissioner’s capacity to serve the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
I recognize that the Leader of the Opposition did rise to 
withdraw his remarks and offer an unqualified apology to the 
Conflict of Interest and Freedom of Information Commissioner. 
I note that this is the action the Government House Leader 
indicated he would move to be required, if the House should 
find the privilege was breached. 
 
However, while noting these two points, the matter is still 
before the House, and under rule 6 the Speaker is required to 
determine whether a prima facie case of breach of privilege has 
been established, and it is my finding that this matter does 
constitute a prima facie matter of privilege. 
 



2746  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

Before allowing the Government House Leader to move a 
privilege motion, I do want to make a further comment. While 
responding to the Leader of the Opposition during question 
period on June 14, Hansard shows that the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training associated the 
commissioner with a political party. Although the minister did 
not make a direct accusation, the Speaker is concerned by the 
comments and finds it unacceptable. 
 
I now leave this matter in the hands of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to ask for leave to move a 
motion. I will read the motion for the benefit of the House. I 
would move, seconded by the member from Watrous: 
 

That this House accept the apology of the Leader of the 
Official Opposition with respect to the statements 
reflecting on the credibility of a Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner and confirms that a reflection on the 
credibility of an officer of the Assembly represents a 
breach of privilege of this Assembly. 

 
If I have leave, I will move a motion. 
 
The Speaker:  Leave is not required and the Government 
House Leader may move the motion directly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Watrous: 
 

That this House accepts the apology of the Leader of the 
Official Opposition with respect to statements reflecting on 
the credibility of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner and 
confirms that a reflection on the credibility of an officer of 
the Assembly represents a breach of privilege of the 
Assembly. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With leave, to move a motion to go 
to government business. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Watrous, that this Assembly do now proceed to 
government orders. 
 
The Speaker:  The Government House Leader has attempted 
to move a superseding motion and the superseding motion is 
out of order unless it is moved in debate, and the Chair finds 
the motion out of order. 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

Motion No. 3  Wildlife Damage Compensation 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This is something which has long 
been a passion of mine  big game farming. I have been long 
frustrated, Mr. Speaker, by an inability to get off a speech on 
big game farming. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  At 21 years, a speech has been . . . 
for 21 years, Mr. Speaker, a speech has been boiling away in 
my soul. I now have the opportunity to get rid of this speech. 
 
I am however, I think, not going to speak very long on this 
subject. I know that members opposite are dying to hear all I 
know about big game farming. 
 
An Hon. Member:  We are and you’re done now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Indeed that’s right. Having said that 
much, I am done. 
 
I am therefore at this point, Mr. Speaker, going to move, 
seconded by the member from Watrous: 
 

That this Assembly do now proceed to government orders. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1015) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
 
The Chair:  We’ll begin by inviting the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. My officials are 
Darcy McGovern and Ian Brown of the department, who are the 
officials that have been with the committee during its 
consideration of this Bill in the previous two sessions. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome again, Mr. 
Minister, to your officials. Thank you for helping us deal with 
this important Bill. 
 
When we left off we talked about a number of things, and 
jumping around with that particular Bill. In the Bill now it 
requires that registered political parties maintain a central 
administrative office. Is there any particular reason that the 
government feels this is necessary, that there is a centralized 
office? And does the central office then have to be an office, 
such as . . . a simple post office box? Was that the purpose of it, 
that you can’t just have a mailing address without an actual 
residence? 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  My understanding, Mr. Chair, is that 
this requirement is similar to the requirements with respect to 
all of the corporations that are incorporated under The Business 
Corporations Act or any of the other organizations that are 
required by statute to become registered. And the purpose is so 
that the persons administering the Act, in this case the Chief 
Electoral Officer, will have a clear address to which notices can 
be sent and notices can be served and where in this case the 
party can be contacted. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. This new Bill as well 
allows for use of computers to prepare voters’ lists. I just 
wondered how limited the use of computers are under the 
current legislation. Have there been some restrictions up to this 
point, or just not the facilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
interest of course is in the evolution of a voters’ list or in the 
evolution of the system of enumeration. Right now, it’s a rather 
rushed process that begins when the writ is dropped. It is fully 
two weeks into the election period before we get a voters’ list 
of any sort, which is subject to revision. That’s not a very long 
time in which to conduct an enumeration in many of the 
constituencies, particularly in the rural areas where the seats are 
very large — and the member’s own would be a good example 
of that. And it’s not a very satisfactory way of settling the 
voters’ lists. 
 
Now in this Bill we’re looking for alternatives, so we have in 
the Bill a process for an early enumeration after consultation 
with the parties. And we also have the possibility of 
cooperating with the federal government in order to produce a 
voters’ list that can be more or less permanent, and continue to 
exist for both federal and provincial elections and perhaps for 
other elections, with a provision for revision and updating. And 
then  and now I’m getting to the member’s question  a 
connection to other sources, and that’s where computers come 
in with their databases. 
 
Now there’s a lot of data around. It just occurs to me as I stand 
here, we have the health records, the driver and motor vehicle 
records, to name two immediately. We also have municipal 
records of one sort or another with respect to property 
ownership, and I think also some track of tenant presence on 
municipal property. But certainly with respect to the first two, 
there are opportunities there to complement or supplement or 
verify the voters’ list. 
 
I said yesterday and I want to say again, we are all sensitive to 
the requirements for confidentiality with respect to some of 
these databases, and we are going to proceed with some care to 
ensure that those confidentiality considerations are not abused 
during this process. 
 
But having said that, there is a lot of information and databases 
that is not confidential and that can be used in this process of 
developing a comprehensive and accurate voters’ list, and we 
want to position the Act so that the Chief Electoral Officer can 
take advantage of those opportunities as they exist. 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
I’m wondering, once the Chief Electoral Officer has gained 
some information from a database, who can get the information 
from him? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  My understanding is that what will be 
shared will be the list that is compiled  the voters’ list  and 
that that is shared among the parties rather than the database 
itself. The database itself stands on its own feet as to whether or 
not it’s accessible or parts of it are accessible, and the use by 
the Chief Electoral Officer can’t compromise the disclosure 
rules with respect to the database. 
 
Let’s take for example the health cards. We know that certain 
aspects of the health records are confidential  my medical 
records for example. So if the health care records are, in the 
course of time, used in order to supplement or complement or 
verify the voters’ list, that’s to the good I suppose, as long as 
the confidentiality of my medical records are not compromised. 
 
So that it would not be possible for someone who could not get 
direct access to some health information, to work through the 
Chief Electoral Officer to get that same information. In other 
words, this whole process has to go forward with a great deal of 
respect to the rules of confidentiality. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So is it up to the Chief Electoral Officer to 
safeguard the other information that isn’t just the names? 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The way we see this developing, Mr. 
Chair, and to the member, is that the . . . Any access that the 
Chief Electoral Officer has to a database will be under an 
agreement or some kind of regulatory regime which will make it 
impossible for the Chief Electoral Officer to compromise the 
integrity of the data or the public access to that data or the 
confidentiality of that data. 
 
All of this remains in our future of course, and all to be worked 
out. What we’ve tried to do here is to establish the legislative 
framework in which these agreements can be made and this 
access can be facilitated. 
 
But I want to just underline again, because I think it’s so 
important, this cannot be used to undermine the confidentiality 
of the various kinds of information that are in these databases 
and that are now held as confidential. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’m sure that it’s not in your 
vision or it’s not something that you plan to do, to allow this 
information to be given out just haphazardly, and probably not 
in the foreseeable future. But the way databases and the way 
technology is changing I’m sure that there’ll be information 
available within five years that we can’t even expect it. We 
won’t even know, we won’t have a clue, what will be available 
to people, and maybe there won’t be somebody with the 
integrity that you have or your electoral officer has who will be 
sitting there. 
 
I’m asking, is the agreements that are going to be signed, will 
these agreements be brought to the Assembly before, so we 



2748  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

understand what’s going to be happening and what will be 
made available to parties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I want to refer the member to two 
sections that I think are responsive to her question. First of all 
with respect to the idea of using databases in the preparation of 
the voters’ list, in section 30(2) the question of regulations is 
referred to, and that would include, first off the mark, 
regulations: 
 

(a) respecting the preparation and verification of a voters’ 
list, including authorizing the Chief Electoral Officer to 
use the databases, lists and information prescribed in the 
regulations; 
 

The section requires that before the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council adopts such regulations, there must be consultation 
with the leader of each registered political party. So that it is not 
simply a government decision to do that, it is a decision of all 
of us, requiring consultation, before the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council acts. 
 
The other point is that the voters’ list itself is not freely 
available to the public. It is available to registered political 
parties and to candidates, and to officers under this Act  
namely the Chief Electoral Officer and the returning officer for 
the particular constituency that the voters’ list pertains to. Now 
that second protection  let me say protection  is to be found 
in section 177, so we have those two safeguards. And I’m glad 
the member is raising these questions because I think it’s 
important. 
 
The question of the use of information in databases and the 
limitations on that use is a developing idea. It’s lagging a bit 
behind the databases themselves, but it is something that there’s 
a fairly high level of consciousness about in the community. 
And indeed in Saskatchewan there has been at least one letter to 
the editor which raised this issue in a very thorough way, and I 
thought it was a good letter that raised a very, very good point. 
 
We can’t just rush pell-mell into this, grabbing information out 
of databases. We have to be sure we use it in a very appropriate 
way that doesn’t compromise the rights of individuals. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I noted that the Act read that 
there would be consultation with leaders of the political parties. 
What happens in the situation that the leader of a political party 
may not be elected as yet? You know this has happened, so 
you’re going to be talking to a leader who may not be officially 
representing the people. What are you saying about that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well we will consult with an interim 
leader if there is one, and we would expect that in the fullness 
of time there would be a leader. 
 
It’s very important for our leaders here to deal with these 
responsibilities in an appropriate way and take them to their 
caucuses and to their provincial organizations and deal with it 
as a question for the political party, both elected and 
non-elected, and not just a question for the leader to determine. 
That’s the under-pinning for this. We would just expect that to  

happen in the normal course. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, another question that I have on 
these databases is, does the Act allow you to get information 
only from companies or cards that are registered in 
Saskatchewan? And I’m thinking about things like VISA cards 
and where the headquarters aren’t in Saskatchewan. Are they 
going to be able to get financial information from Ontario or 
Timbuctoo or wherever there might be some information you 
want? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We most definitely do not have in mind 
accessing commercial lists like VISA or like Simpson Sears or 
whatever. The kinds of lists that we’re talking about here would 
be the public databases. We’ve been discussing in the Assembly 
this morning the databases of the provincial government and the 
two main ones. The federal government has databases also and 
it may be possible that we would access those in the future. But 
we do not include in that the commercial databases. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, does this Act give you the right 
to access other information like bank cards, even though you 
don’t plan to at this time? Does it give you the authority to do 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, we would have no right to 
demand that from any private organization, any private 
corporation, and we don’t contemplate doing it. And I just 
remind the member that all of these initiatives are subject to 
consultation between the parties. 
 
But let me just state categorically that we do not intend to 
attempt to access private databases. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister. Then I guess 
this Act is saying that you can ask for the information but you 
don’t have the right to demand the information from somebody 
who might have a private database. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We don’t even intend to ask for it. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I just have one other question on this line. We 
talked about all parties will have the opportunity to get this 
information. Is it information that will be just shared as soon as 
it is received, or will the parties have to be asking for it? Or 
how will they know that it’s available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the way that this will work 
out is that as the Chief Electoral Officer develops a voters’ list 
or collects voter data, he or she will contact the political parties. 
We will then have access to that information, but we are all 
going to have to enter into an agreement, sign an agreement 
with the Chief Electoral Officer, as to its use. 
 
Like we will not be at liberty, we will not be permitted, to take 
that list and sell it to some direct mail organization or some 
private sector company for our profit, for example. And that’s 
appropriate because everybody wants that voters’ list  it’s the 
best listing that exists for names and mailing addresses in the 
province. 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

So that section 177 contemplates that each party, all of our 
parties, will have to enter into an agreement with respect to the 
sharing or use of the voters’ list or any voter data collected 
pursuant to the Act by the Chief Electoral Officer. And on 
entering into that agreement, then the information will be 
shared with us as and when it’s available. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So the only information that will be available 
from the private databases is the names and addresses. Is that 
correct? 
 
(1045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, if the member means by 
“private databases” the kind of . . . the database of the Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce in its VISA operation, we don’t 
want access to that and we’re not going to ask for it and we’re 
not going to get it. 
 
But as far as the public databases are concerned, provincial or 
federal, we will move with caution to access those databases in 
consultation with the other parties and in a way that’s 
appropriate, having regard to the privacy rights of the citizens 
that are in the database. But we will not be moving outside 
those public databases to ask for any verification or any 
supplement from any of the private databases that may exist in 
our society. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good morning, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, just in carrying on with the line of questioning 
that has been going on here, I’m wondering if there has been 
any anticipation of the period of time before the election writ, 
before the writ has dropped, that this database or this list may 
be in fact forwarded to the parties. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes. We see the process moving 
towards a different system of enumeration and we’ve provided 
within the framework of this Bill . . . we’ve all done that. I 
mean we worked on this thing together. We provided first of all 
for an early enumeration to take place, after consultation with 
all the parties, so that we don’t have this last-minute rush, and 
so that we can have a voters’ list early. And I know we all want 
that. All our organizations all want it and need it because we’re 
sort of groping in the dark until we get that voters’ list. And to 
get it on day 14 of a 28-day election campaign is almost 
ludicrous. So that’s one innovation that’s in the Bill. 
 
The second is the longer-range idea and that is a permanent 
voters’ list, a voters’ list that will apply bother federally and 
provincially and perhaps in other elections, municipally and the 
like — and a list that can be updated or revised from time to 
time, and a list that is verified or supplemented by databases 
where that’s appropriate. 
 
So both those ideas move towards a list that will be available to 
the people who run for elected office provincially and get it to 
them at a time when it’s useful to them rather than just two 
weeks before the election. 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I take it 
then from your comments that it will be with consultation, and 
from all three parties, that they will come to an agreement on 
the time that these lists will be released prior to the election 
writ? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, that’s quite right. The Act 
contemplates that there be consultation with respect to the idea 
of accessing lists. Consultation doesn’t demand agreement, as 
the member will understand, but it does demand discussion and 
an exchange of views and an attempt to find a common 
solution. 
 
Secondly, the regulations will also speak to when that 
information is to be released, and that itself will require a 
consultation. So there’ll be consultation on both aspects of it. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one of the 
major concerns that we’ve had in our discussions in caucus, and 
also in my constituency, was the definition of election 
expenses. And the particular concern revolves around the 
changes, I guess, that mean that now we can’t even get business 
cards or send out flyers or whatever paraphernalia we may need 
before the election is called. And so we can do it, but of course 
we can’t get a rebate for that kind of thing. 
 
Now I’m just wondering why. Because this seems really to 
impose a great difficulty on the candidates and on the, in fact 
the constituencies, in preparing for the election. And although I 
don’t feel anyone should have a unfair disadvantage, I do 
believe that within a reasonable time before the writ is dropped 
that these things should be able to be ordered, and that a rebate 
should be coming, I would say within maybe even two weeks. 
 
We never know when the writ is going to be dropped, I 
understand that, but I think in preparing for the election a 
person can sort of assume when elections will come, and it 
would be only fair to be able to prepare properly. Because this 
is like anything else — if your first set of flyers or whatever 
goes out two weeks after the writ is dropped or a week after, it’s 
just not adequate time to be in touch with the voters. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I’m waiting for an additional 
piece of information but I’ll start my answer in response to the 
member’s question and then pick up this information when it 
comes back to the Chamber. 
 
First of all this idea of election expenses used during an election 
is not a new idea. That’s been the way it’s been for a long time, 
certainly for as long as I’ve been running, which is quite some 
time now. 
 
It is not necessary that the expense be incurred during that 
period. The expense can be incurred before, any time before. 
The question is, used. So if I print up 10,000 candidate’s cards 
to be handed out as I do my canvassing and I use 2,000 of those 
during the election period, I’m entitled to claim as an expense 
one-fifth, two-tenths  one-fifth of the cost of those cards as 
an election expense and I’m entitled to be reimbursed for that. 
So that’s the first point that I wanted to mention; that it is a 
matter of what has been used during the election period. 



2750  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

The information I was waiting for has come and it is this: that 
in the administration of the Act the Chief Electoral Officer has 
been taking into consideration some of the practical aspects of 
running an election campaign. And so he has been allowing six 
weeks rental on premises for the purpose of conducting your 
campaign. 
 
So there’s an example of an expense that on a literal reading of 
the Act, that space is used during the election period for the 28 
or 29 or 30 days, but he has on a practical level allowed six 
weeks rental so that you could be taking the premises before 
and holding them for a couple or three days afterwards in order 
to clean up your offices. There’s also telephone hook-ups that 
are allowed and insurance on buildings and that sort of thing. 
So there’s some flexibility around it. 
 
Now this question is going to be addressed by the Chief 
Electoral Officer in the guidelines that are referred to in the Act 
so that we will all know the rules before we go into the next 
election. We will all know what is allowed and what is not 
allowed, and that will clear up the source of difficulty that 
we’ve all had in every election where we are arguing about the 
interpretation of the Act and whether certain expenses are 
allowed. We’re going to try to make that very clear between the 
Act and the guidelines  make it very clear. 
 
I just want to end on this note, which I touched on yesterday, 
and which is the subject of a House amendment from the 
member’s side, and it is pre-election expenses. And we have 
had interesting discussions about that, and I tried to set out 
yesterday the rationale on the basis of which the government 
was not willing to accept the suggestion that had been put 
forward. It’s a good argument, a good discussion, and there’s 
fair merit in the position put forward by the Liberal Party. But 
our reaction to it has been that we prefer the tightness of the 
present system where the expenses that are to be reimbursed by 
the taxpayer are the expenses that are for goods and services 
used during an election period. 
 
Now I recognize that’s only one formulation; other ideas are 
workable. The idea put forward by the member’s party is a 
workable idea, but we have various choices there. And we just 
feel that the tightest, cleanest, clearest system is to maintain the 
idea that has existed in this province for some long time, ever 
since elections were controlled, and limit those to expenses for 
goods and services used during the election period. 
 
(1100) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d just 
like to go back a bit to your just comments. When you talked 
about the right to use a portion of your expenses, for instance 
for any candidates’ cards or whatever, you alluded to, or you 
said in fact that the portion used after the writ has been dropped 
would be acceptable to get a rebate on. So does that mean that I 
would simply, even if the bills were paid prior to the election 
writ, that I would be able to submit that bill, dock two-tenths or 
whatever of it, and then have the right to have a rebate on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes. 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I just have 
one more question before I turn the questioning over to my 
colleague. I notice that the Act prior prohibited the purchase of 
alcohol for voters or for workers. And it seems now that food 
and other drinks are acceptable. I’m wondering why this change 
was made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, we have three sections that 
are relevant. Section 193 carries forward the provision that 
there won’t be any beverage alcohol at a meeting of voters 
assembled for the purpose of promoting the election of the 
candidate, which means our political meetings. There will be no 
alcohol there. 
 
Second, in section 195, there’s a general prohibition to prohibit 
giving beverage alcohol to any person for the purpose of 
persuading that person to vote which is . . . our history has been 
dotted with examples of when that’s been tried. 
 
And 198 deals with beverage alcohol on polling day and 
prohibits any person from directly or indirectly giving beverage 
alcohol to any voter. And contravention of that section is a 
corrupt practice. 
 
But at the same time, as the member observes, we have relaxed 
the previous prohibition on the giving of food and refreshments 
 coffee, juices, pop, and that sort of thing. And the problem 
was that all of us have got doughnuts and muffins and cookies 
and coffee and refreshments in our campaign offices for the 
refreshment of our workers as they come in and out and for 
anybody coming in to have any kind of discussion will also 
have access to this. And that is obviously not a corrupt practice 
and obviously not intended to bribe anybody or buy their votes. 
 
So we wanted to be sure that there was never any allegation that 
any of us were offending the Act when we were doing such 
commonplace things as the ones I’ve mentioned. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, am I 
hearing correctly then, that food and other drinks . . . when 
referring to “other drinks”, other drinks do not include alcohol? 
All right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That’s right. 
 
Ms. Julé:  And from what you have said, the use of alcohol 
is regulated very closely, and so those guidelines are laid out for 
us in The Election Act which I certainly can go to and look at. 
And I thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I just want to confirm that in three 
separate sections alcohol is prohibited in different 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, there’s 
just a little bit of confusion over section 23 which details the 
enumerators’ right to access private dwellings. The first two 
subsections  or sub-clauses, I’m sorry  of that particular 
section says people do not have a right to deny access, but then 
the third sub-clause seems to override these completely. I just 
wondered if you might explain the reason for that. 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The question is a natural one but I think 
the explanation is actually quite simple. 
 
What (1) of section 23 does is entitle an enumerator to access to 
any residential premise, and (2) supports that idea so that the 
thrust of those two subsections is that an enumerator is entitled 
to access to a residential premise, but then (3) comes along and 
says, notwithstanding (1) and (2), if the residential premise is a 
private dwelling, then the resident might deny access to the 
enumerator. 
 
Now reading those sections all together what you’re left with is 
this. The residential premises that are not a private dwelling is 
an apartment block. Each apartment block will have within it a 
number of private dwellings. But the residential premise being 
the apartment block means that the enumerator can get into the 
building and has access to the doors. Now if the person behind 
the door says no, I don’t want to talk to you, buzz off, that’s 
still their right. But the apartment owner hasn’t the right to say 
you can’t come in here to enumerate the people. 
 
Now it’s interesting because we as candidates have the right 
under the Act during an election period to access apartment 
blocks. And the owners can’t keep us out. This will put the 
enumerators into the same position as the candidates. Our 
canvassers similarly have a right to enter if they’re our 
authorized candidate. So this puts the enumerators on the same 
basis as our canvassers. 
 
Not only apartment blocks are a concern, but the more modern 
idea of the condominium enclosures, where you have limited 
access by card locks and that sort of thing. They are not simple 
to get into. This ensures that they will be able to get into the 
condominium enclosures because those are residential 
premises. Again, whether they get behind an individual door 
depends upon the person behind the door. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess that question 
was asked because for someone, a lay person or anyone for that 
matter, reading that particular section might be asking that. Do 
you believe that that would be clear enough? Is there any way 
of perhaps making it a little more explicit for the benefit of 
people that may be asking the same kind of question that I just 
asked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the member will know from 
his own experience how difficult it is to ensure that all laws are 
written so that everybody can automatically understand them, 
and this is certainly one of those sections. We’ve just had an 
interesting discussion about it and it’s not perfectly clear on the 
face of it what you’re talking about. 
 
What we’re going to have to do in this and in any other 
situations, is for the Chief Electoral Officer to do what is very 
often done, and that is to advertise; to make public what the law 
is so that people will know. The question of access to apartment 
blocks by canvassers and candidates was one such thing. It was 
a new law when it was first enacted. 
 
And there was . . . You know, you had to make sure the 
landlords knew it so that you didn’t run into embarrassing  

situations. So the Chief Electoral Officer found ways to do that. 
You can write to the landlords’ associations, but you also can 
insert paid advertisements into daily newspapers and the like. 
And one way or another the word gets out and gradually people 
become very much aware of what the law is. 
 
And we haven’t had any trouble getting into apartment blocks 
now for a couple of elections. But before that it was a problem 
and it took awhile for this law to become generally known. It 
may take awhile for this law to become generally known but I 
think we can find ways to work it through. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, the 
cabinet currently appoints returning officers in each riding. 
Why would the Chief Electoral Officer not appoint these 
people? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The returning officers have been 
appointed by order in council, as the member indicates, and we 
propose to continue to do that. And the reason why we do that 
is that it has a degree of formality about it. It is an order of the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council, so it’s not a trivial matter. It’s 
an important matter and it’s a public matter. It’s made public, as 
all other orders in council are. It’s gazetted. And it gives the 
idea of the returning officer a degree of formality that I think is 
desirable. That person then has a status conferred in a very 
public way. 
 
In practice what happens is that cabinet receives 
recommendations from the Chief Electoral Officer as to the 
naming of returning officers. It is quite a chore for the Chief 
Electoral Officer because he’s got to come up with 58 names in 
58 different constituencies of people who are prepared to 
undertake such a job. It’s a difficult job and anyone planning to 
get rich ought not to aspire to be a returning officer. 
 
The Chief Electoral Officer, I know goes through a consultative 
outreaching process to find an appropriate returning officer, 
because it’s in everyone’s interest that this person have a good 
capacity, a level of competence that will ensure that all these 
duties  and there are considerable duties  will be done 
properly. And so it’s quite a task. 
 
The Chief Electoral Officer consults around the community and 
does so in a kind of a blind way, because no Chief Electoral 
Officer is going to be familiar with all 58 constituencies. But 
the process involves making inquiries, finding out who might 
be interested. 
 
One of the persons they inquire with  and I should be 
perfectly blunt about this  are the elected members because 
we’re known to be from there and we’re known to know the 
community and we’re known to be able to produce alternatives. 
 
So there is a political aspect to it and it has been so for a long 
time. And we all know that and we make no apologies for it. 
But it is very often not possible for the political party, for the 
political representative, to suggest a returning officer and the 
Chief Electoral Officer then has to fall back on other names and  



2752  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

in the end put forward the name of somebody who is up to the 
job. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, it is the 
appearance of patronage that certainly could be an issue in 
appointing returning officers and so that’s partly why I put that 
forward. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me how the Chief Electoral Officer is 
selected or how he ends up getting that position. What is the 
process whereby he is selected? Is he appointed? Is he elected? 
Is he . . . how does he or she come to that position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I was not personally involved in the 
appointment of Mr. Kuziak, but I know that there were a 
number of people interviewed. The interviews were conducted 
by people, I think from within Executive Council. And there 
was a short list and I don’t know how many were on the short 
list, but from that list Mr. Kuziak was selected and in due 
course was appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. It 
was not a formal competitive process that I know of; I think it 
was informal. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’m interested in those last comments, that the sitting 
member might happen to be consulted on the appointment of a 
returning officer in that particular constituency, because I don’t 
remember being consulted prior to the 1995 election as to who 
would be an appropriate returning officer for the Cannington 
constituency. Perhaps some of the other constituencies there 
was consultation with the sitting members, but I don’t recall 
that opportunity being given to me. 
 
But perhaps, Mr. Minister, that opportunity was given to the 
government member who represents or who looks after or who 
has been assigned my constituency as his orphan  his or her 
orphan. Perhaps that member was consulted as to who would be 
an appropriate returning officer. 
 
So perhaps it would be a good idea though, Mr. Minister, if the 
sitting member in that riding was consulted, because they do 
indeed know who might happen to make a good returning 
officer, who has some experience in it, let’s say, or who would 
be interested. So perhaps that is something that should be 
considered in this Bill or at least in the regulations. 
 
Another item, Mr. Minister, as it relates to the federal Act for 
the appointment of deputy returning officers and poll clerks. 
And you can correct me if I’m wrong on this, but it’s my 
understanding that under the current legislation or at least the 
current practice, the party that won the seat in the last election 
appoints, or recommends, I should say, the deputy returning 
officers for each poll. And the party that placed second in the 
previous election recommends people for appointment as the 
poll clerks. 
 
I know that this kind of a separation was carried out in the ’93 
federal election, I believe, also in the referendum on the 
Charlottetown accord. And it seemed to work very well. All the 
parties seemed to be relatively happy with it, particularly during 
the referendum where all three political parties were asked to  

provide some support in that measure in providing deputy 
returning officers and poll clerks. 
 
In the last provincial election in my own constituency, we had I 
think a good working relationship with the returning officer. 
The party in power  your government, Mr. Minister  
appointed the deputy returning officers, or recommended the 
deputy returning officers for most polls. Our party was asked to 
recommend names for the poll clerks. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, have you given any consideration to allowing 
that procedure to take place under the current Act? Would that 
be . . . if that was to occur, would that be placed in the Act, or 
would that simply be an administrative measure to be dealt with 
through regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I am indebted to the member, Mr. 
Chair, for the ideas that he’s presented on the basis of the 
federal way of approaching these things. 
 
That’s the new idea as far as I’m concerned and as far as the 
officials who are with me are concerned. But we’ll give some 
thought to that and see where it leads us. I don’t know whether 
it would take the form of a regulation or simply an 
administrative process. I would think the latter. 
 
The Act provides who does the appointing. The returning 
officer appoints the deputy returning officer, and the deputy 
returning officer appoints the poll clerk. But there is nothing . . . 
no further direction in the Act. We’ll take the member’s 
suggestion under consideration. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Chair, I want to just go back to the 
question asked by the . . . the previous question asked by the 
member from Humboldt. And I want to say to the . . . through 
you, Mr. Chair, to the member from Humboldt, that the present 
Chief Electoral Officer was appointed after a consultation had 
. . . after a competition had been run by the Public Service 
Commission. 
 
And I want to amend my previous answer in that regard. I 
previously had said it had been an informal competition. In fact 
it was a formal competition. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my thanks to 
the minister and the member from Souris-Cannington for the 
courtesy. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Chairman, is a group of 10 students 
from W.H. Ford School. These are students in the senior 
alternate education program and they are spending some time in 
the gallery here today along with their teachers, Louise Brown 
and Ghislaine Montague, and chaperon Mrs. O’Connor. 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

They are going to spend a little time here and then I understand 
that they’re going to have a picnic in the park. After that they 
are coming back to have a tour of the building. 
 
So would you please join me in extending to them a very warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, there are times when political parties find it perhaps 
difficult to recommend people for positions because it may be 
seeding time and people aren’t available to fill the 
recommendation. It has worked out well in the past. As I 
mentioned, in our constituency in the last election both parties 
and perhaps all three parties had the opportunity to recommend 
people for deputy returning officer and for the poll clerk, and a 
number of those recommendations were accepted from at least 
two of the political parties, and I can’t speak for the third one. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think that has some valid opportunities there 
and I think it adds a little more fairness to the political process 
and allows everyone to participate a little more fully. 
 
I’d like to move on to some questions about the voters’ lists, 
and I know this has been covered to some degree by the 
opposition. But the question is: who would have access to the 
lists? 
 
Now you have indicated that the lists would not be available for 
commercial use. But would the list be available for, say, a third 
party, a special interest group, who for whatever reason may 
desire to have that voters’ list to be able to contact people 
within a certain area for some reason? 
 
I’m thinking of the group down at Bienfait when they had some 
concerns about a waste disposal site going into the area. They 
wanted to be able to contact people throughout the appropriate 
area  to go through the phone book to find names, or to go 
back and find someone who had old voters’ lists available to 
extract the names and addresses off of that. It’s possible for 
anyone to do. They maybe shouldn’t have access to those 
voters’ lists  I don’t know  but a lot of mechanical work, 
but it’s possible to do it. 
 
But while you are sitting with the lists, Mr. Minister, would it 
not be possible for someone  a non-profit corporation or a 
service club, some sort of other interest that would not be using 
it for commercial interests  to have access to those lists? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member asks a very interesting 
question, Mr. Chair. Of course the voters’ lists are posted; we 
all know that. And we have introduced some changes there so  

they’re not on the telephone poles where people felt too 
vulnerable, but we have still required them to be posted in a 
public way. So that’s one aspect of the situation raised by the 
member. 
 
The other very interesting section is section 177  and I had 
cause to refer to this earlier in the committee’s consideration  
but section 177 provides that the Chief Electoral Officer may 
enter into agreements with respect to sharing or using a voters’ 
list or any voter data collected pursuant to this Act with any 
political party that is registered pursuant to the Act. 
 
And then (5) goes on and says that the political party, on 
entering into the agreement with the Chief Electoral Officer  
and we’re all going to have to do that: 

 
. . . (the) political party may use the voters’ list or voter 
data for any purpose related to this Act or any other Act or 
Act of the Parliament of Canada governing elections. 

 
So from that it is clear that the purpose of the voters’ list is to 
run the election, and I think that’s appropriate. 
 
Now it may be that we would come to the conclusion  we, 
meaning the parties in this Assembly  that this data may be 
used for other purposes. Maybe used for . . . You know, I can’t 
imagine circumstances. The member mentions some. 
 
Those, I think, could be addressed in the negotiation of the 
agreement with the Chief Electoral Officer. But unless and until 
we got something like that in place, we have to respect I think, 
the fact that these are voters’ lists compiled for the purpose of 
running an election and ought to be restricted to that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When the 
political parties gain access to this list after signing the 
agreement, in what form will that list take? Will it be a 
computer-generated hard copy? Will it be data files? And if so, 
in what format will those data files be available? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t know for sure, but judging by 
the developments of the technology, I would expect we would 
have it in the form of either computer printouts or diskettes or 
something like that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think it 
would be extremely important that these lists be available as 
computer data rather than simply as hard copy paper. All that 
would mean is that the political parties then in turn would have 
to simply re-enter all that data onto a database again. So I think 
it’s important. 
 
I know that the federal government provides the lists in data 
form. You can get it all on a diskette and use it in the 
appropriate manner. So I think it’s important that these lists be 
maintained the same way and provided in the same manner. 
 
How will the updating of the process work, Mr. Minister? Will 
the updating be handled . . . you have talked about accessing 
other government databases. So if somebody moves into the 
province, takes out a Saskatchewan health care card, will that  



2754  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

name then be updated immediately on the voters’ list, or at the 
next election, or how often? How soon will that updating 
process take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I don’t know at what pace 
these developments will occur. It may well be that at some 
future time the lists can be so responsive to change that it will 
work as the member says. I think we will find ourself moving at 
a measured pace here and not try to go to the sort of full meal 
deal that the member is talking about, but to use technology to 
buttress the system and to make it better and introduce advances 
as and when we can. 
 
This is chiefly a technical problem and I think will be dealt with 
as such in the Chief Electoral Officer’s range of duties and in 
cooperation with other jurisdictions, particularly the federal 
jurisdiction. And I would expect to see a steady range of 
improvement, arriving some day perhaps at the kind of 
instantaneous system that the member sees, but I can’t see that 
far. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact 
that as of July 1 this year there will be a by-election occurring 
within the next six months, would the database for the 
constituency of North Battleford be available by that time under 
this particular Act? 
 
In all likelihood this Act will not be proclaimed until January 1, 
’97, but that doesn’t mean that the databases could not be 
prepared for the North Battleford constituency. Because 
obviously an enumeration will have to take place. The list will 
have to be produced. I suspect that even today they’re being 
produced . . . data is being stored on a computer and then 
simply a hard copy generated from that. 
 
Would that electronic data be available to the political parties 
for the upcoming by-election which will be held in North 
Battleford at some point within the next six months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think all I can do in response is to pass 
on the member’s remarks to the Chief Electoral Officer. I 
couldn’t begin to answer the questions that the member puts. 
 
It had been our plan to proclaim this Act as soon as possible 
and we judged that would not be before January 1, 1997. As the 
member points out, that would be after the North Battleford 
by-election. 
 
But whether any of the possibilities that the member mentions 
can take place in time for that by-election, we’ll just have to 
see. 
 
And I will pass on the member’s remarks to the Chief Electoral 
Officer. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, while this data is being collected and generated, I’m 
assuming that we’ll have the name of the individual, their poll 
number, the number they are in relationship to that particular 
poll, their address. Will they also have the occupation of the 
person, the voter, because that is currently on the voters’ lists.  

Will they also have telephone numbers, which are not currently 
on the voters’ lists? And what other information might be 
available through the databases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member is correct as to the data 
that will be included, except for the phone number. We have no 
provisions in the Act for including the phone number. 
 
I just might mention that with respect to North Battleford, the 
database from the June ’95 enumeration is on disk and it will 
provide the base from which I suppose an up-to-date voters’ list 
will be determined. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Since that 
voters’ list is on disk, I’m not sure that it’s available to the 
political parties on the disk at the present time. As I recollect 
the last election, we only receive voters’ lists in hard copy and 
so perhaps you could check and see whether or not it would be 
available on disk. 
 
I also have a question as it relates to the federal elections, the 
Canada Elections Act. What is the definition under that Act of a 
registered party as opposed to a registered political party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  My understanding is that the idea of a 
registered party under the Canada Elections Act is the same as 
the registered political party that we have in this legislation; so 
to all intents and purposes they’re the same. One is registered 
federally and the other provincially. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 
(1145) 
 
Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 
 
The Chair:  I’ll invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Beside me is 
Lawrence Krahn who’s the executive director of the medical 
care insurance branch. And behind Mr. Krahn is Glenda Yeates, 
who’s the senior associate deputy minister of Health. And 
directly behind me is Rick Hischebett who’s a lawyer with the 
Department of Justice, who provides legal advice to the 
Department of Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and your officials here today. Just some questions, 
Mr. Minister, maybe if we could start with a short explanation 
of why you brought forward this amendment at this time and 
what prompted you to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I would be happy to say why, Mr. 
Chair. The Saskatchewan Medical Association, as the member 
from Arm River knows, provides certain benefits to physicians 
in Saskatchewan, including negotiating their benefit packages,  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2755 

representing the concerns of physicians to government and so 
on. And not all physicians are members of the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association. 
 
In 1986 the Saskatchewan Medical Association came to the 
Government of Saskatchewan and said that they wanted all 
physicians to pay fees or dues to the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association) because they reasoned that all physicians 
benefited from the services that they provide, whether or not 
they were members. 
 
And at that time in 1986, changes were made to the medical 
care insurance branch allowing the government to deduct dues 
from payments made to physicians and to pay those monies to 
the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 
 
Then in December of 1995 or thereabouts, some time in 1995 in 
any event  I’m sorry, April of 1995  the government 
reached an agreement with the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association which was a framework agreement setting out the 
rules as between government and the physicians. And one of 
the provisions of that agreement was that the government would 
introduce legislation, actually the legislation we have before us 
today, that would enable the government, namely the Minister 
of Health, to direct people paying physicians to direct some 
money to the SMA, namely the dues. 
 
And the government agreed to that with the physicians subject 
to the physicians first going to the non-fee-for-service doctors 
and getting their approval in a referendum to do this. They had 
a referendum in December of 1995  not too long ago  
which only involved doctors who are not on a fee-for-service 
basis but are paid a salary, to see if they would agree to this 
legislation. And 240 doctors voted, and of that number, 70 per 
cent of the doctors  these would be the ones affected  
agreed to the legislation. 
 
And once the referendum by these physicians was passed, then 
according to the agreement between the government and the 
SMA, which was arrived at last April, the government was in a 
position where it had agreed to put this legislation before the 
House. 
 
So as the result of the request by the SMA, the agreement that 
we have with the SMA and the approval of 70 per cent of the 
doctors affected, we have brought the legislation forward. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In section 47, it 
makes reference to section 48 talking about an amount 
determined in agreement pursuant to section 48 for services 
rendered by the SMA association. Can you elaborate on those a 
bit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  To the member, Mr. Chair, section 48 of 
the existing legislation simply sets out a process whereby the 
doctors negotiate with the government, and one of the matters 
that the doctors negotiate with government is the amount that 
government should deduct with respect to each doctor and pay 
to the SMA. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. And the amount of those fees are? 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  At the present time, it is: for fee-for-service 
physicians, $866.25; and for salaried physicians, $530.62. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is that fee . . . that’s 
a yearly fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And so any fee-for-service physician, 
regardless of his income, would pay the same fees. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The fee does not vary as between 
specialities, although if you are a physician working on a 
part-time basis they have a system of prorating so that if you 
worked half time you might pay half the fee, for example. But it 
would not vary according to whether you were part of a very 
high billing specialty. Your fee would not go up on that basis. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, do you have the numbers of 
doctors that we have on fee-for-service, and those that are on 
salary, and those that are on other contracts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I believe that there are 1,333 
fee-for-service physicians in the province and 240 
non-fee-for-service physicians for a total of 1,573 physicians. 
And 240 of that larger number is 15 per cent, of the physicians 
are non-fee-for-service. 
 
And I should . . . I want to correct a previous answer I just gave 
you when I said that 240 people voted and 70 per cent approved 
this arrangement; 240 ballots were sent out, but actually I see 
here that 103 ballots were returned, and of those 103, 70 per 
cent were in favour. And then obviously the other 137 chose 
not to vote but they did receive a ballot. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. That indeed was where I was 
heading, Mr. Minister. Do you think . . . In your mind, what 
would the reason be for those other doctors not to have 
responded to the questionnaire? And have they since been 
invited to respond or has your department corresponded with 
them at all on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, we have not been in further contact 
with them because they had the opportunity to vote. 
 
I guess the way I look at it is, it’s like a municipal election or a 
school board election or indeed an election to this House. 
Everybody gets the opportunity to vote; if they choose not to 
exercise their right to vote, then they suffer the consequences 
along with everybody else. And we haven’t made any special 
efforts to canvass those who chose not to vote, nor would I 
draw any conclusion that they would be opposed to or in favour 
of the legislation; although I would draw the conclusion that 
they probably aren’t terribly excited about it one way or the 
other. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. However just 
quickly looking over the numbers that you’ve given us, that 
would mean that less than a third of the doctors who responded 
were in favour of these fees. However I’m not sure whether  



2756  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

that’s a major issue or not; it could come to light in view of 
some of the proposals that are being made, not necessarily in 
this Bill, but in some of the other health Bills that we’re going 
to be dealing with later today. 
 
You mentioned that you talked about the doctors belonging to 
the SMA, the Saskatchewan Medical Association. I just want to 
clarify a couple of things with you, one being that first of all 
membership in the SMA is voluntary. Is that correct? And 
secondly, what happens if these doctors choose not to pay those 
fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well this is designed to deal with that 
situation. In other words, once this is passed, even if they chose 
not to pay the fees, the fees would be paid. Because just as for 
fee-for-service physicians who choose not to pay at the present 
time, the Minister of Health through the medical care insurance 
branch, makes a check-off in effect and pays the due for the 
physician to the SMA. And the physician has no choice in the 
matter; it’s mandatory. Even though membership is voluntary, 
but payment of the money is mandatory. 
 
That is the existing situation we have today. What this does is 
extend the same rule to physicians who do not work in a 
fee-for-service setting, the 15 per cent who are on salary or 
some other arrangement. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Maybe, Mr. Minister, you could explain to us 
why you feel it’s important that even though membership in the 
SMA is voluntary that it’s important that the fees be deducted. 
Is that to sustain the SMA? Or is there some other reasons that I 
don’t personally understand and possibly the people of the 
province don’t either? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It is not I who feel it is as important. I do 
feel it’s important, but it is not I that feels it’s of crucial 
importance as much as the medical profession itself. The SMA 
has asked for this. We have agreed to it in an agreement we 
arrived at. 
 
And the fact is that all positions benefit from the activities of 
the SMA. It provides various services, including negotiation of 
fee increases on behalf of physicians. It lobbies government on 
behalf of physicians for other benefits such as the provision of a 
continuing medical education fund and incentives to enhance 
the provision of services in rural and remote areas and other 
matters. 
 
So the theory is, the SMA says, well we do all this which 
benefits every physician and every physician should share the 
cost of these activities. And that’s why it’s important to the 
SMA; that’s why we agreed to it and why we’ve introduced the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Carrying that same logic, we might take it a 
step further, Mr. Minister. And I’m certainly not questioning 
the value of the SMA and the need for some sort of a medical 
organization in this province. 
 
But I guess the problem that I might have with it would be that 
if you looked at another organization, for example an  

agricultural organization, whether it be the farmers union, 
whether it be the western Canadian wheat growers,  which is 
a poor example  let’s use the farmers union. In 
Saskatchewan, for example, they might make the argument that 
they do lobby on behalf of farmers, and anything that they gain 
is a benefit to all the farmers in the province. 
 
However I would hate to have to be mandated or legislated by 
the provincial government, that as a farmer I would be forced to 
become a member of that association. Do you not think there’s 
analogy here between the two? And could you explain the 
difference? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well actually I thought you already were a 
member of the NFU (National Farmers Union), but perhaps I 
was mistaken in that regard. 
 
The difference would be that in this case what we have required 
the physicians to do is to give everybody an opportunity to vote 
whether they wanted dues payment to be mandatory. 
 
And I should add that the medical profession of course is a 
self-governing profession which exists by statute, namely The 
Medical Profession Act. And as you know, it has two parts to it 
 the college of physicians and surgeons and the SMA. 
 
The National Farmers Union would be different in two respects. 
First of all, it is not a statutory obligation carrying out public 
functions. It is not a self-governing profession. 
 
And secondly, no ballot has been cast to my knowledge asking 
all the producers in the province whether they wish us to take 
the step of making dues payment to the NFU mandatory. But if 
you’re proposing that we have that kind of referendum, I could 
take that up with my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, but 
I don’t know if you’re making that proposal today or not. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I maybe 
underestimated your knowledge of agriculture in this province. 
Maybe some day some questions in agriculture we’ll have to 
direct to you, since at some times I notice the Minister of 
Agriculture is a little reluctant in answering some of them, so 
maybe you could help him out, if you would, on that as well. 
And I see he’s moved close to you now. Maybe he’s going to 
help you with some health questions. 
 
I guess when we talked about the concern of . . . do you have a 
concern that there are going to be an increasing number of 
salary positions in the province which might have prompted this 
move as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I don’t have any particular concern 
about that. It’s not something that I would be concerned about 
nor is it something that is particularly relevant to this Bill, in the 
sense that whether or not this Bill was passed by the legislature 
would not affect movement with respect to reforming the 
primary care system which is being discussed at the national 
level and so on. If that was to be done it would have to be done 
in other ways, perhaps involving other pieces  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

of legislation, not this one. 
 
I think that the concern might be more so on the part of the 
SMA in the sense that they realize that there are positions who 
welcome a different method of payment, and there are probably 
more positions on an alternative payment basis now than there 
were before. And the SMA is concerned that, because of that 
fact, they believe that these physicians should contribute to the 
costs of the representation that all physicians benefit from 
through the SMA. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Do you think it will become an 
issue down the road, whether it’s this year or next year, with 
some of those physicians that are going to be on salary or that 
are on salary, in light of the low number of people that returned 
your ballot? 
 
When the fees are deducted from those people, whether it be 
through the district boards or someone else’s, as noted in the 
amendment here it of course states that: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations 
requiring the minister or any other person to: 

 
I guess I have asked a number of questions here already. Maybe 
you could explain as well what the regulation means when you 
talk about any other person. Are we referring to district health 
boards? Are we referring to private clinics, those types of 
things? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the other person could be any entity 
which had a physician in its employ or a contract with a 
physician. So that it might be a district health board or it might 
be a private clinic. 
 
In answer to your question about the rate of return of the 
ballots, I can only return to what I said before and that is the 
participation was higher than in some municipal elections. And 
we don’t . . . if we have a municipal election where two-thirds 
of the people don’t vote, we don’t question the legitimacy of 
the result in terms of, for example, a reeve and the councillors 
being elected. And we don’t question their legitimacy in terms 
of levying their taxes and so on. Because that’s the way the 
system works. 
 
And it’s like everything else — those that don’t participate in 
the democratic process, and this was . . . you know, there was a 
referendum of the physicians, are not in a position to complain 
about what happened. We have to go on the basis of the 70 per 
cent of those who voted, who voted in favour of this legislation. 
And each physician’s concern was put on notice by the SMA 
that this issue is being determined. There was a referendum 
explaining the issues and advising if they had the right to vote. 
 
Mr. McLane:  However, Mr. Minister, it is indeed a fact 
again that only a third of those salaried physicians voted. I’m 
just wondering, is this the first time that a survey has been 
done, or attempted survey, of the doctors has been done to see 
their opinion on the deduction of the fees for the SMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  In 1966 there . . . or ’86 I should say, there  

was a similar referendum with respect to bringing this system in 
for the fee-for-service physicians, and at that time there was 
approval. And now this has been a similar procedure with 
respect to the non-fee-for-service physicians. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. When the decision was made to 
make the deal with the SMA and to do this survey, was there a 
discussion took place as to who should receive the survey? 
Whether the 1,500 doctors in total should receive it and be able 
to put forward their ideas, or was that part of the discussion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It was not a survey, it was a referendum. 
And I think that’s what the member . . . I don’t think the 
member means to suggest any distinction on that basis. 
 
It was agreed that the . . . There was discussion about it. It was 
agreed that the people who should get to vote would be those 
affected, which were the 240. If you had the others vote, who 
are already obligated to pay, of course they would decide 
whatever they wanted, and the non-fee-for-service physicians 
would have no say because they were a minority. So it was 
thought to be more fair simply to have them vote, and that’s 
what was done. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you 
mentioned about a  I believe you used the word referendum 
in 1986 about the establishment of a fee-for-service  and I’m 
wondering, at that time, Mr. Minister, how many physicians 
would have been qualified to vote, and how many physicians 
actually took the time to vote and how many voted in favour of 
the fee-for-service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  All fee-for-service physicians would have 
been polled at that time but we do not have the numbers with us 
as to the number who . . . which existed at that time or the 
number who voted or the result, other than we know that 
obviously the decision was favourable to the legislative changes 
that were made in 1986. 
 
Mr. Toth:  And that decision at that time was to establish 
fee-for-service to be paid by the physicians to the SMA for 
services rendered on their behalf. What kind of services would 
the SMA perform on behalf of its membership, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The SMA negotiates with government. 
They negotiate fee increases on behalf of their members. They 
also lobby government on behalf of their members and other 
physicians for other benefits such as continuing medical 
education fund and incentives to enhance the provision of 
services in rural and remote areas. And they meet with the 
minister and government officials reasonably regularly with 
respect to legislative changes like this or The Health Facilities 
Licensing Act or other pieces of legislation. And they provide 
input as the official voice for purposes of membership 
advancement of the medical profession. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re saying, this self-governing body 
that’s been regulated by statute . . . And coming back to a 
comment made by the member from Arm River a few moments 
ago, and it was the same thing that was going through my mind, 
is the fact that we have an organization here that basically has  



2758  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

the ability to collect fees from all its members whether or not its 
members are totally in agreement with what they’re doing. 
Whereas . . . and I believe the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) has the same thing and lawyers the same thing. 
 
And I just find it interesting when some of these groups, the 
biggest proponents of the democratic process and free 
enterprise, seem to have to go and find agreements through 
statute to form organizations so that they can indeed derive the 
revenues to manage their associations; whereas groups like the 
Western Canadian Wheat Growers or you mentioned the 
farmers union or some of these groups are basically . . . operate 
on a voluntary basis. Those who are really concerned get 
involved and pay their membership dues. 
 
What does the SMA do to make sure that it is indeed working 
with its membership and what does the government do . . . 
When you sit down with the SMA  SMA comes with some 
requests for some changes or you go to them for some changes 
 how do you know whether or not those changes or 
suggestions are coming from the membership at large or maybe 
what ends up kind of as the directorship making those 
decisions? 
 
I think if you were to ask the rank and file across this province 
of the membership involved in many unions, a lot of them 
would not have much of an idea on many occasions of what is 
really being proposed by the leadership that are quite a bit 
removed from them. 
 
And I think the concern here is as well that we have an 
association that is effectively representing its membership. The 
fact that there was about a third of the members voted, you have 
to wonder whether or not some of the members were not happy 
with some of the suggestions brought forward; whether they 
were not consulted, therefore they didn’t take the time to vote; 
or they just were too busy and decided it’s a foregone 
conclusion so I’ll let somebody else do the voting for me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well it’s very difficult to say why they 
didn’t vote. But I appreciate the point the member is making. 
Of course this applies no matter with what organization you’re 
dealing with  whether government or opposition political 
parties; whether it’s SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) or SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) or the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) or the STF or the 
SMA or the college of physicians and surgeons. 
 
The suggestion is often made that well they’re not really 
speaking for the membership, they’re speaking for themselves. 
And yet we’re all in the position where most of the time we 
have to just assume that when we’re dealing with the duly 
constituted leaders of an organization that it speaks for the 
organization, and that if it strays too far from what the grass 
roots of that organization believe, then indeed the leadership of 
the organization will be changed in due course. 
 
I appreciate the point the member is making, but I think that’s 
just part of life. 
 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, you gave out some numbers of 
physicians who are on a fee for service and the amount that they 
pay to the Saskatchewan Medical Association, also salaried 
physicians. And I just don’t recall the numbers you gave. I 
don’t know if you gave directly how many physicians on a fee 
for service who would be making payments and how many are 
salaried. 
 
The numbers as well . . . I think you said something in the 
860-some dollars, a person who’s on a fee for service, and a 
salaried person is 500-and-some dollars. I’m wondering if you 
could reiterate those numbers, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Certainly. The fees are, fee-for-service 
physicians, $866.25; salaried physicians, $530.62. And the 
number of members who are voluntary members of the SMA is 
1,276, of which 1,166 are fee-for-service physicians and 110 
are non-fee-for-service. 
 
So it’s 1,166 plus 110 for a total of 1,276 physicians who 
belong to the SMA as members. Non-members are 167 fee for 
service and 130 non-fee-for-service, for a total of 297. And if 
you add those two numbers up, you get 1,573 which is the total 
number of physicians. 
 
(1215) 
 
Going back to the non-fee-for-service physicians, there are 240, 
of which 110 are voluntary members, 130 are not members. 
 
Now it may be . . . One thing to keep in mind is that up until the 
present time the non-fee-for-service physicians have not had to 
pay dues. Now that the dues will be deducted if this 
legislation’s passed . . . As for the fee for service, they may 
decide that since  actually it’s 75 per cent of the fee I believe 
that is deducted and paid  they may voluntarily pay the other 
25 per cent so that they too will become members which may 
explain the discrepancy in terms of the percentage of physicians 
that are members and not members as between the fee for 
service and the non-fee-for-service, if you follow me. 
 
So it’ll be interesting a year from now to see if many more of 
the non-fee-for-service become members of the SMA as a result 
of the fact that they will in effect be paying three-quarters of the 
fee in any event. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So, Mr. Minister, basically what you’re saying is 
that every physician does . . . Or is it the department pays part 
of the fee for the non-members? And I guess the question I do 
have, Mr. Minister, I didn’t realize we had part of the 
physicians in the province on a fee for service and some 
salaries, and I’m wondering where would the salaried positions 
come in? Are those some of the specific speciality services that 
are available? Or where does the salary position come in that 
would explain this number here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Many physicians work for district health 
boards in hospitals on a salary, and they may be general 
practitioners or they may be specialists. In some cases, districts 
will want to attract a specialist, but the volume of work will not 
be there to offer specialists the income that the specialist wants,  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2759 

so the district may enter into an agreement with the specialist 
for a certain salary. This is common, I think, or more common 
with radiologists and pathologists for example. So they may be 
on salary. 
 
There may also be general practitioners who work for district 
health boards and prefer to be on salary as opposed to fee for 
services. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So coming back to the question of fees, does 
every physician pay the fees? Or from the numbers we’ve got 
here, there’s a number of physicians who don’t pay the fees 
totally or just pay partial fees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. The physicians who are members, the 
numbers I gave you for membership numbers, they pay 
voluntarily because they have chosen to be members. And the 
government does not pay those fees or direct anybody else to 
pay them. 
 
Those who are non-members, the ones who are fee-for-service, 
the government pays three-quarters of the membership fee to 
the SMA. So that if you’re a fee-for-service physician and you 
choose not to be a member of the SMA, we would presently 
take three-quarters of the membership fee out of the money that 
we would pay you from the medical care insurance branch for 
senior patients and we would give that money to the SMA. 
You’re not a member, but we’re paying them three-quarters of 
the membership fee. 
 
That is the system that was brought in in 1986 for 
fee-for-service physicians. Today what we’re proposing is that 
with respect to a physician on salary, we will do the same thing. 
You may choose not to be a member, but we will pay the SMA 
three-quarters of the membership fee on the theory that they are 
doing some things that are of benefit to you as a physician. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re saying in this piece of . . . this 
amendment basically is covering everyone. And the other 
question I would have is when you’re talking about the fee that 
you’re paying, what are you paying that? Are you paying that 
over and above fees or funds that they would receive for 
services rendered? Or is that just taken off of the fee that would 
normally go to that doctor, which means they’re basically 
paying it indirectly, you’re just taking it out of their pocket 
before you send them a cheque. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So did you ask the medical association whether 
or not they were in agreement with that when you talked about 
paying these fees on their behalf? Did the doctors ask for that? 
Is that how they asked for it to be paid? Or is it just something 
that was unilaterally decided between government and the 
SMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well no, this was asked for by the SMA. 
With respect to both the fee for service, they had a referendum 
in 1986  and those are the numbers I couldn’t give you in 
your first question  and they asked, do you want this to be 
done? And the majority of those who voted said yes, we do.  

Maybe some didn’t vote, but that’s just way things go. 
 
In this case, the same principle is being extended today 10 years 
later to the non-fee-for-service. Similarly, there was a 
referendum of the 240 non-fee-for-service physicians where we 
sent out, or the SMA actually sent out a ballot to each one of 
the 240 giving them the opportunity to vote yes or no, and then 
we would be bound by the result of that referendum; 103 of 240 
actually returned their ballots. Of those 103, 71 said they were 
in favour, which amounts to 70 per cent of those who voted, 
and the number of those who voted is 40-some per cent. 
 
But that’s how they were consulted. Similar to what happened 
in ’86 with respect to the fee-for-service physicians. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you were saying, this last ballot that 
went out went to the non-members to seek their input with 
regards to this specific piece of legislation in front of us. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, another question. Do physicians have 
the opportunity as individuals, especially the non-members who 
haven’t voluntarily got involved, do they have the ability to, as 
we see in many other organizations, to voluntarily request that 
these fees not be deducted or that they receive those fees back? 
 
I know on some of the agricultural settings where there’s a 
membership fee, that is automatically deducted. In many cases 
members have the ability if they really don’t want to make that 
fee, they can apply for and have a refund of that fee that was 
made voluntarily  not voluntarily, but just taken right off  
unilaterally deducted whether it’s off a grain cheque or a 
livestock, like a check-off in many of the agricultural sectors. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, they do not have that ability. This 
legislation, like the previous legislation, makes it mandatory 
that they have to make a contribution of three-quarters of the 
membership fee indirectly, by government directing that it be 
paid, and they don’t have the ability to opt out of that system. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So the fees are now collected just directly via 
deduction from a physician’s cheque. A physician doesn’t 
basically cut a cheque to the SMA other than, I think you used 
the figure of 75 and 25 per cent. Now if I gather correctly, then 
the 75 per cent is deducted directly off payment. The member 
then cuts a cheque for the other 25 per cent, the voluntary 
members, whereas the non-voluntary and the non-members do 
not send that 25 per cent. Is that what I’m understanding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, that’s not correct, and I may not have 
been totally clear about it. To go back to the number of 
members, there are 1,573 physicians in the province; 1,276 of 
those are members of the SMA. Nothing is deducted by 
government on behalf of those 1,276 because they make the 
payment voluntarily. They pay the entire membership fee 
themselves, okay? 
 
There are 297 physicians who choose not to be members of the 
SMA and they do not have to become members of the SMA. 
But with respect to them, the government pays three-quarters of 
what would be their membership fee to the SMA in lieu of the 
membership, and now we do that for fee-for-service physicians.  



2760  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

This Bill would extend the same principle to non-fee-for-
service physicians. 
 
And so we would end up, right now, we’re paying for 167 
physicians. We’re paying the three-quarter membership fee 
directly to the SMA. This would extend that to the 130 
physicians who are non-fee-for-service physicians and paying 
nothing to the SMA. This would mean that we would pay 
three-quarters of the membership fee to the SMA on behalf of 
each of those 130 physicians, the other 110 having already 
agreed to voluntarily make the payment. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. So as I 
understand it correctly now, all members, voluntary members or 
full members of the SMA, make the payment directly on their 
behalf. The government doesn’t make any contribution. 
Whereas previous to this amendment . . . once this amendment 
goes through, all members are now going to be . . . or the 
government’s going to cover the 75 per cent that you were just 
doing for the fee-for-service physicians. The fee-for-service 
physicians you were paying 75 per cent and the non-members 
were covering the 25 per cent, but the salaried physicians were 
not paying anything. There wasn’t a payment made of any kind, 
and this present legislation is going to address that. 
 
Now does that mean that the salaried physicians will 
automatically pay the 25 per cent or they can still choose not to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  They could still choose not to, if they chose 
not to be members. 
 
Mr. Toth:  And as for the fee-for-service physicians, the 
non-members as well may or may not make that payment. 
They’re in the position where the government pays 75 per cent, 
but the 25 per cent may or may not be paid. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. Yes, that’s correct. 
 
Mr. Toth:  For the individuals who are not members of the 
SMA, are there services that they may lose because they are not 
members? Or are there any services that they would not receive 
as a result of not being members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I can’t say. I would imagine there probably 
are, because there are probably member services that don’t 
pertain to government that are provided, you know, to members 
of the SMA. But the theory of this legislation is that people who 
are not members benefit from some of the services in terms of 
the work that the SMA does on their behalf. And that’s why it’s 
thought that they should also share in the expense. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I think you’re aware of the fact that 
there are many jurisdictions in many areas of the province . . . 
many small communities and certainly health districts are faced 
with that question now as we’ve amalgamated into the larger 
service districts, where communities and districts are having a 
hard time trying to entice, if you will, or trying to encourage or 
trying to get doctors to come and look at their communities. 
 
And I was at a couple public meetings in the last little while  

where people were raising that question because they had an 
understanding in their community. And certainly it was a real 
concern, the fact that they didn’t have physicians available; a 
physician had left the community. In some cases there was one 
physician had been in the community for a number of years, had 
left, had gone on or moved. And a couple situations where 
circumstances were that the person had actually retired, and 
now the community is left without a service. 
 
Have you found that there are districts or communities that have 
looked at this fee that is being deducted, and the fee to the 
SMA, the districts themselves have actually decided to pick it 
up and offer it as a service that they would perform on behalf of 
physicians if they would come and practise in that community 
or in that district? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I don’t know of that occurring, but there 
certainly would be nothing stopping it from occurring. If a 
district, because of the population, the number of patients, 
decides it needs to enhance a physician’s income in various 
ways, the district would be free to do that. And in fact I think 
although the number of rural practitioners has been relatively 
stable over the last five years, I believe that what the member is 
saying is valid, and I think we probably will see different 
arrangements arrived at by districts to make sure that we have 
appropriate physician resources in some parts of the province. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 92 and Bill No. 
77. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2761 
 June 18, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens of the city of Melville and surrounding small 
communities with respect to the closure of the court-house in 
Melville. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse its decision to close the Melville court-house; and 
that your hon. Assembly withhold decisions for further 
reductions to the Melville residents until fair input is 
provided by the community. 

 
The signatures come from the citizens of Melville, Fenwood, 
Bangor, Neudorf, and Goodeve, Mr. Speaker. There are 806 
signatures on this petition. I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities of people have signed the petition from are 
mostly from Moosomin, Redvers, and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. Speaker, 
to present petitions from the people throughout the province 
regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names that are on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, Kayville, Avonlea, Esterhazy, and other centres 
throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Swift Current, from Regina, from Raymore, and Bengough. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on  

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
In addition to signatures, of course, from Regina, I see names 
from Carlyle, Indian Head, Saltcoats, Yorkton, Edenwold, 
Grenfell, Canora, and Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise again 
today to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Regina. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by a great number of 
concerned citizens, in particular from the resort community of 
Regina Beach, as well as from Lumsden; and I notice there’s 
also a great number of signatures from the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Wilcox, Francis, White City, and Regina. I 
so present. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased as well to rise and 
present petitions to the Assembly, petitions addressing the 
conditions of the highways in this province. And this one 
specifically deals with the Highway No. 1, and I’d like to read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure  



2762  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

program toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 
allocating those funds towards capital construction projects 
in this province. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And as I indicated yesterday, the petitions I have in front of me 
are signed by individuals from the Carnduff, Carievale, 
Shaunavon, Frontier, and Swift Current areas of the province of 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 
present on behalf of the people of south-west Saskatchewan the 
following petition, and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 
allocating these funds towards capital construction 
projections in this province. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These folks are mostly from the town of Shaunavon, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as of course, Orkney, Eastend, and surrounding 
communities. And these were gathered by the school children 
of Shaunavon and I’m happy to present them on their behalf. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
allocate adequate funding to the double-laning of Highway 
No 1; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and the members of the Assembly, Mr. Manley 
McLachlan from the Saskatchewan Construction Association. 
 
As you’re aware, the construction association has been working 
with us in trying to get the unfortunate Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement repealed, and I would just hope that 
Manley would be here today to see the minister withdraw this 
unfortunate legislation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to  

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, Mrs. Yetta Cohen who is in the west gallery. 
 
She is I think this week celebrating her 80th birthday and she’s 
visiting us here in Saskatchewan from Randolph, 
Massachusetts, which is a suburb of Boston. She’s visiting with 
my constituents, Bernie and Jennifer Cohen. 
 
Let’s have a warm welcome for Mrs. Cohen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to recognize people that are seated in your gallery. This is a 
young couple, a young family from the city of Yorkton. But the 
two people that I am introducing, the parents are originally from 
Invermay and I had the pleasure I think of being the teacher of 
both of them. 
 
I’d like to introduce Kelly and Joy Shewchuk and their young 
son Tyson. I hope you enjoy your afternoon in the legislature. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister 
of Education, I’d like to introduce some people seated in your 
gallery today. I have the pleasure to introduce two recipients of 
the John M. Thompson fellowship program for 1996. They 
were nominated because of their commitment to teachers in 
their country and their willingness to utilize the experience and 
knowledge gained to organize training and professional 
development programs. 
 
The general objectives of the fellowship program are, firstly, to 
provide participants with an orientation to the Canadian 
education system and teacher organizations; secondly, to 
promote the development of leadership skills; and thirdly, to 
provide teachers with practical training in different aspects of 
teacher associations. 
 
The program will be held in the month of June and will consist 
of an orientation, workshops, and such areas as 
communications, program and planning, proposal development, 
budgeting and evaluation, and visits to member organizations. 
 
The Thompson Fellowship program for teachers provides a 
wonderful opportunity for teachers around the world to share 
information and expertise. 
 
In May, 1996 the Government of Saskatchewan announced the 
public consultation process regarding structuring change in the 
21st century. Teachers play a vital role in determining what 
Saskatchewan’s future education system will look like, and I 
would like to ask the guests today to rise as I introduce you. 
 
I first would introduce Mrs. Geeta Verma, of the All India 
Primary Teachers’ Federation of India, and Ms. Marion M. 
Liburd of the Nevis Teachers’ Union of the West Indies. And 
accompanying them, the two visitors, is Mr. Herb Haidl, the 
president of the Catholic section of the SSTA (Saskatchewan  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

School Trustees Association). 
 
I welcome you here today and ask the members of the 
Assembly, through you, Mr. Speaker, to welcome them here to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, 
I too want to welcome Manley McLachlan to the Legislative 
Assembly, the representative of the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association. And I wish you well during one of the more 
interesting times for the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association, Mr. McLachlan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too would like 
to join the other members in welcoming Manley McLachlan to 
the Assembly, representing the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association. Manley has taken the spot that Jim Chase  
well-known to most of us  used to have. And we’re happy to 
have worked over the past four years with his association, with 
Jim, and now with Manley, and we’re looking forward to more 
pleasant days ahead as we work towards bringing about a fair 
and reasonable union-preference tendering policy in this 
province. And of course that’s of interest to not only the people 
that head these organizations but also to the 80 per cent of the 
construction workers of this province who are not unionized, 
and of course the 20 per cent who are. And we hope that you 
are successful in your endeavours to find fair play in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, behind me 
in the west gallery we have a group of students  21, I believe 
 from Glenavon School, grades 5 and 6, attended by their 
teacher Henry Huck, I believe; hopefully I’ve got that 
pronounced right; Cynthia Gilewicz and Lucy Gordon are 
chaperons as well as Norman Pander and Beverly Hazell. 
 
And it’s certainly a pleasure to have you taking the time to 
come and visit the Assembly and I look forward to just having a 
moment with you afterwards for some pictures. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
today to rise and welcome a group of 27 grade 2 and 3 students 
seated in your gallery. These students are here from Deshaye 
School and it is a pleasure to welcome them. I should note that 
there are also . . . there’s a student on the floor of the Assembly 
behind the bar who is also from that class at Deshaye. And I 
would ask that all members join with me in welcoming them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Communities Hit By Storm 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I would like to send our best wishes to all 
those families across Saskatchewan who are cleaning up storm 
damage from yesterday and overnight. Reports from 
Environment Canada show that four tornadoes were spotted in 
the Kindersley, Kyle, Eastend, and Morse areas. Other areas got 
hit with winds gusting over 160 kilometres per hour, not to 
mention extremely heavy rain and hail. This morning many 
farmers are out surveying the damage on their upcoming crops. 
Others are calculating the damage to their property and 
buildings. Thankfully no one was hurt. 
 
It only takes one storm like this, Mr. Speaker, to remind us just 
how powerful mother nature is and how powerless we all are. It 
is our hope that government officials are working closely with 
storm victims to assist them in every way possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tourism Awards 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Tourism creates over a billion dollars to our provincial 
economy every year and is responsible for more than 40,000 
jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Prince Albert region is a major player in all of this and 
recently our community honoured businesses and individuals 
who have made a significant contribution to this industry at the 
second annual Prince Albert Tourism Awards. 
 
Athabaska Airways was chosen as Prince Albert’s Tourism 
Business of the Year. The manager of marketing and sales for 
Athabaska, Ken Gould, says tourism traffic is the most 
important component of their business. Also nominated for this 
award were Prince Albert Northern Bus Lines and the South 
Hill Inn. The Tourism Organization of the Year Award went to 
The Broadway North Theatre Company for its sell-out musical 
production of West Side Story. 
 
Wanda Carter, sales and conference director for the Marlboro 
Inn, was presented with the Tourism Individual of the Year 
honours. The Tourism Volunteer of the Year Award went to 
Bill Smiley for his long-term dedication to the Prince Albert 
Historical Society. The Carlton branch of the TD (Toronto 
Dominion) Bank received the Customer Service Award of 
Excellence of a business. 
 
And the staff of Diefenbaker House, Nicole Pelletier, Tanya 
Danylyshen, Tanya Trofimuk, and Danielle Simonot were 
presented with the Public Sector Customer Service Award; and 
in the business category, Sherry Chatlain, an employee at the 
Coronet Motor Inn, received the Customer Service Award. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to all of the recipients of these 
important awards. 
 



2764  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Western Canada Farm Progress Show 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
extend a warm welcome to the thousands of people from across 
Saskatchewan, and from across Canada, as well as visitors from 
outside Canada, who will be attending the Western Canada 
Farm Progress Show that’s on this week in Regina starting 
tomorrow. 
 
The farm progress show of course has gained an international 
reputation for being a showcase of the best agriculture 
technology in the world. It is a true reflection of the attributes 
of our rural entrepreneurs from all across Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
and of course highlighting those entrepreneurs from rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It also has an outstanding attendance because of the amount of 
business information that it provides for other entrepreneurs to 
view, as well as farmers like myself that enjoy looking at some 
of this new technology and methods. 
 
I wish to extend to all the people that will be attending a 
welcome to Saskatchewan and to Regina as well. I hope that of 
course that the weather will cooperate so that it’s a successful 
venture. A lot of work has gone into this from the organizers 
who certainly deserve a pat on the back, and certainly for all the 
exhibitors that will be attending as well, that the attendance is 
up so that they can enjoy a successful year again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bovine Tribute to the Speaker 
 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As all members on all 
sides of this House know, I have a great deal of respect for this 
Chamber, and I would never, ever want to be accused of 
breaking the rules in here. I might bend them, massage them 
occasionally, even torture them, but I would never wittingly 
break the rules. 
 
So since I know it’s against the rules to exhibit 
non-parliamentary items, I would ask the pages to confiscate 
this plastic cow and deliver it to you, Mr. Speaker. You will 
note that it is a cow. Even I know that there’s no bull allowed in 
here. You will also note that it’s a black and white cow, Mr. 
Speaker, bearing a certain resemblance to your sartorial 
splendour and to your black and white decisions  decisions 
that have udderly impressed all members of this House. 
 
On behalf of all MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly), I 
present you now with this plastic wind-up walking cow. It 
should remind you of your decision made a couple of years ago 
when you were on a CPA (Commonwealth Parliamentary 
Association) junket in England. As I recall what you said when 
you returned to Canada, you were so impressed with the British 
parliament that it was then you decided to stand for Speaker. 
 
Now it’s a very special cow we’re giving you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
not a mad cow. Rather it’s a token of appreciation by all  

members for the judicious, calm, almost bovine equanimity you 
have displayed during this session. I’m sure you didn’t really 
anticipate all the beef we’d cook up or the rules we’d milk 
when we MLAs were herded together at the start of the session 
for the historical first vote for Speaker in this House. 
 
Whether you’ve been dealing with the rump roast back bench, 
the sirloin tip cabinet, the tenderloin opposition, or the ground 
round third party, you’ve kept the beef and bull to a minimum. 
Mr. Speaker, you’ve never been a cow-ard in your rulings. We 
have no beef with you. You’re a prime cut and we congratulate 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Santa Claus Theme Park for Watson 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
commend the people of Watson on their efforts to create a 
major tourist attraction in our town. The people of Watson will 
raise $12,000 to build a 25-foot cement statue of Santa Claus. 
Watson historians want to stake claim to being the original 
home of the Santa Claus Day. 
 
History shows that in 1932 a local merchant had an idea to 
make Christmas more fun for children so he organized a type of 
Santa Claus Day. Of course the idea spread throughout the 
world. After that the community is considering building a Santa 
Claus theme park and constructing some permanent Christmas 
decorations. 
 
I would like to congratulate Bill Chyz for his hard work in 
organizing the committee work on the statue, and invite all 
members to our town where we celebrate the Christmas feeling 
all year round. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Summer Theatre in Weyburn 
 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker, this summer an important piece 
of Saskatchewan history will be revisited through the 
performing arts in Weyburn. August 10 will mark the premiere 
performance of That’ll Be The Day, the life of Tommy Douglas. 
 
Most appropriately, it will be held at the T.C. Douglas Calvary 
Centre in Weyburn, the restored church in which Mr. Douglas 
served as minister, now dedicated in his memory as a 
performing arts centre. 
 
The play is a new, original work by Ken Mitchell, the nationally 
known Saskatchewan dramatist. It is lively and uplifting, 
befitting both the spirit of Mr. Douglas, the humanitarian, 
visionary, and inspirational leader. 
 
That’ll Be The Day will be directed by Ron Ror, a talented, 
well-known, and respected artist. Mr. Ror bears the unique 
distinction of having had a very special speaker at his high 
school graduation in Goodwater  namely, Mr. Douglas 
himself. 
 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

The play will star Nova Scotian-born actor, Gordon Gammie, 
who recently won strong reviews in the lead role of a play based 
on the Westray mining disaster. Gammie will be supported by a 
small cast and some roles will be filled by Weyburn community 
actors. 
 
Signal Hill Theatre is a completely new entity and the 
brainchild of the city of Weyburn tourism committee. The 
theatre’s mandate is to attract visitors to Weyburn and 
south-eastern Saskatchewan and to utilize the Douglas Centre 
facility. This first summer theatre endeavour is done in 
association with the staff from the Souris Valley Theatre in 
nearby Estevan. This type of cooperation could serve as a 
model for others to follow in theatre and tourism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite everyone to visit Weyburn this August to 
enjoy first-class theatre. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis, better known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, is an 
irreversible disease of the nervous system. 
 
ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) killed Lou Gehrig, one of 
the greatest baseball players of all time, and it also killed David 
Niven, the actor. 
 
The blue cornflower is the official emblem of the ALS society 
and each year the ALS Society of Saskatchewan runs a 
campaign with these flowers to raise funds for medical research 
and to raise awareness of this disease. 
 
The life expectancy of a person with ALS is about three years. 
During this time, patients slowly lose muscle function until they 
are no longer able to speak, eat, or move. Eventually most 
patients will suffocate as the muscles that allow them to breath 
cease to function. It is a devastating illness for those which 
have it and there is no cure that has yet been found. 
 
ALS also has an impact on the patients’ families, consuming 
their financial and emotional resources. 
 
There is some hope for people with ALS. Scientific research in 
Canada has been proceeding at an accelerating rate: 10 projects 
are now in progress; new drugs are being tested; advances in 
knowledge about other nervous system diseases may shed some 
light on the cause and a cure for ALS. 
 
I would encourage all members to visit or call their local ALS 
society or provide support to their local chapter. They do need 
your support. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with leave, 
to revert back to the introduction of guests who are here for a 
short time. 
 

The Speaker:  The hon. member for Moosomin has 
requested leave to introduce guests and I believe that his guests 
will not be here when we reach orders of the day. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, 45 students from McLeod/Churchill 
Elementary School in the community of Moosomin. They are 
attended today by their teachers, Mrs. Pam Foy, Mrs. Shannon 
Windrim, and Ms. Lana Miskamin. 
 
We’d certainly like to welcome you to the Assembly and we 
trust that you’ll enjoy your trip to the city today, and welcome 
very much. Have a good day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Care Funding 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
scene that may be played out in countless communities over the 
coming months is now taking place in Canora. The town is 
going to court to prevent the closure of six acute care beds and 
to seek funding to maintain a safe and proper level of health 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canora residents are upset, and rightly so, about 
the fact that they have to take legal action to maintain a safe 
health care system. However, they are also concerned about the 
fact that they are being pitted against the communities of 
Preeceville and Kamsack for health care dollars. The situation is 
so severe that many residents are now boycotting businesses in 
these neighbouring towns. 
 
Will the Minister of Health explain what solution he has to 
address this growing problem, a problem that his government 
has created by underfunding our rural health care system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  As the member knows, Mr. Speaker, the 
matter is currently before the courts, and I’m not going to 
comment on the legal proceedings that are in front of the court. 
 
But I want to say to the member that I believe that the best place 
for the controversy to be resolved is at the community level. 
And I have every confidence, Mr. Speaker, that people acting 
reasonably and in good faith will see to it that proper health 
services are provided to the people of Canora and the residents 
of all communities within the Assiniboine Valley Health 
District. 
 



2766  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
further demonstrate what my colleague from Canora-Pelly has 
stated, and I have received a letter from the town of Kamsack, 
and I’d like to send a copy to the Minister of Health. 
 
This letter reads, and I quote: 
 

When health districts are being told they have too many 
acute care beds in the district, in many cases the outlying 
areas are not being considered, and the decision to close 
beds below a potentially safe level pits community against 
community. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that this government is poisoning the 
atmosphere of cooperation that has existed in this region for 
decades. The town of Kamsack is calling on the minister to give 
more autonomy to health boards and not hamstringing them 
through funding cuts and restrictive regulations. 
 
Will the minister make these commitments in this House today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Of course, Mr. Speaker, as the member 
knows, the only funding cuts there have been to health care in 
Saskatchewan this year, have been those cuts imposed by the 
federal Liberals. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberals have withdrawn $47 
million from health care spending in Saskatchewan this year. 
And what this government has done in light of that is to replace 
every single dime that they have taken out, Mr. Speaker. 
Undoubtedly, for all of us in government and municipal 
government and in health districts, there are tight finances, Mr. 
Speaker, but I remain convinced that the appropriate number of 
hospital beds exist in Preeceville, Kamsack, and Canora, to 
meet the health care needs of the people in the district, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Fort 
Qu’Appelle is another community in which this government’s 
underfunding of the health care system has had a drastic effect. 
The Fort Qu’Appelle Hospital is suing the local health district 
because this NDP (New Democratic Party) government has 
failed to provide the local district with appropriate funding. 
And because of the actions of the government, Lestock and the 
other nearby communities such as Balcarres are concerned that 
the outcome of such court action could impact their funding. 
 
The minister fails to acknowledge the fact that his actions and 
those of his government are pitting community against 
community. Mr. Speaker, at what point is the minister prepared 
to properly fund the rural health care system? In other words, 
when can rural people expect a health care system based on 
common sense, and not on dollars and cents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, we have a very good health 
care system in the province of Saskatchewan; a health care 
system that is the envy of people around the world. But the 
problem the Leader of the Opposition has, Mr. Speaker, is that 
when he takes the side of one institution within the health 
district that he represents, as he has in this House  he 
mentions Lestock and Balcarres  when he says that one 
institution should get more and takes sides as between that 
institution and the health board, he must recognize, Mr. 
Speaker, that that may have an impact on Lestock and 
Balcarres. 
 
It is best, Mr. Speaker, that these matters be resolved at the 
local level. It is best that that member not politically interfere 
with decisions that should properly be made between the health 
board and the Indian hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
Louise Simard travelled Saskatchewan a few years ago 
promoting this government’s so-called wellness approach, she 
promised that health care decisions would be brought back to 
the local level. She promised renewed cooperation between the 
NDP government and Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleagues from Canora-Pelly, Saltcoats, 
and Melville have demonstrated, this government has shown 
absolutely nothing in the way of cooperation. Instead, the NDP 
has drastically reduced funding, and the quality of health care in 
rural communities has sagged. 
 
This government now sits back and watches communities battle 
district health boards for more funding, pitting community 
against community, people against people. Even worse, 
communities are being pitted against each other for the valuable 
health dollars  they’re being pitted simply for money, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Will the minister explain what happened to the cooperative 
spirit that this government promised, and will the minister make 
a commitment to properly fund rural health care so as to clear 
up the atmosphere of cooperation that he and his government 
has poisoned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  What the cooperative spirit means to me, 
Mr. Speaker, among other things, is that we in society will 
cooperate one with another to jointly finance our health care 
system. It does not mean, as that member has advocated in this 
House, that we should move to an American-style, two-tiered 
system, pay as you go, where the rich . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  . . . where the rich get a better form of 
health care than the poor, Mr. Speaker. And the reality is that 
despite the fearmongering by the Liberal Party, we have a good 
health care system, Mr. Speaker. And what they are 
complaining about . . . for example, the member from Melfort  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2767 

complains that the Melfort Union Hospital has gone from 80 
hospital beds to 40. He doesn’t tell people that the average daily 
census in Melfort is 32. He doesn’t do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The number of hospital beds we have in Melfort and elsewhere, 
Mr. Speaker, is quite adequate to meet the health care needs of 
the people of the province, and so is the number of nursing 
home beds, Mr. Speaker. Because we have one of the best 
health care systems in the world and we’re going to keep our 
medicare system despite the opposition of that party over there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A five-year-old boy 
from my constituency was using the services of a speech 
therapist until this government cut back on health care funding. 
Now the therapist is shared between the North-East and the 
Central Plains Health District, meaning the young man can only 
get therapy if there is a cancellation. He hasn’t had a session 
since Christmas. 
 
I’m not going to ask the Health minister why this is happening 
because he’ll just pass the buck to the federal government, or 
he’ll blame Tory mismanagement, or he’ll blame the district 
health board’s choices. What I am going to ask him though, is 
to admit that his government considers rural Saskatchewan 
people to be second-class citizens; that your government has 
decided that rural Saskatchewan doesn’t deserve a decent 
standard of health and that it is part of your long-term plan to 
decimate rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member of course has not 
provided me with any information about the case she’s referring 
to. And if the member is concerned about the situation, I would 
ask the member to send me some information. Because I assure 
the member and I assure the House, that I would want to look 
into that situation and respond to the member in a proper way. 
 
But I want to say to the member that we do have a good health 
care system. We do believe in rural Saskatchewan and, Mr. 
Speaker, our belief in rural Saskatchewan is going to mean that 
we’re not going to go to an American-style health care system 
such as that member who just spoke, by the way, has advocated 
in this House. Because such a system, Mr. Speaker, would not 
be to the benefit of rural people, urban people, or any of the 
people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the minister responsible for CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) or his 
designate. Mr. Minister, I know your party and the Liberals 
were planning on wrapping up this session and getting out of 
here today, but it isn’t going to happen. We have no intention 
 we have no intention  we have no intention of letting this  

session end until you release your Crown tendering review and 
indicate what changes you plan to make in light of this flawed 
policy. 
 
And by the way, we want the report that’s already written. We 
want the report that’s already written, not the one that you’re 
going to cook up in the next few days to try and make this 
policy look good. 
 
Mr. Minister, a simple question. Will you release that report 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll take this question on 
behalf of the government. The Minister of Labour, and the 
House Leader, and other ministers who have answered this and 
similar questions in the past few days on behalf of the 
government, have indicated to the members of the House that 
there is no written report that has been prepared thus far 
respecting the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement). And the reason for that is very simple. 
 
There has been a series of stakeholders’ meetings involving the 
SCA (Saskatchewan Construction Association), the CLRA 
(Construction Labour Relations Association), and the 
construction unions involved, with a view to working out what 
possible workable arrangements are available to us. And we 
found out yesterday that those talks have broken off. 
 
In the consequence, if that condition continues, a report will 
have to be obviously prepared by the CIC people summarizing 
what’s taken place. And I dare say officials are looking at it 
now. 
 
Our hope is, Mr. Speaker . . . in fact as Premier, I would call on 
all of the parties to get together again  all of the parties to get 
together again sometime this week, next week  to take 
another concerted effort to see as to what can be done to make 
this policy, which is after all trying to right the wrongs 
implemented by the former administration . . . to right those 
wrongs and make a workable policy for all of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, what are 
you talking about, there’s no report? On May 8 in this House 
the Minister of Labour said and I quote: 
 

. . . we feel that the review is almost concluded and that 
we’ll have a report very shortly. 
 

On May 10 the Minister of Labour said: 
 

We expect the review of the . . . (CCTA) will be concluded 
by the end of the month. At that time, the member, as all 
. . . (of) Saskatchewan (knows), will be privileged to know 
what the results of the review have been. 

 
On May 21 the Minister said: 



2768  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

. . . we expect to have a report sometime near the end of 
the month. And when that report is released, the member 
along with the rest of the public in Saskatchewan, will 
know the results of the review of the . . . (CCTA). 
 

That’s what he said then. And today, Mr. Premier, you stand in 
this House and say there is no report and there never was a 
report. There’s a report all right, Mr. Premier, you just don’t 
want to release it because it says this policy is a disaster. Mr. 
Premier, will you do the right thing here and release that report 
that you know is in existence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the House should be 
reminded again, and told again, that the difficulty which all of 
us face with respect to CCTA has been occasioned as a result of 
nine years of deliberate policy by the former Conservative 
administration, which was intended, in cold, blunt terms, to cut 
out all contractors who had unionized workers from any of the 
construction tendering of the government of the day. This was 
an inequity. 
 
In the consequence, we determined to implement something 
which we thought was more equitable called the CCTA. In the 
consequence, there is further demand that the CCTA be 
reviewed and all of the statements that the member refers to are 
totally consistent with what I said in the first answer. The 
interim report, which is the result of the failed negotiations, will 
be prepared and will be released at some appropriate time. But 
keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that the discussions only terminated 
temporarily, I would say, yesterday. 
 
I again say that it is the objective of the government, it is my 
request as Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, that the 
SCA, the CLRA, the construction trade unions, get together in 
the absence of any preconceived report by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, or by anybody else, and to try to work out in the 
spirit of compromise a fair, workable arrangement for all 
working men and women in all construction companies in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It can be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, on June 4, 
the minister responsible for CIC wrote to Manley McLachlan, 
the Saskatchewan Construction Association. And I have a copy 
of the letter right here. It says, and I quote: 
 

The results of the CIC’s review of the CCTA have not 
been shared with anyone outside of government. If the 
results of the review and our current recommendations 
were released, it would likely prejudice the current 
discussions taking place. As a result, it is not our intention 
to release anything until such time as your discussion have 
reached a conclusion. 
 

Well they’ve reached a conclusion yesterday, Mr. Premier. Mr. 
Premier, this letter confirms that there is a report and that the 
report makes recommendations. It also says that the report will 
be released once negotiations between the two sides have  

concluded and that’s taken place. 
 
Mr. Premier, I think you’ve been caught on this. You can’t 
stand there and deny that there is a report that exists when you 
wrote . . . when the minister responsible wrote about it in a 
letter to the construction association here in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Premier, will you release the report and the recommendations 
today as promised in this letter to the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again the 
Leader of the Third Party just refuses to listen to the answer and 
doggedly and religiously sticks to the written question which 
has been prepared for him to read. 
 
I repeat again to the Leader of the Third Party, how could there 
be a report since there were stakeholders’ meetings which took 
place involving the SCA, the CLRA, and the trade unions, up 
until yesterday? How could there be anything except an 
intention to summarize  hopefully, we thought  the 
successful completion of those negotiations, or in the absence 
of a successful completion, some other report on the 
consequence? 
 
We say, I say, the words “interim report” because what we hope 
is as what I’ve said in the first two questions — I repeat again 
— that the parties involved here will come back around the 
table and to solve this problem in the best interests of working 
men and women. 
 
I repeat, Saskatchewan people in this province don’t want a so 
blatantly right-wing, anti-union approach that the former 
Conservative administration and this caucus advocates. They 
want a fair wage policy which is applicable to unionized 
workers, non-unionized workers, and construction people. The 
CCTA holds the germs of that. It bears the possibility of that. 
 
I say to the parties, get back around the table and let’s take one 
more crack at working out a solution. If not, the government 
will take its responsibilities in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the real 
reason you can’t release that report is because it is very 
damning on your government and the policy that you brought 
in. And also the problem is, is you’ve entered into a contract 
with the unionized contractors of this province. That’s the 
problem here. 
 
The negotiation process was doomed right from the start 
because the unions never had any intention of allowing any 
changes. And why should they, Mr. Premier? You gave them a 
sweetheart deal just prior to the last election, and then you gave 
them a veto over any changes for the next five years. 
 
The only way to fix this thing, Mr. Premier, is to scrap the 
whole policy entirely and start over again with all parties at the 
table. We have introduced a private members’ Bill that would  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2769 

do just that, Mr. Premier. Will you pass that piece of legislation 
today so that we can work on creating a new, fair tendering 
policy for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the new, fair tendering 
policy by the new PCs (Progressive Conservative) translates to 
the old PC policy of attacking trade union men and women, as 
they did from 1982 to 1991. That legislation is not a fair 
tendering policy that even the Saskatchewan Construction 
Association would buy. That Bill that these Conservatives have 
tabled in the House is a Bill which would make Saskatchewan 
Alabama North. 
 
That is a piece of legislation which would reduce our working 
men and women to the lowest common denominator in terms of 
wages and opportunities. Not even the SCA employers, good as 
they are, even with their differences that they may have with 
this government and the CCTA idea proposal  they wouldn’t 
buy that. 
 
And the Hon. Leader of the Conservative Party asks me to get 
up and to say to the people of Saskatchewan that I’m going to 
turn the clock back to the day when they almost bankrupted the 
province, to the day when they brought shame to working men 
and women in the province. I say, never. We have been elected 
to provide fairness and opportunity and compassion, and that’s 
exactly what we’re going to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environment Department Office Closures 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question as well, and this one I’m directing to the minister 
responsible for Environment and Resource Management. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that your department is planning 
on closing 16 district offices throughout the province, including 
the Moosomin district office? Can you provide us with a list of 
the offices to be closed? When will these closures take place? 
How many jobs are on the line? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for the question. I do not have a list of all of the 
district offices which will be affected with meeting our budget 
target this year, but I’ll be happy to provide details to the hon. 
member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again to the 
minister. Mr. Minister, would you not acknowledge that this is 
yet another attack on rural Saskatchewan? Virtually every 
government office in the community of Moosomin has been 
ripped out over the past few years, and now our conservation 
office is going, and how many others? 
 

I’m looking forward to seeing that list that you’re presenting. 
I’m sure that many other communities feel the same way that 
Moosomin is today. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is this being done? Why are you and your 
government and this Premier continuing your attack on rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In due respect to 
the hon. member, we have to make these changes as we prepare 
for the 21st century, and the facts are that far more employees 
from my particular department have been laid off in urban 
centres than will be laid off in rural areas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Gambling 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my first 
question is for the Minister of Gaming. Gambling does not only 
affect the adults of this province; it is also affecting, and having 
a significant impact on, our youth. In fact a recent study of 
students aged 14 to 19 in Windsor, Ontario show that 90 per 
cent of adolescents were involved in gambling activity. 
 
Another study by the Canadian foundation on gambling found 
that 37 per cent of adolescents in Ontario had some degree of 
problems with excessive gambling. And in Alberta 23 per cent 
of teens have been identified as problem gamblers or at risk of 
becoming addicted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t have the actual statistics in 
Saskatchewan yet, but there is no reason to believe that our 
youth are not having the same problems. Does this government 
have any plans to identify gambling problems among our youth, 
or are they just keeping their eyes focused on the huge profits it 
is bringing into their coffers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
for the question, and the member from Humboldt for the 
question. I don’t know where the member is getting her 
information from, but in Saskatchewan, young people, and she 
speaks about teenagers and adolescents, in this province under 
the age of 19 years of age, aren’t permitted to gamble anywhere 
in this province. So I’m not sure where the member is getting 
her information from. 
 
But what I would like to say to the member is that in this 
province we have set the standard across Canada for 
establishing the kinds of regulations and controls for people 
who are involved in gaming. And we have just recently, at a 
symposium in Regina, had people from across North America 
at this symposium who took the Saskatchewan model and will 
be implementing it across Canada and using that regulation as 
being the standard. 
 
Because not only do we have regulations, strict regulations, and  



2770  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

control in this province, we have established as well how we 
distribute equity fairly across the province and have a very 
comprehensive education and treatment program in this 
province, unlike any other province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Incidentally, I got my 
information from the mental health association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my next question is for the Education minister. 
Madam Minister, something needs to be done to help our youth 
before it’s too late. We do not want to subject our youth to a 
lifetime of severe gambling problems. I understand that the 
provincial curriculum offers a segment on alcohol and other 
drug addictions for grade 7, 8, and 9 students, but it has not 
been updated since the 1980s. 
 
Given these startling numbers about gaming problems, will the 
Minister of Education or her designate consider adding gaming 
addictions to the provincial curriculum, and in doing so, take 
the first step in helping to prevent our youth from this very 
serious social condition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to be able to take my place today. I want to say to 
the member, Mr. Speaker, through you, that I’ve heard the 
question. She is quite correct, that there is a program in effect 
for some addictions. And without accepting the premiss for her 
question, I’ll be glad to refer this question to the minister and 
she will in turn take it up with the appropriate authorities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple more 
questions, Mr. Minister. You mentioned earlier about the 
agreement that’s mentioned in this amendment with the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association). I’m wondering, in 
agreeing to bring forth this legislation on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, what did you offer in 
return? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It is not easy, Mr. Chair, to answer the 
question simply, in the sense that this is one provision of an 
agreement that contains several provisions. But generally 
speaking, the framework agreement, with which I think the 
member has some familiarity, is the agreement that sets out  

roles and responsibilities as between district health boards and 
physicians and ensures that physicians have the right to 
collective representation respecting financial issues, in terms 
and conditions of work. And it actually contains really a variety 
of measures. 
 
So I would say that there isn’t one measure in the agreement 
that is quid pro quo for this aspect of the agreement. This is part 
of a larger package. 
 
Mr. McLane:  When you were discussing with the SMA, 
Mr. Minister, bringing forth this amendment Act, did you 
discuss things like capitation and rosterings and those types of 
issues, as to where your government was prepared to head in 
that respect and give some assurances to the SMA that indeed 
that would be slow in happening, that would indeed happen, or 
indeed it would not happen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. In connection with this legislation 
there have been no such discussions. Because whether or not 
you change the method of payment of physicians does not hinge 
on this legislation. 
 
Certainly I’ve had discussions with the board of the SMA on at 
least one occasion about fee for service versus capitation versus 
service contracts, but not in relation to this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you. It may not have too much to do 
with this legislation. However, if the government of the day 
would have been reluctant to bring forth this, it could have 
caused some hardship, I would suggest, to the SMA in that they 
wouldn’t be able to collect the fees from a great number of 
physicians that chose not to do it. So I’m wondering why that 
would not have been part of the discussion, or if indeed it was 
part of the discussion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’ve already indicated to the member 
that the general discussion of method of payment has not been 
specifically addressed with respect to this legislation. But 
indeed from the SMA’s point of view, it is suffering a hardship 
right now because the fact is there are 15 per cent of the 
physicians approximately that are not on fee for service and 
with respect to whom the SMA is not receiving any payment for 
the services that, from their point of view, they are providing 
for all physicians. 
 
Mr. McLane:  In the explanatory notes that accompanied 
this Bill, on the last page under the explanation of the new 
provision, item 4, it states, the proposed amendment involving 
section 47.1 extends the dues check-off provisions to 
non-fee-for-service physicians providing clinical/direct patient 
services. It goes on to state that this recognizes the ongoing 
shift to other, alternative methods of payment such as capitation 
and salary. 
 
Now it would make me believe that those were part of the 
discussions. I know the minister has said they weren’t. I guess I 
have a couple of questions in this regard. 
 
The first one would be, personally, I haven’t noticed a big shift  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2771 

in the method of payment. I wonder if you could maybe give us 
a little background, Mr. Minister, as to the number of 
fee-for-service physicians, say in 1990  maybe go back to 
1980, ’85, ’90, and to present day. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I don’t have the specific numbers for the 
years that the member refers to, but I’m advised that the figure 
of about 15 per cent of the practising physicians being on 
non-fee-for-service has been more or less the same for the last 
five to seven years, and part of that, it might have been slightly 
lower. Probably not a dramatic change, but some change in the 
last 10 years, but not really all that dramatic; probably 15 per 
cent in the last five to seven years. And that’s about as good as I 
can do at the moment. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, did you, when this legislation 
come forward, did you approve these explanatory notes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well no, I must say I did not. I don’t 
disapprove of them either, but I think I probably saw them at 
the same time that the member saw them as far as I can recall. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well thank you. I guess that would give rise 
to another question then as to when it makes mention of, when 
your department makes mention of, the ongoing shift, if there 
hasn’t been that shift over the last 15 or 20 years, then you must 
be surmising that there’s going to be one over the next five 
years. Could you deny that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I don’t have any definitive idea that 
there would be such a shift. There’s obviously been some shift. 
I mean you can debate whether a small shift is a shift or 
whether a shift has to be a large shift, as is implied in your 
question. 
 
The point is, 15 per cent of the physicians are not on fee for 
service. The SMA is not getting any fee for the service that it 
might provide on behalf of those physicians. There are 
physicians that are expressing an interest in an alternative form 
of payment. There is no hidden plan, if that’s what the member 
fears, at the present time. 
 
But at the same time, I wouldn’t deny that I’ve had discussions 
with physicians and others about changing the fee-for-service 
system, and that’s something I think all governments should be 
looking at and indeed it’s something that a national forum, as 
the member may know, is travelling across Canada to look at. 
 
And indeed if we do change the system, then we will need a 
method by which people who are not paid on a fee-for-service 
will provide some compensation to the SMA. But it is not the 
intent of this legislation to facilitate that kind of change. This 
legislation is necessary to deal with the situation as it is in 
reality today, even as we speak, and as it has been for the last 
several years. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I guess when we talk about the fee for 
service, Mr. Minister, and other alternatives, that’s one thing. 
When we’re talking capitation, that is indeed something else  

and that word again is mentioned here. And it appears, 
according to what you’re saying, is that indeed it is not your 
wish to actually pressure the doctors or some 1,500 doctors that 
we have in this province to alternative methods of payment. 
Although as you said, it is being reviewed right across Canada 
and that’s probably most appropriate. 
 
However, the concern that we might have, would be, that 
whether your government indeed is pressuring in that direction 
in terms of alternative methods, and in particular the capitation, 
which causes some problems which would indeed limit services 
to the people of the province. 
 
Now maybe you don’t have those ideas but maybe you could 
ask your department if that is the direction that they feel is 
appropriate for the medical group in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well of course as minister I will be in 
charge of whatever it is we do. And I can only say that the 
member is correct  that different people have different ideas 
as to how doctors should be paid. There probably is no one 
model that one would go to. But in any event, whatever 
happens in the future with respect to the manner in which 
doctors are paid, will not really hinge one way or the other on 
the legislation that is before the House today. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I appreciate that, Mr. Minister. But for my 
own curiosity, I wonder if I could get you to do a couple things 
in response to what I’m going to ask. And one would be to give 
us your definition of what you believe capitation means. And I 
guess as well, as it relates to the medical profession in this 
province, and in particular the 1,500 doctors. As well as, could 
you also give us your definition of what you believe rostering 
. . . as it pertains to the doctors this province needs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well as I’m sure the member knows . . . I 
want to caution the member that when he asks me about my 
definition of capitation or rostering, if the member is implying 
that I have some system in mind at the moment, the member is 
mistaken. And I’ve explained that to the member. 
 
But as I think the member knows, capitation is a system 
whereby each physician is paid on the basis of the number of 
patients that the physician takes care of. So that you’re paid so 
much per patient as opposed to so much per service provided to 
the patient. 
 
Rostering is a system, I believe, whereby each physician has a 
roster of patients with respect to which that physician is 
responsible. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, normally, this being Tuesday, we have 
private members’ day. And I believe it’s most appropriate that 
private members’ discussions should take place today. The 
government moved a motion which moved us to government 
business. And I disagree that we should be doing that today. 
 
Therefore I would move that this committee rise and report 
progress. 
 



2772  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

The division bells rang from 2:38 p.m. until 2:48 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  29 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Lautermilch 
Kowalsky Renaud Calvert 
Pringle Koenker Bradley 
Lorje Scott Nilson 
Cline Serby Hamilton 
Murray Langford Wall 
Kasperski Ward Sonntag 
Flavel Aldridge McPherson 
Bjornerud Gantefoer  
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, there have been a number of 
concerns we’ve raised with the minister, and we certainly 
appreciate the forthrightness the minister has given us in 
providing his responses and his answers; however we feel there 
are some other important issues that need to be raised and 
therefore at this time I do move, Mr. Deputy Chair, that the 
Chair do now leave the Chair. 

 
The division bells rang from 2:50 p.m. until 2:52 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  28 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Lautermilch 
Kowalsky Renaud Calvert 
Pringle Koenker Bradley 
Lorje Scott Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Flavel 
McLane McPherson Bjornerud 
Gantefoer   
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Chair:  The Chair has erred. I apologize to committee 
members, particularly the third party, who were making their 
wishes known to me. I should have called a vote on each clause. 
I’m going to go back to clause 1 and apologize to committee 
members for my error. 

The division bells rang from 2:55 p.m. until 2:59 p.m. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  27 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Kowalsky 
Renaud Calvert Pringle 
Koenker Bradley Lorje 
Scott Nilson Cline 
Hamilton Murray Langford 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag Flavel McLane 
McPherson Krawetz Gantefoer 
 

Nays  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe that 
we should rise and report progress. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:01 p.m. until 3:02 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  23 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Kowalsky 
Renaud Pringle Koenker 
Lorje Scott Nilson 
Hamilton Murray Langford 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag McLane McPherson 
Krawetz Gantefoer  
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, as we look at the second clause, 
we understand that the government still haven’t caught the 
message. And while there’s a message we’re trying to relay 
here, it seems like the minister responsible is certainly not 
interested in really paying attention. I think it’s certainly 
imperative that we take the time for this message to be released, 
and in regards to this clause that the government give some 
thought to the clause and the necessity for clause 2. 
 
And therefore at this time I move the chairman do now leave 
the Chair. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:05 p.m. until 3:06 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2773 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  23 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Kowalsky 
Renaud Pringle Koenker 
Lorje Scott Nilson 
Hamilton Murray Langford 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag McLane McPherson 
Krawetz Gantefoer  
 
The division bells rang from 3:07 p.m. until 3:14 p.m. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  24 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Koenker Lorje Scott 
Nilson Cline Serby 
Hamilton Murray Langford 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag Thompson McLane 
McPherson Krawetz Gantefoer 
 

Nays  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned earlier, I 
believe that we should be dealing with private members’ Bills 
and motions today . . . business, rather than government 
business. Therefore I would move that this committee rise and 
report progress. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:16 p.m. until 3:17 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  23 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Koenker Lorje Scott 
Nilson Cline Serby 
Hamilton Murray Wall 
Kasperski Ward Sonntag 

 
Thomson McLane McPherson 
Krawetz Gantefoer  
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, at this time I don’t think it would 
be appropriate for us to move into the repealing of section 47 as 
item 3 would suggest. 
 
And therefore at this time I would move that the Deputy Chair 
do leave the Chair. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:18 p.m. until 3:19 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 

Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  23 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Pringle Koenker Lorje 
Scott Nilson Cline 
Serby Hamilton Murray 
Wall Kasperski Ward 
Sonntag Thomson McLane 
McPherson Krawetz  
 
The division bells rang from 3:20 p.m. until 3:21 p.m. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  24 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Thompson 
McLane McPherson Krawetz 
 

Nays 5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, we haven’t had the opportunity yet to do a lot of 
the things that need to be done on this particular Bill. Therefore 
I would move that this committee rise and report progress. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:22 p.m. until 3:23 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 



2774  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  24 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Thomson 
McLane McPherson Krawetz 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 
I look at clause 4 and I certainly would indicate again that the 
Minister of Health was certainly straightforward in his 
responses in addressing concerns we had about clause 4. And 
while we understand what clause 4 is saying, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
we just feel at this time that clause 4 should not be moved 
forward. And therefore, Mr. Deputy Chair, I would move that 
the Deputy Chair do leave the Chair. 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. Committee members, it is of 
course all right to call votes, and that’s fine. The Clerks are 
having an increasing trouble taking the vote and I ask all hon. 
members to allow the vote to be taken without disruption. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:25 p.m. until 3:26 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  24 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Thomson 
McLane McPherson Krawetz 
 
The division bells rang from 3:27 p.m. to 3:28 p.m. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  24 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 

Ward Sonntag Thomson 
McLane McPherson Krawetz 
 

Nays  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 
Clause 5 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Deputy Chairman, I believe at this 
time it would be most appropriate if the committee was to rise 
and report progress. I would so move. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:29 p.m. until 3:30 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  24 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Thomson 
McLane McPherson Krawetz 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Certainly while we 
would acknowledge that sooner or later this clause will be 
passed and this Bill will come into force, it’s not appropriate 
that it be moved ahead at this time. And in no disrespect to the 
Chair, I would move that the Deputy Chair do leave the Chair. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:31 p.m. until 3:32 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 

Nays  25 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Thomson 
McLane McPherson Krawetz 
Gantefoer   



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2775 

The division bells rang from 3:33 p.m. until 3:34 p.m. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  25 
 
Van Mulligen Shillington Johnson 
Whitmore Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Pringle Koenker 
Bradley Scott Nilson 
Cline Hamilton Murray 
Langford Wall Kasperski 
Ward Sonntag Thomson 
McLane McPherson Krawetz 
Gantefoer   
 

Nays 5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Elderhostel 
started in New Hampshire in the late 1970s largely through the 
efforts of one Marty Knowlton. In Canada, Dr. Robert Williston 
of the University of New Brunswick founded a Canadian 
version of the Elderhostel, also in the late 1970s.  
 
The University of Regina seniors’ education centre first hosted 
an Elderhostel in 1990. To date in Canada, there are 
approximately 150 Elderhostel programs at various 
post-secondary educational institutions across Canada. Around 
the world there are about 300,000 Elderhostellers in 60 nations. 
 
This afternoon it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through 
you to all my colleagues in the Assembly, 11 Elderhostellers 
that are visiting the University of Regina’s seniors’ education 
centre. They’re seated in the Speaker’s gallery and they are 
accompanied by coordinators of the program, Marj and George 
Will of Regina. If they would rise when I introduce them, 
please. 
 
So we’ll start with Marj and George, if they could stand. Mrs. 
Marion Adams of Trenton, Ontario. Mrs. Lillian Lee of 
Toronto, Ontario. Virginia Morton of Bettendorf, Iowa. And 
Mrs. Edna Nordin of St. John’s, Newfoundland. Mrs. 
Jacqueline Paterson of Willow Bunch, Saskatchewan. Mrs. 
Marian Rae of Medicine Hat, Alberta. Mrs. Muriel Rogers of 
Medicine Hat, Alberta. Joan Russ of Scarborough, Ontario. 
And Alison Watson of Regina, Saskatchewan. Not able to make 
it was Theresa Klemm of West Chester, Pennsylvania. 
 
I’d ask all members to give a warm welcome to the  

Elderhostellers who are visiting us this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  With leave, Mr. Deputy Chair, to also 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Deputy Chair, I would also like to 
welcome the people from the Elderhostellers here to the 
Assembly. In particular, I’d like to welcome Marj and George 
Will from Regina here. Hopefully they’ve had opportunities 
before to come into the legislature, but if they haven’t, I would 
certainly ask them to come back again and observe the 
proceedings. 
 
I would also like to welcome to the Assembly, Marion, Lillian, 
Virginia, Edna  particularly Edna, being from the U.S. 
(United States), I believe. Our Assembly works considerably 
different than what your legislatures do there. We have a 
unicameral system rather than a bicameral system. I’d also like 
to welcome Jacqueline, Marion, Muriel, Joan, and Alison. 
 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings today. You will get lots of 
opportunity to observe how the members vote in this Assembly 
and some of the other procedures that lead up to that point. You 
will get an opportunity to hear what the bells do, which call 
members in to vote, Mr. Chairman  Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
And I would certainly like to welcome you to stay as long as 
you would like to do so. And thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 77 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I move, Mr. Deputy Chair, that we report 
Bill No. 77 without amendment. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:40 p.m. until 3:41 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  26 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Kowalsky 
Renaud Calvert Pringle 
Koenker Bradley Scott 
Nilson Cline Hamilton 
Murray Langford Wall 
Kasperski Ward Sonntag 
Flavel Thomson McPherson 
Krawetz Gantefoer  
 



2776  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

Nays  5 
 
Boyd D’Autremont Toth 
Heppner Goohsen  
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(1545) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 
Care Insurance Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:46 p.m. until 3.49 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  22 
 
Van Mulligen Mitchell Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Kowalsky 
Pringle Koenker Trew 
Bradley Nilson Cline 
Hamilton Murray Langford 
Wall Kasperski Sonntag 
Flavel Thomson Krawetz 
Gantefoer   

 
Nays  4 

 
D’Autremont Toth Heppner 
Goohsen   
 
The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce any 
officials that he may wish to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, again today we’re assisted by 
Con Hnatiuk, who is deputy minister of Social Services; Neil 
Yeates, associate deputy minister; Bob Wihlidal, director of the 
budget management branch; Phil Walsh, executive director, 
income security division; and Richard Hazel, executive director 
of family and youth services. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, there 
are a number of questions for the committee to review before 
we vote off the debate on the estimates with regards to spending 
in Social Services. 

And one of the questions that was being . . . we raised when the 
House recessed last evening was about youth centres and youth 
treatment centres. And there’s a centre, I believe, at North 
Battleford that’s been facing some problems over the past little 
while, Mr. Minister, and I’m kind of wondering where we sit 
today. 
 
What has your department done to address the concerns and the 
questions that have been coming forward? What 
recommendations has your department brought forward? And 
what have you done to implement a change that would certainly 
address those concerns and make sure the people of North 
Battleford are quite comfortable with the young offender centre 
in the city of North Battleford? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, as you may recall, I had I 
think a relatively long conversation with the member from 
Humboldt around this subject. There has been the Jackson 
report done on the North Battleford centre. Each and every one 
of the recommendations now of the Jackson report have been 
responded to and steps have been taken. And I’d be very 
pleased to provide for the member a printed statement of all the 
responses to each of the recommendations. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d be 
pleased if you’d just take a moment to let us know about some 
of those recommendations in the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Again, Mr. Chair, we did have quite a 
lengthy discussion about that in the House the other night  
some of the concerns that I think have affected the North 
Battleford Youth Centre regarding staff turnover. There’s been 
a high level of staff turnover in that centre. That does not 
continue to be a problem. At the current time, there are only 
two vacant positions. At one time in 1993, back in ’93, we had 
vacancies as high as 17 in that centre. And so that problem is 
being addressed  has been addressed. 
 
There was some question about the use of holding cells within 
the centre. Now holding cells are used when required, but to 
separate youth demonstrating behaviour which puts themselves 
and other residents at risk. 
 
We are working at bringing in more native staffing for the 
facility. There was a fair number of questions about staff 
relationships and staff meetings and communications within the 
centre and we’ve taken some real steps to try and address those 
issues. 
 
So again, I can provide for the member a much more detailed 
comment on the situation at North Battleford. We feel we’ve 
come a long way. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
mention about the staffing and some of the problems that have 
occurred with staffing within the North Battleford centre. Mr. 
Minister, can you inform me as to how many staff members we 
have in the centre today, what there were for numbers of staff 
members for the past year, ’95 and ’94, as well as the number 
of youth that have been treated or been involved in the centre 
over the past three years. 



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2777 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we would have to do the 
research to get the numbers of youth actually held at the facility 
over the course of the three years. Sometimes the facility will be 
full; perhaps at other times, not full. 
 
But to get the actual number . . . I can tell the member that it is 
a 52-bed secure custody facility  52-bed; and there are 50 
permanent staff in the centre. Of that 50 today, 11 are 
aboriginal and three are from other minorities. There are, in 
addition, 65 non-permanent staff. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, if I caught you correctly, you said 
50 permanent and 65 non-permanent. Do I understand you 
correctly on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Minister, when we talk about the centre and individuals that 
are looked after or indeed housed in the centre, and I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, would many or the majority of these 
individuals come from first nations background or is it quite a 
diversity of individuals? And, Mr. Minister, what are some of 
the reasons why we would end up with the numbers as they are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  In fact, Mr. Speaker, this facility tends to 
serve the northern area of our province, and I think 
understandably therefore the majority, I think, of the youth 
incarcerated here would be aboriginal, given that the majority 
of the population in the North is aboriginal. 
 
So yes, it would be true that the majority of young people in 
this facility would be from the North and would be aboriginal. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege this morning of 
talking to a couple of women who are basically doing some 
research for a university professor, and they’re of first nations 
descent. And they had a number of questions and a number of 
different issues, some dealing with education, some dealing 
with health, some dealing with justice. 
 
And I’m wondering . . . Mr. Minister, I’m going to come at it 
from the judicial side of it and just say, one of the things that 
has been done over the past number of years in addressing 
concerns about problems that native people run into, and one of 
the proposals they have put forward, is the idea of sentencing 
circles and addressing with their first nations individuals in that 
matter. 
 
Is this something that could be part of . . . or something along 
that line, that a first nations community could bring forward, 
that might be . . . enhance the role of Social Services in dealing 
with young offenders and certainly the program of youth 
centres across the province? 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair — and here I speak perhaps 
more generally for government than simply for Social Services 
— the area that the member touches in would be in the realm, I 
think, more of Justice and the court system and sentencing and 
so on. But we are supportive of alternate mechanisms, including 
sentencing circles. 
 

We are working with communities, with police forces, with 
others in our province these days, around a concept described as 
restorative justice, which would look at other processes for 
dealing particularly with non-violent crime, particularly with 
young offenders involved in non-violent crime. 
 
It is a matter for Justice. In Social Services we are responsible 
to provide the rehabilitation, the housing, the custody, for 
young offenders. But as government, we are supportive of 
alternates, including sentencing circles and restorative justice 
techniques. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re basically saying, Mr. Minister, is 
while the Department of Justice administers, if you will, the 
law, the fact of looking after . . . And I take it we’re dealing 
with young offenders, individuals  I believe you said under 
the age of 16 in most cases  that you’d be dealing with as far 
as looking after them. 
 
And I think you talked about the idea of helping with some 
counselling, to help with rehabilitation, so that when they 
would leave a centre, they would leave with a different view as 
to how they look at society and how they’re going to become 
very positive members and contributors to society. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could share with us this 
afternoon some of the programing that would be provided, the 
type of programing that is provided, to try and meet the needs 
of young people. And if you will, Mr. Minister, I think what 
I’ve found and what I’ve seen in first nations community on 
many, many occasions, Mr. Minister, is that while . . . And 
certainly of all young people, is the fact that young people 
sometimes can be very inattentive. 
 
And maybe some of the problems that are arising are arising 
because of the fact that they may not have received the care or 
the concern or felt the love in the home and they’ve ended up in 
situations with, if you will, the wrong crowd, ended up with a 
group of peers that have led them in the wrong direction. 
 
And so what I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is, there are so many 
circumstances that individuals have probably had to deal with 
that have caused them to take certain . . . go a certain route and 
make certain choices which have put them in, placed them in, 
conflict with the law. 
 
And in view of that, Mr. Minister, I’m interested in knowing 
what your department is doing to address some of the emotional 
stress and concern that these youth face when certainly they are 
sent to these centres, in some cases, to pay for crimes 
committed as well as to receive counselling and rehabilitation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Just to respond generally to the 
member’s observations, I think we would share much of the 
same observation here. I think in terms of young people, 
sometimes an ounce of prevention is worth a tonne of care. And 
so through the Department of Social Services, we work very 
closely with, for instance, the family service bureaux of 
Saskatchewan that provide significant resources to families, 
individuals, young people, in terms of counselling and so on. 
 



2778  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

In terms of the appropriate response to a young person who’s 
been involved in a criminal activity, whether that’s been the 
result of hanging around with the wrong crowd or however that 
has happened, we are looking and searching for mechanisms, 
both to get tough on the crime, but to also restore some justice 
and to restore the life that headed down the wrong track. 
 
And so there’s a whole number of issues and options now that 
. . . We’re working with police forces. I’m looking forward to 
joining with a number of police officers later this week to talk 
about some of these very issues. We think that there can be 
better ways to do what we’re doing to strengthen our young 
people, to make them accountable for their actions, but equally, 
not to set them into a life of crime. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well certainly, Mr. Minister, we need to take the 
time to look at other options and alternatives and giving young 
people a reason to reassess where they may be going with their 
lives and how they approach the daily living cycle. I think, Mr. 
Minister, that some of your government’s policies certainly 
haven’t helped the situation. 
 
This whole policy of gambling was another issue that came up 
today and it was interesting to just get a general feeling of 
where these two individuals that I was talking to were coming 
from. They certainly were not in favour of your gambling 
policy. 
 
One of the problems that we find in our society at the present 
time, Mr. Minister, is occasions where young people are left on 
their own because the parents have found that because of the 
convenience it’s a lot easier now to complete work and maybe 
grab a quick bite and run off either to the hotel and run that 
VLT (video lottery terminal) machine and spend all night at it 
and just give up all their funds, or lose all their money, or run to 
the casino. 
 
And as a result, young people are left without any real direction 
in their lives. And they end up in the situations where they’re 
out with their peers and they start getting into trouble because it 
appears that well, if mom and dad can do it, if they don’t really 
care, then why should I care. It doesn’t really matter. No one 
else cares so I’m going to do my own thing. They’re just 
looking for some support; they’re looking for some 
encouragement; they’re looking for some love and care at 
home. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, when you’re sitting down with the 
police forces across the province this week, I trust you’ll take a 
look and maybe even take the time to give second thought to 
some of the policies and how they have hurt family 
relationships, relationships and concerns, which can lead to 
some of the problems that our youth are facing today. 
 
So I trust, Mr. Minister, you will indeed be more than open and 
more than willing to sit down and listen to some of the concerns 
that our police officers are facing as they deal with individuals 
on the street on a daily basis. 
 
And talking about dealing with individuals on the street, I just 
noticed in the paper today that officers responded to a call  

yesterday where a young person had a gun in his belt buckle, 
and it wasn’t till they had finally confiscated the weapon that 
they realized it was nothing more than an air pistol. 
 
However, even air pistols can look very real and you don’t 
know exactly what they are until you find them. And certainly 
people in the neighbourhood were quite concerned. But one 
would wonder why a young person would be walking around 
wearing this air pistol in his belt buckle. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Minister, I know there is a number of these 
issues that need to be raised, and I would certainly recommend 
that you take the time to not only listen but go with some ideas. 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department has 
done and some of the ideas you are putting forward to address 
some of the concerns that the officials run into and see on a 
daily basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member has quite a broad, 
wide-ranging statement there. If I could maybe perhaps refocus 
on some of the very specific things we are doing. 
 
As I said before and particularly in terms of young people, very 
often the ounce of prevention is sure worth a pound of cure, if 
not a tonne of cure. So we are endeavouring to, in addition to 
continuing to provide the custody facilities and so on, to be 
working full stop on issues around prevention and 
rehabilitation. 
 
We also know that we cannot separate young people from the 
context of their family or those around them and the 
communities in which they live. Someone, I think, a lot wiser 
than I once said that it takes a village to raise a child; that none 
of us are raised in isolation or grow up in isolation. We grow up 
with neighbours, with friends, with family, and in some ways it 
does take a village to raise a child. 
 
And perhaps one of the tragedies of our modern circumstance is 
that we live so separate and apart from each other in our own 
little boxes with our own little VCRs (video cassette recorder), 
and sometimes we just don’t have that same community and 
village contact that we might have had in other times. 
 
And so we need to be working in prevention. We need to be 
working in rehabilitation. We also need to be conscious of the 
requirement that we involve families, parents, grandparents, 
aunts, uncles, and the community  the village, the 
neighbourhood  the community in which we live. 
 
We have  in terms of dealing with some of these very specific 
issues and in terms of giving options to custody, options to the 
traditional jail approach  we have now seven family 
preservation programs which provide 24-hour services seven 
days a week to youth and families as an alternative to custody. 
We are working with a variety of community groups, 
individuals, Indian and Metis governments to provide day 
programs, academic and life skill programs, school re-entry 
programs, recreational cultural activities. 
 
We have now programs somewhat in infancy but growing  
and I would like to see them grow more  that link the young  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2779 

person, again a young person that’s involved in non-violent 
property crime, to link those young people with their victims; to 
bring the young person who has committed the act face to face 
with the victim. 
 
Now this won’t occur in every circumstance and it’s not 
perhaps appropriate in every circumstance, but in some 
circumstances a young person will tell you it’s much more 
difficult to face my victim face to face and have to own up to 
that consequence than it is to face a judge and a courtroom 
where lawyers are representing everybody. 
 
And so we have circumstances now where we describe them as 
alternate measures program where victims and offenders 
voluntarily meet face to face, and the outcomes may include 
some personal service offered to the victim. It may mean 
compensation paid in money or it may mean appropriate 
community service. It may mean an apology. It may mean that 
the young person submits then to counselling. It may mean that 
the young person will submit to alcohol or drug rehabilitation. 
Or it may mean that they will be responsible for undertaking 
some other kind of community service. 
 
There’s a project here in Regina and Saskatoon which is now 
providing an alternate measure to deal with young people who 
are caught shoplifting. Rather than entering the formal court 
process and all that goes with that, in fact, they are brought to 
account to the store owner or the business where they have been 
guilty of shoplifting. So they’re accountable then to the 
corporate victim as opposed to an individual victim. 
 
So there are . . . and there are many others  ideas, programs, 
plans  that we are working on because we think we can 
accomplish more for our young people, bring down the 
numbers of young people involved in crime, and in that sense, 
get very tough on the criminal act by making individuals 
responsible to the broader society but also to the victims who 
they’ve hurt. 
 
I’m going to indicate, Mr. Chair, to the member that my 
responsibilities now will be taken over by the House Leader, 
ably taken over by the House Leader, and that I’m required to 
attend to another function at 4:30. If we continue with estimates 
beyond the supper break, I will certainly be returning and gladly 
speaking to the members and answering the questions. 
 
So in my absence the House Leader who seems . . . When the 
House Leader returns he will fill in. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well with leave, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you. To you, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, and through you to all members of the Legislative 
Assembly, I would like to introduce to you 45 grade 6 students  

sitting in the west gallery. 
 
They are from Wagner School in Nipawin, one of the most 
beautiful towns in Saskatchewan. They are accompanied today 
by teachers Michael Botterill, Paul Thomas, and Debbie 
Chorney; and chaperons Mrs. Jurgens, Mrs. Unger, Mr. 
Armstrong, and Mrs. LeCuyer. 
 
Now Nipawin, Mr. Chairman, is set in the pines in 
north-eastern Saskatchewan. It’s set on the banks of the 
Saskatchewan River. It’s sitting between Codette Lake and 
Tobin Lake. It’s noted for its tourists. It gets many, many 
tourists during the year. They have excellent fishing. They have 
a wonderful golf course. They have skiing not far away. 
 
And I know that they will enjoy the Committee of Finance  
that’s what’s happening right now. I know the Minister of 
Social Services, who just left, was in Nipawin last week to talk 
to students there. So please join with me in welcoming our 
guests from Nipawin. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair:  I recognize the hon. member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  With leave, Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I would 
like to join with the minister in welcoming our guests from 
Nipawin. I see that this is a large and relatively young group, 
and I’d like to mention to them that my brother was a doctor in 
Nipawin a number of years ago and could very well have 
delivered a number of these children, and I hope that they 
would remember him fondly in that sense. 
 
Nipawin is indeed a very, very lovely part of Saskatchewan  I 
have visited it very often. I hope that they enjoy their trip down 
to Regina, that they find the Assembly an interesting place. And 
I would like to ask everyone to again welcome them to our 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
The Chair:  I recognize the hon. member for Rosthern. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I’d also like to welcome this 
group of students to the legislature today. Statements made 
earlier on that the Minister of Social Services had been in your 
community recently, and it’s interesting that the teacher that 
invited him there to that particular class is a very good friend of 
mine. In fact he asked me if I thought if it was a good move to 
invite the Minister of Social Services, and I highly  



2780  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

recommended him. And so he went down there and enjoyed it. 
 
I’ve done some fishing and some hunting in your area and I 
have to agree with the other people that welcomed you that you 
live in a very beautiful part of the province. And we’re also 
very proud of this particular building and what it stands for. I 
hope you enjoy your time in Regina and in the legislature and 
remember fondly your visit here. 
 
Welcome to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
it’s unfortunate that the Minister of Social Services had other 
commitments at this time. I’m not exactly sure that the 
Government House Leader is going to be as cordial as the 
Minister of Social Services was, but we’ll certainly attempt a 
try. 
 
Mr. Minister, your colleague and I were addressing how we 
address programs that kind of deal with young people and help 
them become affiliated and put them back in society and help 
them become productive members of society. And your 
colleague had just finished giving some of the ideas and 
presenting them, that have been brought forward by the 
department. 
 
But an area that I wanted to get into was a discussion on the . . . 
some debate or discussion around the discussion paper that the 
Department of Social Services is bringing forward. I believe the 
member from Humboldt raised some questions about that the 
other day. 
 
But I would just like to know: to date, Mr. Minister, what 
consultations have taken place in regards to that paper; the 
groups that have been talked to; whether or not you’ve had any 
public consultations about this process; and indeed the response 
to this paper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The department . . . the minister and 
the officials have met with over 250 different individuals and 
groups. I’m assured by the officials that the approach has met 
with overwhelming support from those who have contacted the 
department. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, in these meetings, have these 
meetings been public meetings so far or have they been 
basically meetings based on invitations that have been sent out 
to groups that the department are aware of would have more of 
an interest and more of a willingness to sit down and discuss 
the paper as well as bring forward some suggestions? 
 
And if they have been, just more on the basis of invitations, is  

the department planning any broad, public consultative 
meetings for some input? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Many of them have been public 
meetings. And there have of course been a number of private 
meetings, but many of them have been public meetings. There 
has, in our view, been adequate opportunity for the public to 
have input into this. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well certainly, Mr. Minister, as I observed in 
looking over the report, there were a number of 
recommendations in that report that I can certainly concur with 
and pass those on. 
 
In fact, Mr. Minister, when the Minister of Social Services was 
in Yorkton at a consultation meeting regarding the budget, he 
had asked the public at that time how they felt and if they had 
seen this report on changes to Social Services. And as I was 
talking to individuals in the audience that night, I asked them as 
well for their input and what their views were. 
 
And I certainly contend with you, Mr. Minister, and your 
department, that as people began to review the report and as 
they took more of an in-depth review and as they heard a little 
more about it, there certainly was a broad consensus that there 
were some good, positive thoughts being brought forward. And 
I guess if there was a concern, it was about the fact of whether 
or not any of this report would come to fruition. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the minister: what is the 
department doing today as far as the report? Are they still in a 
mode of consulting with people? Or are they in the process now 
of taking information they’ve gleaned from their meetings, with 
public meetings and individuals, to come forward with a 
recommendation to government as to how they would like to 
implement it, and certainly pointing out the areas that they feel 
that could be addressed today and other areas that they need 
more discussion on? Where are we today on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The answer to your question really is 
both. The throne speech announced that this would be 
implemented in 1997. Something earlier than that may be 
possible with some cooperation by the federal government. 
 
And we note there have been encouraging comments from the 
federal government, the latest of which was today. And I 
received a text, in fact, of the Prime Minister’s speech in which 
he led us to be encouraged that the issue of child poverty would 
be attacked, and attacked directly. 
 
So our target was 1997. However we . . . There’s some hope 
that perhaps there may be some significant movement across 
the country before that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, you mentioned the fact that you’re 
hoping to have something done about this report or implement 
it in 1997. My concern is, as we’ve been discussing and 
debating over the last six months, that one would wonder 
whether, in view of the promises that have been made with 
regards to the CCTA agreement and the review process and 
presenting it, a report to the stakeholders as well as this  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2781 

Assembly . . . And the fact that you’ve basically said well it was 
going to be ready last fall; then it was going to be ready this 
spring; then one of the ministers said, well we’ll have it to you 
by May 1. And then when May 1 came, well we hope to have a 
report revealed by the middle of June. 
 
And we’re still waiting, Mr. Minister, and I guess . . . and based 
on the concerns that members across the floor have, that’s the 
concern we have with regards to this report. Is it going to be: 
well today we hope to implement it in 1997. But as we get into 
1997 and 1997 rolls along, all of a sudden the recommendations 
of the report aren’t coming forward. Is this just going to be put 
off? 
 
Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that it would be appropriate 
to at least have a target time rather than saying “hope” . . . 
We’re planning on, and we plan on and would like to see it up 
and operating, if you will, by April 1. 
 
Now I realize that you may need some help from the federal 
government on this issue. But the realities are, I think the 
people of this province are losing, if you will, hope; and 
believing that, just hoping to have something done, means 
anything any more. They want to see something specific. So if 
when you say that the CCTA agreement, a review of this matter, 
is going to be on a certain date, that it’s going to be there rather 
than being put off. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, can you give  I realize that you’re not the 
minister responsible for the department  but maybe as House 
Leader can you give . . . indicate that as House Leader you 
certainly will inform the minister responsible that it would be 
appropriate that we get on with this matter. And if it depends on 
the federal government, maybe we forget about the federal 
government and we implement it and show the people of 
Canada what this province can do to address these concerns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, I think the opposite is true. 
Rather than having been later than target, I think the hope is 
that we’ll actually be earlier than the target. Target date was set 
to be 1997 for such broad, sweeping reforms. We think that’s 
reasonable. However, it looks as if something may be possible 
before that and that’s actually what we’re aiming at. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and the officials here today. I’d like to 
ask the House Leader, since he is replacing the Minister of 
Social Services this afternoon in these estimates, if he could 
please explain for me the role that Social Services might play in 
child support, in maintenance. 
 
A number of your clientele have approached me over time at 
various periods because they have a great deal of difficulty 
collecting their maintenance payments. I had another one this 
morning, Mr. Minister, that phoned me. And it seems to be an 
ongoing, reoccurring problem and many times within the same 
families. 
 
A lot of times these are your clients. If the maintenance 
payments were made properly and on time, if the maintenance 
payments were of the proper level, perhaps these people would  

not need to be on social services, would not need to be clients, 
and therefore would not need to be on the roll of using 
taxpayers’ dollars. Most of these people would prefer not to be 
in that position, but unfortunately because maintenance is not 
forthcoming in the proper time, they have to go to Social 
Services for assistance. 
 
The lady that phoned me this morning, her spouse is 
approximately three years behind in his maintenance payments; 
he’s moved to British Columbia. There seems to be a great deal 
of difficulty moving back and forth with the jurisdictions to 
enforce maintenance orders, to get the people into court, to 
move through the process. 
 
I have talked to the Minister of Justice about this. I had 
assurances that British Columbia was looking into the situation. 
When the lady phoned British Columbia to find out what was 
happening, they knew nothing. They didn’t have a clue what 
was supposed to be going on. Supposedly British Columbia was 
supposed to take this person who was supposed to pay the 
maintenance, to court. That hadn’t happened to the best of the 
knowledge of the maintenance board person that was talked to 
in British Columbia. 
 
So I think it’s important, Mr. Minister, that Saskatchewan 
Social Services, in those areas where it is involved  people 
who are dependent on Social Services for assistance  that the 
Social Services department should play a leading role in 
encouraging the Minister of Justice and his department and the 
maintenance board to pursue these errant fathers, in most cases 
 perhaps in some cases, errant mothers  who do not meet 
their maintenance payments. 
 
And I think it’s incumbent on the Social Services department 
when they’re involved in paying out maintenance  excuse me, 
not maintenance  support in these cases, where maintenance 
is being reneged on, where children are not receiving what they 
should do, what their dues are from their fathers — in most 
cases, sometimes perhaps their mothers — I think it’s very 
incumbent on your department or actually the Minister of Social 
Services’s department to deal with this. 
 
And in fact since you are the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs serving this afternoon in place of the Minister of Social 
Services, perhaps you should be talking with your counterparts 
in British Columbia and across the province to find a solution 
to this problem, so that maintenance orders issued in a province 
such as Saskatchewan are enforceable in British Columbia or in 
Newfoundland or wherever across this great dominion the 
people move to. 
 
I think it causes a great deal of harm to the children who fail to 
receive their maintenance support because they, Mr. Minister, 
are the ones who are losing out. As this mother said today to 
me, how is my child supposed to carry on in Air Cadets when 
the father refuses to pay any support whatsoever, and she has a 
very limited income. 
 
It’s not the parents that lose out, Mr. Minister, it’s the children 
that are losing out. They are being denied the access to the same 
opportunities that other children are being denied. 



2782  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

So Mr. Minister, what is your department doing? What role do 
you play in those cases where Social Services is involved with 
parents who are supposed to be receiving maintenance support 
and where that maintenance support is not forthcoming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Let me pay the former administration 
a rare compliment  at least it’s rare coming from me — one 
of the few areas where I thought the former government was 
very effective was in this area. Prior to 1986 it was incumbent 
upon a recipient of . . . it was incumbent upon someone who is 
a recipient of maintenance to enforce it themselves. That posed 
peculiar hardship for those on social services, because they 
would often get an order their social assistance be reduced. 
Then they had to collect it, couldn’t do it, missed out, and all in 
all it was a horrifying circus. 
 
One of the changes which the now . . . Mr. Justice Lane, the 
current . . . the former attorney general, made was that they 
introduced the system of having the Attorney General’s 
department, the Minister of Justice, the Department of Justice, 
collect the maintenance. 
 
It really was very effective. The default rate prior to that was a 
shocking 85 per cent  85 per cent of maintenance orders were 
in default. That’s now been reduced to 25 per cent. It really is 
quite a change. 
 
(1630) 
 
The member also pointed to one of the difficulties which we 
have, and that is interjurisdictional orders. They are a problem, 
partially because other jurisdictions don’t have a system as 
effective as we do, partially because of the difficulties of having 
these orders registered and re-registered. 
 
I’m now going to refer to a particular hero of yours, the federal 
Minister of Justice. 
 
An Hon. Member:  You hit him where it hurts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, if these comments reduce you to 
an unintelligible state, the member from Moosomin will have to 
take over. 
 
But the Minister of Justice has been most helpful on this area. 
In a program they have, they have been pursuing improvements 
which they would facilitate in interjurisdictional collections. 
 
So the member has referred to one difficulty in 
interjurisdictional collections. We’re pursuing that the only way 
we can, with the assistance of the federal government. And to 
the extent that the member from Cannington has any influence 
with the current Minister of Justice, you may want to encourage 
them to proceed as quickly as they can with their program. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think 
my influence on the federal Justice minister, Allan Rock, is 
about as great as my influence on you. At least though, I have a 
chance to talk directly with you, and the Minister of Justice is 
nowhere to be found any time you want to talk to him. 
 

Mr. Minister, I believe there are though some reciprocal 
agreements in place that deal with maintenance transfers across 
provincial boundaries. How does Social Services deal with 
those as it pertains to the Social Service clients who should be 
receiving maintenance payments and who are receiving 
maintenance payments? 
 
But what avenues, what actions, do you take when one of your 
clients is not receiving her maintenance payments or his 
maintenance payments? Does Social Services say we will 
contact the jurisdiction involved to seek that maintenance 
support? And is your reaction any different when the 
maintenance support is failing within the province as opposed 
to from outside of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’ll spare you a long speech here. 
This is a long tale of woe, at least for me personally. Back in 
the days of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), 
back in the ‘50s, the CCF used to pay maintenance to . . . used 
to pay social assistance to recipients; they collected the 
maintenance. 
 
Then during the Liberal years of the government of Ross 
Thatcher, that system was abandoned. It was up to the social 
welfare recipients to collect it. It was a horrifying system. 
 
And it was not until relatively recently that we resumed the 
system of social assistance recipients getting their social 
assistance. The Department of Justice collects it, as they try to 
collect everything else. When the money from those people is 
collected, it’s returned to the treasury. But the social service 
recipients do not lose their social assistance by reason of failure 
of the spouses to pay maintenance. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  The social service recipients you say 
don’t lose their social assistance when their maintenance comes 
in. But surely their maintenance, if they’re getting  I’ll just 
pull a number out of the air because I don’t know what a social 
service assistance would be  but let’s say it’s $1,000 a month, 
if they receive a support payment of $400 for two children, 
would they still only end up with at the end of the month, 
$1,000 or would they end up with some portion above that 
$1,000 which is the maintenance for the children involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This is what I tried to explain and 
perhaps didn’t do so very well. As I said, during the ‘50s and 
early ‘60s, the social service recipients got their social 
assistance. Maintenance was assigned to the provincial treasury 
and it went to provincial treasury. They didn’t get it and they 
didn’t lose it. 
 
It took us about 30 years, it took us almost 30 years, to return to 
that system but we’re back to that system again. Social service 
recipients get their social assistance. Their maintenance is 
assigned to the provincial treasury and it is provincial treasury 
which gets the backlog when we get it. It is a much more 
humane and a much more effective system. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  So under this system, someone who’s on 
social assistance really isn’t concerned about whether 
maintenance is paid or not then. Because they receive their  



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2783 

social assistance regardless, from the department. It’s then the 
department’s duty to try and collect that maintenance from 
whoever the court order has been applied against. Is that the 
case? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, that’s the case, but that’s the 
case with everybody. Everybody, whether they’re on social 
assistance or not, now files their return with the ministry of 
Justice, and the ministry of Justice collects it. So social service 
recipients aren’t treated any different than anyone else. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me 
that they are. If someone is self-employed, let’s say, and 
collecting maintenance, it would go through the maintenance 
board. But if that maintenance isn’t paid to the maintenance 
board, the maintenance board then would not turn around and 
pass that maintenance on to the person who was entitled to it. 
 
In the case of Social Services though, Social Services pays the 
person their social service allowance and then turns around and 
tries to collect the maintenance. If the maintenance is not 
collected, the person on social services loses nothing. The 
department suffers the loss. 
 
In the case of the independent person who would be getting 
maintenance from the maintenance board through the Minister 
of Justice, if that maintenance isn’t paid, they simply don’t get 
their money. So in actual fact a person on social services, in this 
sense is better off under that system than the independent 
person is who is relying on the maintenance board to collect the 
money and pass it on to them. Because under that system, no 
money collected means no money returned. 
 
And that is exactly what’s happening in a number of cases. The 
money simply isn’t paid to them. The maintenance board, 
perhaps within the province, will take the individual to court to 
collect the money, and then some of it is remitted on to the 
person who is entitled to it. 
 
But under the social service system, the person entitled to the 
maintenance receives the maintenance whether or not your 
department has collected it. So I think that they are better off 
than the person under the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That may be. In that narrow sense, 
that may be accurate. 
 
The view of the Department of Social Services, and I think the 
view of most humane people, is that people on social assistance 
are getting the minimum needed to care for themselves and 
their children. To lose a substantial portion of that in any 
maintenance payment is a very substantial portion of the social 
assistance. To lose a substantial portion of that creates very 
severe problems. 
 
With respect to the efficiency and the effectiveness of a 
collection of maintenance for non-social service recipients, 
these questions really should be addressed to the Minister of 
Justice when his estimates are up. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, what happens in the case  

where your department is trying to collect maintenance from a 
spouse residing outside of this province? Do you pursue that as 
a department? Do you pursue that through the Minister of 
Justice? Do you have some other, reciprocal agreements with 
other Social Services departments across the country? What 
mechanisms do you use to try and pursue that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The Minister of Justice pursues that. 
I could describe the procedure for it if you like, but I’d just be 
describing the legal procedures. The Department of Justice 
pursues those collections. This department is really only 
responsible for providing care for social services recipients. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  What kind of a record does the Justice 
department then have on collecting the maintenance due to the 
Social Services department? Do they collect 10 per cent? 100 
per cent? What kind of numbers are we looking at 
percentage-wise, and what kind of total dollars are we looking 
at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m told that they don’t have those 
figures with them. I’ll undertake on behalf of the minister to 
provide those figures to you. I’m told they don’t have those 
stats physically with them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I think they would be very 
important information, Mr. Minister, because it would be 
interesting to compare those numbers  the collections for a 
government department  and compare that to the collections 
of maintenance for those people who are not being represented 
by a government department. 
 
And I think that would be extremely important and extremely 
telling on how the system is working, whether or not the social 
service system . . . Because the recipients of the money, the 
children, are not at a loss if the maintenance is not paid, 
whereas if they’re not under the social service system, if the 
maintenance is not paid, those children suffer directly because 
of that. 
 
Now I’m not saying that children under social assistance aren’t 
also being denied access to some of the things that children in 
general have access to, but certainly under the system of the 
maintenance, they are receiving their full entitlement and their 
full benefit from the maintenance whereas a child outside of the 
system does not if they do not receive their maintenance 
payment. 
 
So I think it would be extremely important that we receive those 
numbers as quickly as possible, Mr. Minister, and I’d like your 
assurance that those numbers will be so provided. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We’ll provide them as quickly as is 
reasonably possible. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
notice that there’s a substantial sum of money that goes into 
services protecting children from abuse and neglect and gives 
support to families and communities. And I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, if you just could inform us of the particular services 
that are presently available in the department to meet the  



2784  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

specific cases that do come forward and how you deal with 
them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  These services are in general 
adoption, foster care, child protection, and residential services. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, does Social Services offer any kind 
of a program for individuals who may be in an abusive situation 
looking for some help or assistance, or does that come under 
Justice? Let’s say a woman who may find herself in a situation 
where there’s abuse and is under direct need of care and is 
looking for some assistance. Is that handled under your 
department, or is that outside of the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, assistance where it’s appropriate 
would come directly or indirectly from this department. 
Sometimes it’s through the shelters themselves. That’s the 
general case. There might be occasions upon which they’d be 
eligible for social assistance, and that would be reviewed. 
 
The legalities of it all, however, is handled by the Department 
of Justice. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So if a woman were facing a situation with a 
young family where there was severe abuse, and in particular, 
some of the areas where abuse really becomes very, very severe 
and becomes a hardship is in an alcohol situation where a 
spouse may come home, and certainly maybe spent too much 
time either at the local establishment or whatever, but comes 
home and certainly he is not in total control of his faculties and 
creates a situation where it’s difficult for a spouse or partner to 
continue to put up with the abuse that they’re receiving. Would 
they make a call to your department? 
 
I believe there’s a 1-800 number available, and I’m wondering, 
is that run by your department as well? And how would your 
department then deal with this situation, especially when you 
get outside of our larger urban centres where a person may be in 
a rural setting or on a farm and may need some help. Is there 
someone who is there to provide some help or assistance for 
say, a mother and her young children, for a period of time until 
the abusive situation is dealt with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — There’s a number of calls they could 
make, none of which would be to this department. By far and 
away, the most commonly  in the situation where there’s 
some danger to life and limb  by far the most common is to 
call the police. They might also call one or two social agencies, 
Mobile Crisis, or they may call the transition houses 
themselves, none of which are to this department. There is no 
1-800 number in this department. The department isn’t directly 
involved in those sort of very front line kind of services. 
 
Mr. Toth:  When it comes to child abuse or child neglect, 
Mr. Minister, what avenues does the department follow up in 
dealing with these? Let’s say a person should happen to put 
forward a complaint or a view that there might be child abuse 
taking place, whether it’s in a home or whether it’s even say on 
a playground, what avenues does your department follow up in 
dealing with these situations? 
 

(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There is a protocol for following up 
on that. When there is evidence brought to the attention of the 
department, whether that be in the form of complaints or 
otherwise  a teacher might call and say there’s room to be 
concerned  the department does follow up on that. There’s a 
protocol to be followed. 
 
And they attempt to balance the interests of all parties. The 
parents have rights; the children have rights. In the end of the 
day, however, there has to be a certain tilting of the system 
towards protection of children, and that’s done. But there’s a 
delicate problem here of balancing the rights of parents against 
the protection of children. In the case where they conflict, the 
protection of children really comes first. And when you think 
about it, I think most fair-minded people would agree that’s 
appropriate. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I certainly agree with you, Mr. Minister, because 
I’ve had concerns raised on both sides of the scale. Situations 
where individuals may have felt that when an abusive situation 
as they saw it was reported, the feeling that it may not have 
been acted upon quickly enough or responded to. And yet on 
the other hand, where individuals who ended up being dealt 
with and having the department respond, feeling that the 
department may have overreacted. 
 
So it’s certainly imperative that in a situation where a person 
may suspect abuse, where a call is made to your department to 
look into it, that the rights of the child and the rights of the 
parents and all involved . . . Even in a school situation, I think 
it’s very easy sometimes where you may find individuals and 
even students making accusations against teachers out of 
frustrations with the fact that they may feel that they haven’t 
been treated fairly on an exam or whatever. That there is a 
broad policy out there that certainly there’s a total review done 
and that everything is handled very discreetly. So that indeed at 
the end of the day legitimate complaints are addressed, and 
addressed appropriately, and that these concerns certainly are 
raised and at the same time that people are responsible and held 
accountable for their actions. 
 
Mr. Minister, I raised some questions regarding adoption 
yesterday as well and a couple of other questions that have 
come up. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, when it comes to 
adoptions, first of all what are the qualifications to be an 
adoptive parent that the department uses when they work 
through an adoption process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There are very few children available 
for adoption these days. The vast majority of children which are 
available for adoption have special needs. Thus the officials tell 
me that the overwhelming approach here is that you attempt to 
assess the needs of the children, then you try to match that with 
the skills of the parents. 
 
And given the few number of children available for adoption 
it’s a case of one on. It always has been I guess, but much more 
so now. It’s a case of one on one, matching the needs of the 
children  and as I say, they’re often special needs children   



June 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2785 

with the particular skills and ability of the parents. And that’s 
the approach. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, given the fact that there are 
so many parents . . . individuals who would like to be parents 
and would like to have a family, I would take it then from your 
comments that the demand for children or individuals wishing 
to adopt children is much higher than the number of children 
that are available. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  That’s true. The number of children 
put up for adoption is a fraction of what it once was. 
Single-parent families are, if not the norm, they’re certainly 
very common. A couple of decades ago it was a very 
considerable scandal  pregnancy out of wedlock. Now while 
it may not be the accepted . . . it’s certainly not the norm, but 
the stigma to single parenthood is no longer there and most 
single parents keep their children. So the demand far, far 
exceeds supply. 
 
In fact I’m told by the officials that most of the children which 
are available, the mother is often involved in picking the 
parents so that there is some continuity between the mother and 
the child even although their actual parenting duties may be 
done elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I can appreciate that, Mr. Minister. And 
certainly as I look at the adoption process and as I get couples 
even coming into my office seeking my assistance as to the 
process they may follow in adopting a child, I’m aware, Mr. 
Minister, of the fact that there have been groups, and I’m not 
sure whether the Department of Social Services has been 
involved or not, and I’d like you to clarify it, but there are 
countries around the world where there are a lot of children 
who do not have families. Children in homes where they really 
have no one to care for them. 
 
And a number of people even in this city of Regina and this 
province of Saskatchewan have planned and have put in process 
a form of adopting not just interprovincially, but outside of the 
country. And I’m wondering what process, Mr. Minister, we 
have in place today and how many adoptions . . . or how many 
adoptions are in the process. And what kind of understandings 
we have with other countries of the world as far as allowing 
some of those children, young people, to come to this country 
and to be adopted by families who would certainly provide a 
loving family environment versus the institutional environment 
that they are basically in today, and in many cases just a 
number. 
 
And I know there are, and I’ve heard of, and I’ve had 
individuals who have been to other countries who have 
mentioned some of the plight of these type of individuals. And 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what the department is doing to 
address the concerns and the questions that are coming from 
adoptive parents regarding going outside of the province to 
adopt children. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Canada certainly cooperates on this. 
It’s really a national question. Canada cooperates on this. We’re 
a signatory to The Hague Agreement, to The Hague  

Convention, and Saskatchewan is included in that of course. 
 
I want to say that the statistics here are quite startling. There 
have been 29 placements only, since January 1995. The truth of 
the matter is, almost all foreign countries discourage these 
adoptions. They do not want the youth of the nation being 
shipped out of the country, and almost all countries discourage 
this. 
 
There are adopting arrangements with Romania, China, and 
Russia, among others. All three countries discourage it. An 
element of nationalism  perhaps unfortunate  an element of 
nationalism here that makes this very difficult. As I say, there 
have been 29 since January 1995. 
 
I know that those who have, is a very long, difficult procedure 
as well and often involves enormous expense living in a foreign 
country for months on end to complete the adoption 
arrangements. 
 
The difficulty is, while it sounds humanitarian and probably is 
humanitarian, foreign countries . . . almost all foreign nations 
discourage the adoption of the youth of the nation. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well certainly, Mr. Minister, I can appreciate 
that. And certainly we have seen on . . . via our TVs and 
certainly heard through the other news mediums of situations 
where families have worked through this process and it has 
taken a good long time for the families who have been able to 
put in motion the adoptive procedures, and have gone to 
countries like Romania to adopt children. And many cases, I 
think, Mr. Minister, many of these families certainly indicated it 
took a lot longer than they thought. There was a lot of emotion, 
a real emotional drain, as they were going through the process 
and the red tape. 
 
And I guess if you will, Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, 
the concern we have is the fact that while there are families who 
would love to provide a good, loving and caring home, there are 
children around the world who are living in situations, very 
deplorable situations. It’s unfortunate that other nations of the 
world cannot look beyond their own borders. 
 
And I can appreciate their views of nationalism. I can 
appreciate the fact that they want to keep their young people at 
home. But some of the situations that have been described to 
me, some of the situations that have been raised via the news 
media, would certainly indicate that anyone who would desire 
to adopt one of these children is certainly going to provide an 
avenue and an atmosphere that was much more conducive to 
the well-being of that individual. 
 
And I guess all we can do, Mr. Minister, is work through 
national programs, work through international agencies, work 
with other countries in trying to reassure them that we’re not 
. . . it’s not the intention of the province of Saskatchewan or 
families within the province of Saskatchewan or certainly in 
Canada to just go and steal away the young people. 
 
It’s the desire to provide a loving and caring home in view of 
the fact that we do not have the numbers of children in this  



2786  Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 1996 

country that are available for adoption, as well as taking 
children out of an environment that really is nothing more than 
an institution where they really don't have that care, in some 
cases. 
 
And while I realize we can’t do much about it, I think it’s . . . 
what we need to do, even as a province, is to reiterate to these 
other nations that there are families who could provide very 
loving and caring homes and could assist you through a time of 
change in your nation, as you try to address those changes. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, it’s important that we just let other 
nations know, even if it’s by the federal government, that there 
are some very loving homes here who would like to reach out to 
people. And I would encourage you and your department, 
whenever an opportunity arises, just to let even ambassadors 
from other countries know that there are these opportunities 
here if they are in a process of finding that they need some help 
in that matter. So I would encourage you to do that. 
 
Would the fact that there have been major changes in how 
adoptions are handled and the fact that the birth mothers are 
now involved very intimately with the adoption procedures and 
birth mothers are aware of and even choose who the adoptive 
parents are . . . there isn’t as much of a need any more, Mr. 
Minister, for a program or policy whereby adopted children 
need to look and do a lot of research to find out who their real 
parents were. 
 
But I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, for those who still are . . . 
were adopted a number of years ago, before this process 
changed, what is in place today to assist a child or a parent in 
locating the birth parent or the child? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There has been some progress made 
in that regard. Effective June 1, 1995 the department allows 
searches for an adopted adult at the request of the birth parent. 
So this is facilitated now. 
 
The time is 3 minutes to 12. We’re going to be going to the 
Premier’s estimates this evening. And I think unless there’s 
something that you really want to ask, I’m going to report 
progress. And I see the member nodding his head, so I’ll move 
we report progress. 
 
The Chair:  It may seem to the Government House Leader 
that it’s 3 minutes to 12, but I assure you it’s really only about 2 
or 3 minutes to 5. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I suggest, Mr. Chairperson, we call it 
5, then the officials don’t have to come back. 
 
The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................2745 
Murray ......................................................................................................................................................................................2752 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2762 
Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................2762 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2762 
Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................2762 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2763 
Toth .................................................................................................................................................................................2763, 2765 
Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................2763 
Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................2775 
D’Autremont ...................................................................................................................................................................2775, 2779 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................2779 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2779 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
Ruling on Privilege  

Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................2745 
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2746 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS  
Motion No. 3  Wildlife Damage Compensation  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2746 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2761 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2762 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2762 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Saskatchewan Communities Hit By Storm  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2763 
Tourism Awards  

Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................2763 
Western Canada Farm Progress Show  

McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2764 
Bovine Tribute to the Speaker  

Lorje ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2764 
Santa Claus Theme Park for Watson  

Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................2764 
Summer Theatre in Weyburn  

Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2764 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis  

Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................2765 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Health Care Funding  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2765 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................2765 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2766 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2766 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2766 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................2767 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2767 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................2767 



 

Environment Department Office Closures  
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2769 
Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2769 

Youth Gambling  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2769 
Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2769 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections  
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2746 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2746 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................2747 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2749 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2750 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2752 

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act  
Cline.......................................................................................................................................................................2754, 2770, 2775 
McLane ...........................................................................................................................................................................2754, 2770 
Toth .................................................................................................................................................................................2757, 2772 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2771 

Recorded Divisions ............................................................................................................................................................ 2772-2775 
THIRD READINGS  

Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act  
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................2776 

Recorded Division .......................................................................................................................................................................2776 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Social Services  Vote 36  

Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................2776 
Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................2776, 2780, 2783 
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2780 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2781 

 


