


















































April 22, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1029 
 April 22, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
This petition is signed by people from far south Saskatchewan, 
and some from the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
express concerns of people throughout Saskatchewan regarding 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are from Regina, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, and throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from people in Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Indian Head, Odessa, Qu’Appelle, and Wolseley. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of people concerned about the future of the Plains Health 
Centre. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
People that have signed this petition are primarily from 
Wawota, Wapella, and Carlyle. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again too to 
present a petition of names from people in southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by many concerned citizens 
of Regina, and as well, Pilot Butte. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
petitions of names from within Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are, the 
vast majority of them, are from Grenfell. There’s also some 
from Melville and Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise to 
present a petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

People that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina; they’re from Gainsborough; they’re from Estevan, from 
Carnduff, Glen Ewen, Frobisher, and all throughout 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, the 
35th day, with my colleagues and the people of Saskatchewan 
on presenting petitions regarding the Plains Health Centre in 
Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Mr. Speaker, a number of the people that have signed the 
petition are from the Grenfell area and, of course, many from 
the Regina area, Regina Dewdney in particular, and Regina 
Northeast, Regina Victoria, and Regina Coronation Park, and as 
always, Regina Albert South, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order, a petition protesting portions of 
the gun control Act as it pertains to hunting and sporting 
firearms, presented on April 19, ’96 has been reviewed, and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be irregular and therefore 
cannot be read and received. 
 
The following petitions have been reviewed and pursuant to 
rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
pass legislation to protect the rights of firearms owners;  



1030  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Wednesday next ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance regarding order in council 
243/96, please provide the following information: (1) were 
the assurances given to the Johnsons regarding their 
eligibility for Saskatchewan tax credits given verbally or in 
writing; (2) what was the name and/or position of the 
government official who gave the erroneous assurances; 
(3) which Saskatchewan venture capital corporation was 
involved in the investment from the Johnsons; (4) were 
there any other investors given erroneous assurances with 
reference to investing in the Saskatchewan venture capital 
corporation; (5) were there any investors given erroneous 
assurances with regard to any other Saskatchewan venture 
capital corporation or any other tax credit-eligible 
investment; and (6) has similar compensation been paid to 
other investors, and if so, what is the total amount of such 
payments over the past five years? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce students today 
that are in your west gallery — and the overflow goes into the 
Speaker’s gallery — 110 students from Sister O’Brien School. 
They are grade 5 and 6 students. They are accompanied today 
by their teachers: Mme. Bundgaard, Ms. Bolen, Mr. Gantner, 
Mme. Korol, and eight parent chaperons. 
 
I want to welcome them here today and I would like the 
legislature also to welcome this group of very enthusiastic 
children today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our caucus 
is very, very pleased to see the previous Speaker of the House 
with us today in the Speaker’s gallery  Mr. Herman Rolfes. 
 
We are especially happy to have him here with us and we thank 
him so much for assisting our caucus with the new orientation 
seminars. You have been a great help to us and we welcome 
you here today. 
 
Please join me in welcoming Mr. Rolfes. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce 13 grade 12’s 
in your gallery. Accompanying the grade 12’s from their 
Wawota High School are their teacher and principal, Harold  

Laich, and chaperon, Vicki Beauchesne. 
 
I would ask the Assembly to welcome them here today. We 
look forward to meeting them right after question period. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with my 
colleague in welcoming the students and Mr. Laich and Ms. 
Beauchesne from Wawota. 
 
Wawota basically is right on the edge of my riding as well as 
Mr. D’Autremont’s so we share students at the high school. 
And we’d like to welcome them. It’s been a pleasure to work 
with Mr. Laich and the students through the years and I look 
forward to meeting them. 
 
As well, a special welcome to the former Speaker of this 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Volunteers Week 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week of April 
22 to 27 is National Volunteers Week, a week during which we 
officially recognize the crucial role volunteers play in the daily 
life of our community, our province, our nation, and our world. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan in particular know the value of 
volunteers and the necessity of their work. According to 
Statistics Canada, nationally 24 per cent of the people involve 
themselves in some kind of volunteer work. In Saskatchewan 
that figure is 37 per cent. 
 
A report released last year by the Saskatoon City Council stated 
that formal volunteer efforts are worth $650,000 yearly to the 
city and its taxpayers. And similar numbers, if not more, apply 
to all our communities. 
 
This week I will be present at a ceremony honouring 
exceptional volunteers in my town as well as will many other 
members in their towns. In paying tribute to the few, we are 
recognizing how all our lives are enriched in every sense of the 
word by the work of all volunteers. We appreciate their efforts, 
and we thank them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Earth Day 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
recognize today’s designation as Earth Day. Despite continued 
campaigns for environmental awareness, our water, air, and 
land become more and more polluted. Many people refuse to 
heed warnings, while others may think the environmental crisis 
is over. 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

The United Nations environment program released some 
startling statistics on Friday in a new report. It says the overall 
quality of the world’s environment is falling in every category. 
It estimates that between 150 and 200 species of life become 
extinct every day. There are an estimated 280 species currently 
at risk in Canada. 
 
We can do more to protect the environment and reverse the 
destructive trend. One of the keys to solving the problem is 
careful waste management. In recent years, many Saskatchewan 
communities have developed and implemented environmentally 
friendly waste management plans. Blue boxes are a common 
sight on city roadside curbs, and some people try to reduce, 
reuse, and recycle. Newspapers, cardboard boxes, bottles, cans, 
and now oil find their way to the recycling depot. 
 
Hopefully over time, more and more households will join these 
programs, and governments will look for ways to develop more 
efficient and cost-effective waste management programs. The 
fight is only beginning. By recognizing Earth Day, I hope that 
we all can become a bit more environmentally conscious. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

National Volunteers Week 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton in 
recognizing the work of volunteers in this special week across 
this country and certainly in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re quite well aware of what volunteers do in 
our communities. I take a look at sport, culture, and recreation, 
and certainly vocal duets like Donna and Leroy would not have 
been possible were it not for volunteers through the local arts 
councils or Sask Express or the minor ball days and the hockey 
and the major curling bonspiels that take place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are all because there are individuals in our communities, 
whether they be young or old, who are willing to give of their 
time and efforts to provide these activities. And I want to 
recognize them on behalf of my caucus. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northlands College Student Residence 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to attend the 
opening of an expanded and updated educational facility in 
northern Saskatchewan last week. Northlands College student 
residence in Buffalo Narrows will be well prepared and 
equipped as we move into the new century with our educational 
and skills training programs in Saskatchewan. 
 
The original residence was built in 1980. The new centre will 
include cafeteria, recreation centre, three classrooms, and 
residence serving the needs of the North. Funding for 1,065,000 
was provided by the province and Northlands board while the 
federal government provided 185,000 through the infrastructure 
program. 

This project demonstrates a tremendous partnership between 
the province and the Northlands board. The partnership and the 
multi-party training program means that training will focus on 
apprenticeship skills geared for employment in the northern 
mines — training for northern people for jobs in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to congratulate all of the instructors, staff, and 
residents of Buffalo Narrows and area while participating in the 
bringing of the project to completion. Students who attend 
Northlands will get the training they’ll need to get the jobs in 
the new economy which will add to the prosperity and growth 
in the North. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Volunteers Week 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
recognize National Volunteer Week. A widespread volunteer 
effort is traditional in Saskatchewan. When the first settlers 
began arriving in this province, it was the volunteer spirit and 
the sense of community that helped people survive. If one 
homesteader was building a barn, or beginning harvest, 
everyone in the surrounding area would pitch in and help out. 
 
These days, volunteer efforts are highly organized. Volunteer 
organizations thrive in nearly every Saskatchewan community. 
People donate their time to help others with a wide range of 
activities, ranging from visits to people who are housebound, to 
teaching adults to read. 
 
Many groups specialize in raising money for people in need. 
Other people donate their time to provide services to the sick 
and elderly. And we must not forget the volunteer spirit that 
always shines through when people are suffering in times of 
crisis. For example, the past few weeks thousands of people 
filled sandbags and helped build temporary dikes to fend off 
rising flood waters. 
 
I would like to extend my gratitude, on behalf of the opposition 
members, to the thousands of volunteers in Saskatchewan and 
across Canada who selflessly give their time and energy to help 
make the world a little bit better for others. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association  
Mock Parliament 

 
Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report on an 
event that took place right here in this room last Saturday. 
About 40 of our province’s finest young debaters turned back 
the hands of time to when Douglas was in government, and 
debated Bills and legislation relevant to that era. 
 
All of this was a part of the Saskatchewan Elocution and 
Debate Association’s mock parliament. Along with the member 
from Regina Wascana Plains and the Leader of the Official 
Opposition, we took turns assuming the role of Mr. Speaker. 
Now you will know that I have always held you and your  



1032  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

position in the highest regard, but let me say that after this 
weekend’s experience in your chair, I’ve been able to elevate 
that just a bit more. 
 
As a major sponsor of the event, Saskatchewan Lotteries needs 
to be acknowledged and thanked. So too does Doug Chase, 
executive director and, I suspect, key organizer. Participants 
were asked to attire themselves in garb suitable to the times. 
Kirsten Deane of Thom Collegiate here in Regina came in first 
in the best costume voting. Lisa Ockochinski of Yorkton was 
second, and Jason Court of Wesmor High in Prince Albert was 
third. The student voted top parliamentarian by his peers at the 
1996 SEDA (Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association) 
model legislature was Nolan Berg of Yorkton Regional High 
School. His schoolmates Alan Chicoine and Scott Yemen came 
second and third respectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that a number of these young 
people will be back in this Assembly in the not-too-distant 
future, but in an elected capacity. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Claybank Brick Plant Historical Society 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I had the 
honour to attend the annual general meeting of the Brick Plant 
Historical Society in the hamlet of Claybank in my 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, the volunteers and members of this 
society are seeking to preserve and develop the brick plant site 
which is just south of this hamlet. 
 
Started in 1914, the brick plant remains one of the most intact 
industrial sites in the country. Original machinery, kilns, 
warehouses, and residences are all mostly still intact. Also at 
this site is a rare piece of woodland along the Dirt Hills as well 
as a first nations archaeological site. 
 
With the help and support of both the provincial and federal 
levels of government, it is hoped that by the time of this 
province’s centennial, this site will be fully preserved and 
developed as a major attraction in southern Saskatchewan. 
Within an hour’s drive from Regina or Moose Jaw and just 
minutes from Long Creek golf course, this site does hold great 
promise. 
 
Over the summer months, the brick plant will be open for tours 
on weekends, and I would welcome all members of this House 
to take the time to see and enjoy this fascinating part of 
Saskatchewan history. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Earth Day 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, 25 years ago today a 
group of friends got together to talk about the precarious state 
of the earth. They called their local gathering Earth Day and 
agreed to meet each year thereafter for a general discussion on 
the condition of what one church’s prayer book calls, this 
fragile planet, our island home. 

Importantly, this handful of people committed themselves to 
expanding their Earth Day concerns across the earth. Now on 
this the 25th anniversary of Earth Day, we continue to celebrate 
our planet with its remarkable geological, biological, and 
climatological diversity and we remind ourselves once again 
that our very survival as a species depends on a healthy 
environment. 
 
Earth Day Canada is a charter member of Earth Day 
International which represents 91 nations. Our national 
organization each year coordinates over 9,000 environmental 
projects and activities, including clean-ups, tree plantings, and 
educational programs. 
 
In our province today, the minister responsible for Environment 
and the Regina Public School Board sign an agreement which 
will promote environmental stewardship through educational 
programs, partnerships, and information materials good 
example of cooperation. 
 
The message of Earth Day is that keeping our nest clean, our 
water pure, and air fresh, is everybody’s business. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Seniors’ Health Services 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to the 
attention of this House a tragedy involving a Moose Jaw family. 
This case began when 84-year-old Jack Nicholson was left in 
the hands of home care for the first time last September. After a 
fall which the family alleges was a result of negligence on the 
part of a home care worker, family members returned to find 
Mr. Nicholson with a bruise from the top of his head to his 
collar-bone. 
 
His family phoned the Moose Jaw Union Hospital but were told 
there wasn’t enough beds to admit Mr. Nicholson. He did not 
see a doctor until three days later, and shortly after being 
admitted, he suffered a stroke. His condition deteriorated until 
he died on October 3. 
 
Mr. Speaker. the official cause of death is subdural hematoma 
on the left side of the skull. How does the minister explain what 
appears to be a total breakdown of the system, one which 
resulted in the death of Mr. Nicholson? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  What I would say to the member, Mr. 
Speaker, is that obviously allegations are being made against a 
health care worker in Moose Jaw concerning the treatment of 
Mr. Nicholson. And with all due respect to the member, I 
believe that the Legislative Assembly ought not to be used as a 
forum for making allegations against workers in a forum where 
the member enjoys immunity from civil lawsuit. 
 
I think if there’s an allegation that this person did something 
wrong, that that should be investigated by the appropriate 
authorities at the appropriate time. I do not believe that those 
allegations should be discussed in this Chamber and I don’t  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

think the member should take that approach. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health 
attempted to make a point last week by showing this House a 
newspaper article containing a photo of a man kicking a door. I 
also wish to show the minister an article, and this one is from 
the Moose Jaw Times-Herald dated April 17, and it’s aptly 
titled: “Daughter wants answers about death of her dad.” 
 
It also contains a photo, a photo of 84-year-old Jack Nicholson 
just days before he died. And I’d like to send copies of this 
article over to the members of the cabinet. 
 
Will the minister explain what he intends to do to correct what 
is an obvious problem in our health care system, one which 
cheated this family out of more time with their father? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that in my 
opinion this is not a form of high politics; this is a form of low 
politics. Because what the member is doing is trying to take 
advantage of the unfortunate circumstances that have affected a 
family in Moose Jaw and to unfairly malign a worker in Moose 
Jaw when the member has not talked to both sides. 
 
The member does not know what the facts are. If something 
wrong was done, this should be properly investigated. The 
worker in Moose Jaw is entitled to the benefit of the doubt. The 
member is trying to make politics out of a very unfortunate 
situation, Mr. Speaker. I am not going to engage in that kind of 
debate with the member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the article I refer to details the 
tragic circumstances that led to the death of Mr. Nicholson. His 
daughter states in this article and I quote, “If that’s the kind of 
care they have for our seniors, it would better to not have any at 
all.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that support services are clearly not at 
an appropriate level and will only deteriorate because of further 
funding cuts. Will the minister make a commitment in this 
House today to ensure the situation leading up to the death of 
Mr. Nicholson is thoroughly and properly examined? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  All I can do, Mr. Speaker, is say that I 
think it’s a sad day in the legislature when people like that 
member get up repeatedly to make cheap political points out of 
the death of somebody in their community. I think that that’s a 
sad example of leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I too have a tragic story to bring 
to the attention of this House. And although it’s not as severe as  

the one noted by my colleague from Wood River, it is one that 
clearly demonstrates the problems this NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government has in its health care plan, if in fact they 
have a plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an article in April 4 edition of the Humboldt 
Journal describes how residents of the Leroy lodge recently bid 
farewell to Leroy  a community that these seniors called 
home for decades. 
 
One of the saddest stories relating to the closure of this facility 
is the fact that a couple, Joe and Magdelina Just, who have been 
married for 66 years and raised a family together, will no longer 
be sharing the same room after being moved to another facility. 
 
Will the minister explain why our seniors, people like Joe and 
Magdelina Just, the very people who built this province, are 
being treated with so little respect and absolutely no 
consideration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I think the member knows, Mr. 
Speaker, that people are assessed at the district level with 
respect to the level of care that they need. And I would just say 
to the member that the member was up in the House a few 
weeks ago talking about how her example of commitment to 
health care would be an American style of health care, Mr. 
Speaker. And I have to say that that member’s idea of health 
care is that 35 million people go without medical care coverage, 
100,000 people join the ranks of the uninsured every month, 
people go without health care because they’re not covered at all. 
 
What we did in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was to pioneer a 
medicare system, a single-payer system, so that everybody 
could have medical care regardless of how much money they 
had in their wallet. It was opposed by that party. 
 
I was somewhat shocked to hear that member advocating 
American-style health care a few weeks ago. We have a good 
system, notwithstanding the opposition of that party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sad that I can’t really give an 
answer back to the family. That wasn’t an answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Leroy’s town administrator, Mark Fedak, said that 
the Leroy lodge should have been maintained. He stated that, 
and I quote: “We believe there should be some type of 
long-term care here in our town.” 
 
Mr. Fedak indicates that without some form of seniors’ facility 
in Leroy, the elderly will have no reason to remain in the 
community where their families and loved ones are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the kind of decisions this government is 
forcing on district health boards; decisions that are not in the 
best interest of our seniors or of the affected towns. 
 
Will the minister explain at what point his government will  



1034  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

realize what they’re doing and begin to address the anxiety and 
pain they are creating among seniors, their families, and our 
rural communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  You know, I don’t know if I’ve mentioned 
in the House before, Mr. Speaker, that recently the federal 
Liberals took out about $50 million from our health care budget 
in Saskatchewan. And you know, Mr. Speaker, the member 
talks about properly funding the health care system and they 
would do this and they would do that, but the reality is, what 
the Liberals have done is as of April 1 taken $50 million out of 
health care. 
 
And what did we do? For every dollar that the Liberals took out 
of health care, we put a dollar back in in our recent budget. 
What did they do, Mr. Speaker? They opposed that in this 
legislature. We even had a motion to express concern over what 
the federal Liberals were doing to health care. Those members 
refused to vote in favour of it. So I think the member’s words 
ring rather hollow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
come back to an issue that I believe the minister really hasn’t 
answered, for the sake of individuals who are concerned and 
raised the question with our caucus as well. And it’s a question 
to the Minister of Health. 
 
Lorraine Michon of Moose Jaw reluctantly agreed to have home 
care come in and help take care of her father who was in need 
of palliative care. And we’ve already heard the story of how this 
gentleman unfortunately died very tragically just about a week 
ago. 
 
Mr. Minister, Lorraine and her family have come to your 
department because they have been unable to get any 
information as to the tragedy, how it happened, and why it 
happened, specifically when they had given specific 
instructions to the home care worker as to how to take care of 
their father who was in his home. Even though he was in need 
of very heavy and extensive palliative care, he was there 
because of your government, your cut-backs, and a policy that 
forces . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The member has been fairly 
lengthy with his preamble and I’ll ask him to proceed directly to 
his question. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, where do people like Lorraine 
Michon turn to to get the answers to their questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  What I say to the member, Mr. Speaker, is 
what I said to the other member, and that is that he is raising 
hearsay in this House that he’s heard from family members with 
respect to what happened. And I say that before he says that the 
home care worker did something wrong or was to blame for this 
man’s death, the matter should be properly investigated. And 
the member should not get up in this House and make those 
kinds of allegations with the immunity he has in this House. 
 
If something wrong was done, then that should be resolved in 
some proper forum. But it is not proper for me to get up in the  

House and discuss somebody’s personal medical condition. 
And it isn’t proper for that member to get up in the House and 
make allegations against a worker in Moose Jaw when that 
worker isn’t represented here and doesn’t have a chance to 
defend herself. That is not a proper way to do things, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
guess we’ll have to go directly to the head of this government, 
and that’s the Premier. Quite obviously the Minister of Health 
is not prepared to meet with or to even discuss the concerns that 
individuals have. 
 
Why would Ms. Michon have come to us if his department 
would have been doing their job? She went to the department. 
She went to the district health board. Unfortunately no one’s 
willing to answer the questions and the concerns  concerns 
that arise because of the cut-backs that are coming from this 
government. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you respond and let Lorraine know . . . 
Lorraine Michon know who she turns to to have questions 
answered that everyone else that she’s supposed to turn to will 
not answer? Will you do that, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I didn’t say that I wouldn’t 
have a meeting with anybody. I didn’t say that this family’s 
questions shouldn’t be answered. 
 
What I said is that it is unfair for that party and that party to 
come into this legislature and adopt one person’s version of the 
facts and make allegations against somebody without having 
the matter properly investigated. And the place for a matter to 
be investigated is not in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker; it is in the 
proper forums where people investigate allegations of this sort. 
 
That’s what I said, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that both of those 
parties don’t persist in simply trying to score cheap political 
points over what is obviously a very tragic circumstance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this afternoon is for the back-up Minister of 
Agriculture. Mr. Minister, the other day I asked you whether 
your government was threatening to cut off crop insurance 
coverage to farmers with outstanding GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) bills, and you completely failed to answer 
that question. 
 
We have now learned that there are still over 4,000 farmers who 
have not yet paid their GRIP bills. In fact less than half of the 
$12 million worth of bills you sent out have been paid. Clearly, 
many farmers are unable to pay this bill, this unfair bill, a bill 
you promised they'd never receive in the first place. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you give us a clear answer and the farmers of  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

this province a clear answer? Will these 4,000-plus farmers be 
denied crop insurance coverage if their GRIP bills are not paid 
by April 30? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you to 
the member opposite, there were 39,000 farmers in this 
province sent cheques with the GRIP surplus. There were some 
farmers, about 11,000, that were sent bills because they had an 
overpayment in 1993, Mr. Speaker, and for their 1994 premium. 
 
The majority of those farmers have now sent in their money on 
bills that they owe. I expect that to continue. Farmers are very 
responsible in this province, Mr. Speaker, and if they owe a bill 
they will pay it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agriculture Trade Mission 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the Premier. Mr. Premier, your Agriculture minister’s 17-day 
trip to the Pacific Rim was supposed to cost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers $55,000. And now we’ve learned that the minister 
has decided to extend his visit by an additional six days to April 
29. 
 
Mr. Premier, why has the minister’s trip been extended? Are 
you trying to keep him out of the Assembly? And how much 
more is this extended visit going to cost Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you to 
the member opposite, I find it . . . I don’t even know what to 
call it. You know we’ve got an agriculture community in the 
province of Saskatchewan that wants to diversify, that wants to 
market their products overseas. We’re trying to attempt to 
facilitate that, and they argue that. They would sooner support 
the old GRIP  that’s their agricultural program for the people 
of Saskatchewan. We believe in value added, we believe in 
diversification, and we believe in trade with foreign nations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fill-in for 
the Minister of Agriculture says the minister is offshore to 
facilitate agriculture in this province. It seems the only ones 
getting any assistance are the wood producers in this province 
for paper sales because he’s certainly been releasing a lot of 
news releases. The fact is I looked them all over this morning 
and there’s one thing absent in there and that is there are no 
new sales made; there are no new agreements signed at all. And 
that’s a pretty sad record, Mr. Premier, for $55,000 for a 
three-week Asia trip and not to sign one single agreement. 
 
Mr. Premier, specifically what has the minister accomplished on 
this trip? What specific agreements have been reached that are 
going to result in new economic activities and jobs for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well again, it’s just astonishing, I think, 
Mr. Speaker, to listen to the member opposite criticize trade and 
the export of what we produce, our strength  agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. Ag biotech, for an example, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
known worldwide because of the ag biotech that’s happening 
right . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now I was able to hear 
the question being put but I’m not able to hear the answer being 
provided. Order. And I will ask all hon. members to allow the 
minister to be heard during the answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It seems very 
strange that the member should ask those kinds of questions. He 
should talk to the people like Thomson Meats from Melfort 
who are with the trade delegation, and what’s happening. 
 
We would sooner trade with nations like that, Mr. Speaker, 
based on our strengths of agriculture, not have to go to the post 
office to look to see if there’s a cheque from the government in 
the box. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emergency Health Services 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to bring to the attention of this House another 
example to demonstrate the ever-widening cracks in our health 
care system. This case involves Pearl Fitzpatrick of Eatonia, 
who after having surgery on a broken ankle was transported to 
St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon, in the Premier’s own 
constituency, so that a specialist could examine her. 
 
This is where Pearl’s problems went from bad to worse, as it 
was five days before a doctor could arrange time to see Pearl 
Fitzpatrick, Mr. Speaker. Can the Minister of Health explain 
how, under his government’s so-called new and improved 
health care system, such an ordeal could take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well of course the sad news, Mr. Speaker, 
is that every time somebody has an unfortunate situation with 
the health care system, or somebody dies, the Liberal Party is 
happy about it because it gives them an opportunity to try to 
score political points in the House. And I think that is sad. 
 
I want to tell the members of the Liberal Party that if the 
member would get in touch with me and discuss this case, 
which I haven’t heard anything about, I’d be happy to sit down 
with the member and discuss it and look into it and talk to the 
health board about it. 
 
That isn’t what the member wants to do, Mr. Speaker. He wants 
to get up in this House and raise these cases so that he can score 
cheap political points about somebody’s misfortune. And it is 
shameful. But I want to say to the member and to the House, 
that of the people that use the health care system, 89 per cent of 
the people that actually use the system are very satisfied with 
the care that they get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t make the member happy because he  



1036  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

can’t get up and make some sad tale of woe in the House. But 
that’s the way it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, when Pearl Fitzpatrick was 
examined by a specialist on a Friday, she was informed that she 
would be released from the hospital the following Monday due 
to a bed shortage. Because of Pearl’s condition, the family 
protested but to no avail. The only facility available for her to 
recover in was a personal care home. 
 
However, upon being examined in this facility, it was 
discovered that Pearl Fitzpatrick’s wounds had developed 
gangrene. The family lodged an official complaint with St. 
Paul’s and Ms. Fitzpatrick was immediately allowed back into 
the hospital. 
 
Will the minister explain why people in need of medical 
treatment need to take such action to ensure their proper health 
care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the difference between the member 
and I, Mr. Speaker, is that the member is probably happy that 
Ms. Fitzpatrick developed gangrene so that he could get up in 
the House and make some point. I’m sorry to hear that, I really 
am. 
 
But I want to say to the member that the federal Liberal polling 
which recently came out confirms what our polling shows, and 
that is that people do get good service in the hospitals. 
Sometimes people develop complications. The system is not 
perfect. It never has been perfect, probably never will be. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to be treated to this every 
day, that every time somebody has some unfortunate incident 
these members are going to get up and pretend that they’re the 
friends of these people, I think it’s a sad form of politics. 
 
And I want to say to that member that if he cared one little bit 
about the medicare system, he wouldn’t belong to a party that 
opposed the introduction of medicare and he wouldn’t be 
supporting the reduction  $50 million this year  of 
medicare payments from Ottawa to Regina. 
 
But he doesn’t care about that, Mr. Speaker. He just wants to 
make cheap political points. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, you shouldn’t 
be too proud about your government’s polling on what the 
questions were regarding rural health care. They weren’t good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pearl Fitzpatrick’s second visit to the hospital 
lasted about a month because doctors were uncertain if Pearl 
would lose her leg or perhaps her life. Pearl can only wonder 
what may have happened to her if the special care home and her 
family had not taken the action to have her placed back in the 
hospital. 

While in the hospital, Pearl also had to pay about $1,000 per 
month to keep a bed at the special care home for fear the 
hospital would once again send her out on her own. If Pearl was 
a family member of one of your cabinet colleagues, I don’t 
believe for a moment this would’ve happened. 
 
Will the minister now assure the people like Pearl Fitzpatrick 
that they will receive the same health services as your 
government colleagues, the same services every Saskatchewan 
resident should have? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say to that member, Mr. Speaker, 
that he can get up in this House and he can sink just as low as 
he wants to in this question period. But you know when my 
wife had to get surgery and had to get arthroscopic surgery, she 
had to wait six or seven months because it was elective surgery. 
But she had to wait just like everybody else, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s the way our system is. Everybody’s treated 
equally. 
 
The only other comment I can make to that member, Mr. 
Speaker, is that he should get down on his hands and knees and 
beg the member from Saskatoon Greystone to come back and 
improve the quality of questions in question period. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rental Damage Deposits 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you for the standing ovation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a controversy involving the Saskatchewan 
Landlords Association and this government is one that has been 
going on for far too long. The last meeting held between the 
association and the Minister of Justice and the Minister of 
Social Services took place on March 7. 
 
It has been brought to my attention that at this meeting the 
Minister of Justice suggested to representatives of the 
association to simply raise the price of rent to solve their 
problems. This of course would be no solution because it would 
simply mean every renter in Saskatchewan would be punished 
because of this government’s refusal to take appropriate action 
on this issue. 
 
Can either the Minister of Justice or Social Services confirm 
that this is in fact what was stated at the March 7 meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, again we have another 
example of the Liberal tactics in this House, which is to 
introduce misinformation or information they have not 
confirmed with others, into the course of the debate. 
 
I will say again, Mr. Speaker, as I have said to this member 
before, that we are considering this issue and all of the 
implications surrounding this issue, and in due course we’ll 
have announcements to make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, an article in the March 16 edition of 
the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix contained an article in which the 
Minister of Justice indicated that landlords would know the 
future of the security deposit controversy by April 1. 
Twenty-two days later and another in a series of deadlines has 
been passed with no indication from this government that it 
plans on any immediate announcement, or even a meeting with 
the association to further discuss the issue. 
 
The time has come for this government to work with the 
landlords and tenants to replace the existing outdated and 
troubling legislation and come up with a solution that works in 
the best interests of both landlords and tenants in this province. 
 
Will the minister announce in this House today when an official 
decision will be made on this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the announcement will be 
made in due course. And the issue is not assisted either by 
antics of certain landlords beyond this building or by the antics 
of the Liberal Party opposition within this building. And there 
are days I wonder if this isn’t the same thing. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I may, just to close today’s question period, 
remind members of what’s being said in the press. A quote 
from a recent editorial: “Will we ever be blessed”, says the 
editorial, “by a day when our provincial Liberal Party, 
Saskatchewan’s official opposition, doesn’t crank up the whine 
metre one more decibel?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will save the member who’s asking the question, 
from Humboldt, the embarrassment of reading the rest of this 
editorial. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the issue of the security deposit, we will have 
consideration and there will be, there will be an announcement 
in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Nipawin Awarded Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
Assembly. Even though a heavy fog in Saskatoon prevented me 
from being there in person this morning, it was my pleasure to 
be part of an announcement that was made earlier today in 
Nipawin. 
 
My colleague, Andy Renaud, Minister of Highways and . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order. I’m going 
to have to call the minister to order for using the proper name of 
a currently sitting member, and I’ll ask the minister to simply 
withdraw the unparliamentary remark and proceed. Order. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  It was my pleasure to be part of an 
announcement that was made earlier today in Nipawin by the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation and the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Carrot River Valley,  

who had the privilege to announce that Nipawin had been 
chosen as the site for the 1998 Saskatchewan Winter Games. 
 
Nipawin has hosted numerous provincial, national, and 
international sporting events. This is the first time in the 24-year 
history of the Winter Games that Nipawin, a community of 
almost 5,000 people in north-east Saskatchewan, was chosen by 
the site selection committee to host the event. This is a credit to 
the people of Nipawin and surrounding districts who pulled 
together to present a successful bid for the culmination of a lot 
of hard work and commitment on the part of a dedicated, 
enthusiastic group of volunteers. 
 
The Saskatchewan games program began in 1972 with the first 
Saskatchewan Summer Games in Moose Jaw. Since then the 
program has realized one success after another. So far six 
Summer Games and six Winter Games have been held. This 
summer the 1996 Summer Games will again take place in 
Moose Jaw, from August 4 to 10. The Winter Games in 
Nipawin will be no. 7, and one of the major sporting events in 
the province, with approximately 2,000 athletes, coaches, 
managers, officials, and staff participating. 
 
Nipawin will indeed be the winter sporting showcase of the 
province in 1998. I know, based on previous successes, that 
Nipawin will again be the home of good old Saskatchewan 
hospitality. 
 
The provincial government is pleased to work in partnership 
with the Saskatchewan Games Council, Sask Sport, and 
Saskatchewan Lotteries in supporting and promoting 
Saskatchewan games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the members of the Assembly 
join with me in wishing Nipawin and surrounding districts good 
luck as they prepare to host the 1998 Saskatchewan Winter 
Games. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I very much am 
pleased to join into the congratulations for the community of 
Nipawin in regard to the 1998 Winter Games. I’m particularly 
pleased because, as you know, Nipawin was one of the 
communities bidding for these games, as was Melfort and 
Tisdale and the city of Prince Albert. And it’s always good to 
know that no matter what happened, north-east Saskatchewan 
was going to be the recipient of these games. 
 
One of the other very positive things that happened through this 
bid process is that the communities of Melfort, Tisdale, and of 
Nipawin have made the commitment to each other to support 
each other in these games, and it’s really terrific to see the 
communities in the north-east working together. 
 
And so I’m very pleased to see that these games are going to be 
in the north-east. It’s very pleasing to see that three 
communities can work together without having amalgamation 
rammed down their throats by this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1038  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Madam 
Minister may have been in a big fog this morning . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Thank you, I was just repeating that the 
Madam Minister may have been in a fog this morning and not 
know where she was going. However this idea still has a lot of 
light to it, and I think having Nipawin as a site for the 1998 
Winter Games is going to be very appropriate. 
 
It’s a beautiful community with a lot of very good people there, 
and I think part of these kinds of functions needs a lot of 
volunteers. This part of Saskatchewan is strong on 
volunteerism, and I’m sure there’ll be a great Winter Games 
there. Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to 
repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster 

Hospital Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments 
to other Acts 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 
The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and 
The Lloydminster Hospital Act, 1948 and to make 
consequential amendments to other Acts be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 
The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before orders of the day, with leave, 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
failed to glance in your gallery before introduction of guests. I 
missed the presence of a former distinguished member of this 
Assembly, Adolf Matsalla, who represented Canora for many 
years. I think he was first elected in ’67 and was there until the 
‘80s. And he was also . . . he was not only a colleague in 
caucus, he was a colleague in cabinet during those years as 
well. 
 
I would ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming the 
return of a distinguished member to this Assembly. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, and as the representative for 
Saskatoon Southeast, I would like to join with the House 
Leader in welcoming a very distinguished constituent from 
Saskatoon Southeast to this House. Mr. Matsalla, welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker:  Written question no. 75 is converted to 
motions for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my remarks, 
I will be moving the second reading of The Natural Resources 
Amendment Act, 1996. Mr. Speaker, these amendments will 
ease the administrative burden on rural municipality 
administrators. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order! Now I’m having difficulty, 
because of noise coming from both sides of the House, hearing 
the remarks being made by the minister in introducing second 
reading of the Bill  order, order  and I will ask all members 
to show their cooperation in the House and allow the minister 
to make his remarks on Bill 49. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The fish and 
wildlife development fund is used to secure and improve fish 
and wildlife habitat throughout Saskatchewan. In its land 
management role, the fish and wildlife development fund 
provides grants to approximately 110 rural municipalities in 
Saskatchewan. These grants are instead of taxes that might 
otherwise be collected on the land. 
 
Right now rural municipalities levy taxes on lands that are 
leased back to vendors or permanent farmers for haying and 
grazing purposes. Some of these activities take place on fish 
and wildlife development fund land. When this occurs, the 
assessment on the land must be split. Permit holders pay the 
taxes on portions they use, and the fund pays grants in lieu of 
taxes on the balances. 
 
Splitting the assessments is a difficult exercise that creates 
additional administrative burden for the rural municipal 
administrators. Sometimes appropriate taxes are not levied, 
therefore creating significant administrative confusion. This 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

amendment will allow for the payment of taxes by the fish and 
wildlife development fund on lands under permit and will allow 
for the recovery of the grant payment by adjusting the 
individual permit fee to reflect municipal taxes. The 
administration of taxes on these lands will be consistent with 
the system used by Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food in 
which municipal taxes are collected on provincial community 
pastures. 
 
Rural municipality administrators have asked the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management for this change. The 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities strongly 
supports the amendment. Passage of this Act will show that the 
Government of Saskatchewan listened to the concerns and 
amended the Act to ensure that all permitees are treated equally 
and fairly. 
 
This Act also recognizes the importance of a strong partnership 
between provincial and local governments. This will help to 
ensure financial accountability and contribute to effective and 
efficient government operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Natural 
Resources Amendment Act, 1996. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
stand before the Assembly today to speak on the proposed 
Natural Resources Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Natural resources are the cornerstone of our economy here in 
Saskatchewan. Without the vast amount of resources that we 
are so lucky to have here, many of the industries that bring tax 
dollars and tourism money into our province would just simply 
not be here. It is of utmost importance that we, as members of 
this Legislative Assembly, do all that we can to ensure the 
protection and fostering of these important resources. 
 
At a time when our environment and the ecosystems within it 
are facing increasing dangers each and every day, we should all 
be working to ensure that the beautiful and vast lands of this 
province maintain their pure qualities in order to be able to 
continue to foster the fish and wildlife that thrive in this 
province. 
 
Through the fish and wildlife fund, our fisheries and wildlife 
are regulated and administered with the focus of sustainable 
management in mind. The fish and wildlife fund was created 
under the authority of The Game Act and has subsequently been 
continued under The Renewable Resources, Recreation and 
Culture Act. Since this Act was repealed in 1993, the fish and 
wildlife fund now continues under section 20 of The Natural 
Resources Act. 
 
This fund was originally established to prevent the continual 
reduction of wildlife habitat and wildlife population in the 
agricultural areas of our province. Fish enhancement projects 
that have been and continue to be financed through this fund  

are intended to prevent the loss of fish and fish habitat. 
 
The annual revenue that comes from the General Revenue Fund 
has been set at 30 per cent of habitat certificates and certain 
hunting, trapping, and fishing licence fees collected by the 
Department of Environment and Resource Management. For the 
year ended March 31, 1995, the fish and wildlife fund had total 
revenues of almost three and a half million dollars. 
 
The fish and wildlife fund deals with three major expenditure 
components each year. Last year, one of these expenditures was 
to the wildlife fund which spent $1.6 million, or just better than 
that, on maintaining bio-diversity in Saskatchewan  this by 
enhancing the wildlife habitat in this province. 
 
The next major expenditure was to fish enhancement; $964,000 
was spent to rehabilitate fisheries habitat to conserve and 
enhance fish populations and to provide educational 
opportunities for those interested. 
 
The municipal habitat conservation fund was the third source of 
major expenditure on the part of this fund last year. 
 
The Department of Environment and Resource Management 
has set aside $1 million of the fish and wildlife fund’s assets. 
The interest earned on this money is used to pay rural 
municipality grants in lieu of taxes on the fish and wildlife 
development fund land located within the boundaries of those 
RMs (rural municipality). This is the focus of the amendments 
proposed in the Bill before us today. 
 
The fish and wildlife fund also spent over $2 million last year 
to administer and protect over 380 species of wildlife known to 
live in this province, as well as to preserve the many species of 
fish that need appropriate habitats in our province’s rivers, 
lakes, and streams. As we understand it, Mr. Speaker, the 
money is credited to the fish and wildlife fund in order to meet 
the needs of not only the fish and wildlife in this province, but 
to protect them for the present and future use and enjoyment of 
all people who live in Saskatchewan and the thousands who 
come here to travel each and every year. 
 
This Act, though fairly brief, makes some significant changes 
and also some additions to the way that money is credited to the 
fish and wildlife fund. This Bill also attempts to change the 
ways in which the minister responsible for the Environment and 
Resource Management is to administer the assets of this fund. 
 
The system of municipal taxation proposed in this Bill will 
shadow the system used by the Department of Agriculture and 
Food with regards to their community pastures. The new Bill 
proposes ways in which the minister will be able to use the fish 
and wildlife fund’s assets for payment to rural municipalities in 
lieu of taxes. This is only with regard to provincial lands within 
that municipality that were acquired through assets of the fund. 
 
On top of this, the minister will be able to recover the cost of 
these payments to the rural municipalities by adjusting permit 
fees to reflect the amount of municipal taxes that have been 
paid or have not been paid by certain permit holders. The 
amendments to this Bill are supposed to streamline current  



1040  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

process for allocation and payment of taxes between permit 
holders, rural municipalities, and the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management  this with respect to 
haying or grazing land. 
 
I question the proposed simplicity of this system. There are a 
couple of aspects of this Bill that have caused some concern 
and confusion. The areas that do cause concern for us and for 
the people that will be affected by this Bill are with respect to 
the ways in which the minister will be able to change permit 
fees to reflect municipal taxes owed in certain situations. We 
are also concerned with how these changes will affect people 
involved in wildlife and the fisheries, not only for sport and 
recreation but for their way of life. 
 
It’s for these reasons that we would like to spend some more 
time talking to some stakeholders and gaining some legal 
insight into the possible repercussions that may arise with the 
passing of this Bill into law. 
 
I therefore would move that debate on this Bill be adjourned. 
Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements 
and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I will be 
moving the second reading of The Conservation Easements Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will allow governments, private 
conservation agencies, and landowners to use conservation 
easements to conserve a full range of space we in Saskatchewan 
value for their natural, historic, heritage, cultural, and scenic 
qualities. 
 
In the past, with the exception of some projects narrowly 
defined under The Heritage Property Act, the sale of land meant 
the end of any conservation agreement made by the previous 
landowner, no matter how conservation oriented he or she 
might have been. 
 
This Act will enable landowners to donate or sell easements on 
parcels of land for conservation purposes to government or 
private conservation agencies, thus giving them the opportunity 
to leave a conservation legacy either for the designated term or 
in perpetuity for future generations in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Act will be administratively simple and flexible enough to 
meet the needs of both government agencies, private 
conservation groups, and landowners. In addition to assisting 
recognized non-government conservation groups to accomplish 
their conservation objectives, Mr. Speaker, this Act will assist 
the province in achieving its goal to protect representative areas 
in each of our 11 ecoregions. 
 
The representative areas network initiative which the 
Department of Environment and Resource Management is 
developing will be a coordinated system of areas across  

Saskatchewan managed to help represent and conserve 
important landscapes and biological diversity. 
 
You will note I said managed, not protected, because under this 
concept represented areas may be accessible to some resource 
users. The representative areas will be areas managed to 
preserve the natural habitat as much as possible. Used as 
benchmarks and compared to adjacent areas, they will allow us 
to find out how well we are doing in managing our lands and 
resources. 
 
The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act lands, park lands, and parts 
of the provincial forest, will be extremely important pieces of 
this network of representative areas. Conservation easements 
offered by landowners on land strategically located for our 
native flora and fauna values will provide another important 
tool for preserving and conserving representative areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act was developed through extensive 
consultations with municipal governments, private conservation 
groups, landowners, and lending institutions, to name a few. A 
landowner wishing to place an easement on a parcel of land can 
approach government or a conservation organization to see if 
they would be interested in holding such an easement. If there 
was interest, the landowner and organization would jointly 
determine what types of agriculture or habitat-related activities 
would be allowed in the area and then the easement would be 
registered. 
 
This Act will enable landowners to receive financial benefit 
from conservation easements. The easements can either be sold 
or donated to recognized conservation groups. If donated, the 
value of the donated easement may be eligible for a proposed 
federal tax credit. This provides landowners with an increased 
incentive to employ conservation easements. 
 
The conservation easements envisioned by this Act will be 
voluntary on the part of the landowner and of great potential 
benefit to the wide range of conservation values it is designed 
to protect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure I now move the second 
reading of The Conservation Easements Act, 1996. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
address this legislation, especially on today’s designation as 
Earth Day. In fact just last Friday the United Nations released a 
report that warns of unprecedented destruction of earth’s 
environment. The United Nations environment program says 
that between 150 and 200 species of life become extinct every 
24 hours. I find that figure to be extremely disturbing. There’s 
no question that we must raise environmental consciousness 
and take more steps to encourage sustainability of our most 
precious resource  earth. 
 
I believe that Bill 54, The Conservation Easements Act, aims to 
accomplish some positive goals. The amendments proposed in 
this legislation encompass changes to three Acts, which are: 
The Planning and Development Act, 1983, The Saskatchewan 
Farm Security Act, and The Tax Enforcement Act. The changes 
outlined are to coordinate the three Acts I just mentioned in  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

order to encourage more donation or easement of land for 
conservation purposes. 
 
I am pleased that the amendments will allow landowners to 
receive some financial benefits from granting their land to 
conservation agencies. This could be a valuable incentive. It is 
also encouraging to see that this new legislation proposes that, 
if the land is donated to conservation charities, that it may be 
eligible for a federal tax credit. 
 
The Saskatchewan government recently got a poor review 
concerning establishing protected areas in the 1994-95 
endangered spaces progress report. Therefore it is important 
that this new legislation entices more landowners to consider 
conservation easements. 
 
But I also have some concerns about Bill 54. Although the 
amendments outline the notice that must be given concerning 
conservation easements, I would like to know what mechanism 
is in place for neighbouring landowners to give their input on 
the conservation plans for land bordering their property. With 
the winter we have just experienced, many farmers would not 
welcome any more encouragement for wildlife. Dozens of 
farmers are still fighting for compensation for the thousands of 
acres of crops the deer, elk and geese ate over the winter. 
 
Once again, this Act refers to the regulations that will be set out 
later for conservation easements, but why not have them before 
us now to discuss? 
 
I would also like to know what measures the government has in 
place to ensure that there’s a balance of conservation easements 
among the 11 ecoregions in Saskatchewan. 
 
Because this legislation could have a profound impact on many 
Saskatchewan landowners, we would like more time to consult 
with stakeholders. I therefore move adjournment of debate on 
Bill 54. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 5  An Act to 
amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to be able to take part in the debate surrounding the 
changes to The Education Act. 
 
While on the surface The Education Act doesn’t seem like it 
will be affected to any great degree, when you take a much 
closer look at it though you realize that there are two or three 
sections of the Act that will be amended or repealed. And as a 
result, I think that it will have a far-reaching effect, not only on 
employers, the boards of education, the teachers, but in fact the  

students. And I’d like to bring to the attention of the members 
opposite a number of concerns that I have regarding some of 
the points. 
 
The Education Act amendments address a number of issues. 
One of the less controversial issues of course is the changes to 
the banking procedures that will be allowed for both school 
boards and conseils scolaires. 
 
There are three sections that will deal with the setting up of 
bank accounts in terms of the actual placement of funds of 
school divisions and the French boards; and the fact now that as 
we’ve moved through technological changes, boards of 
education will not only be able to pay their employees by direct 
deposit, but they are looking forward to being able to pay bills; 
that is, vendors that they have money owed to. And the 
amendments that are suggested by banking procedures, I think, 
will be okay. 
 
The second change is around a name change. And when we 
look at that, the name change I think further addresses some of 
the concerns around the Saskatchewan Book Bureau. 
 
The repeal of an Act is also contained in The Education Act 
amendment, and that is taking out a specific section of the Act 
 section 146. And there are some implications around 
actually taking that entire section out of the Act. 
 
One of the smallest sections, or at least the least words are 
altered regarding a section, is involving the termination of a 
contract. Section 208 is actually going to deal with the 
termination of an employee’s contract, and I think it looks . . . it 
needs some specific adjustments. 
 
(1445) 
 
The final point of course in this Act is around short-term 
contracts. Short-term contracts have been an item of contention 
between boards of education, the teachers’ federation, 
individual teachers, and of course directors of education and the 
LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents) group who represents all of the directors and 
superintendents within the province. 
 
Short-term contracts have always been referred to as temporary 
contracts. They may range in differences in lengths, and those 
need to be clarified. And I think we have a serious problem in 
that area, and that definitely needs to be resolved. 
 
To understand all of those issues, I think you have to be aware 
of some of the definitions of the different items. And I’d like to 
bring to the attention of the members, certain definitions, 
because if we understand the definitions, I think we can see the 
picture as to why there is a slight problem and some of the 
things that can be done to correct these problems. 
 
And I’d like to begin by looking at the definition of school year. 
Currently, The Education Act states that the definition of the 
school year means the period commencing on July 1 in one 
calendar year and ending on June 30 in the next calendar year, 
both dates inclusive. Now that covers the entire 365 days of the  



1042  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

year. Well we know that in Saskatchewan there are no schools 
that will be operating for 365 days of the year. 
 
So what we’re looking at then is what is the definition of the 
actual teaching portion of that full year. And for clarity, the Act 
proposes that an academic year be described. An academic year 
being the first day upon which we will start school and the last 
day upon which school will end. They will be, of course, in 
different calendar years. 
 
So when we take a look at that under section 164  and we 
have to make reference to 164 as well, and it does so in the Act 
 section 164 lays out the procedures that a board of education 
along with the Minister of Education have in establishing the 
school year. And then of course, the board of education 
establishes the academic year. 
 
The Act states that of course, school year must be a minimum 
of . . . I mean  sorry  must be 200 days or less and the 
Minister of Education may prescribe something less than 200. 
The board of education then, with some guidelines, determines 
when they will start school and when they will end, and of 
course there are specific holidays for Christmas and the Easter 
break, etc. 
 
What is suggested here of course is that this academic period be 
used to describe the contract. And I think it’s much more 
meaningful to the teacher that will be employed to know that if 
a particular division . . . And we know that there are some 
instances where they are trying what is referred to as the 
alternate school year, where the alternate school year may not 
start on the traditional end of August or the first part of 
September. It will start at a different time, and of course end in 
June, not the traditional June 30. 
 
So to look at those two definitions in the Act is very important 
to understand how this mechanism has been put in place. 
 
The other definition that must be addressed is the definition of 
temporary teacher. Currently, we look at a temporary teacher as 
a person who has been employed for a period of 20 or more 
consecutive school days but less than a full school year. That’s 
the current clause in the Act. And what we’re looking at then is 
that the school year is now going to be re-described as being the 
academic year and the academic year will be the one that will 
be used. 
 
The difficulty of course, in terms of temporary contracts  and 
these are the definitions that we must look at  is that a 
temporary contract can be used over and over again and that is 
probably some of the reasons why we are in the dilemma that 
we are in in the province. 
 
The next definition that I bring to the attention of members is 
the definition of prescribed forms. To date, education contracts, 
education offers of acceptance for employment, there have been 
no prescribed forms. Each school division follows a pattern and 
of course the hiring takes place. 
 
What is suggested in this Act is that there be a prescribed form 
that will be developed and it’s indicated that the regulations  

will be developed when the prescribed forms are ready. What I 
see happening here, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re going to be 
looking at another form  we have no idea what it is. And 
we’re going to be developing a situation where the people in 
charge  the directors, the superintendents, the principals who 
are involved in the hiring process  will have to be looking at 
another set of forms to fill out. 
 
The final definition that we have to look at takes us outside The 
Education Act and that is the local authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act. That’s a whole new 
Act. And when I referred to section 146 of The Education Act 
and indicated that that is the section that is being repealed, what 
we are doing is replacing Section 146 of the Act, which is in 
The Education Act, with an Act that was introduced previously. 
 
So one has to be aware of what that Act is saying to understand 
the conditions by which records  student records  will be 
released and whether or not there is ambiguity or whether or not 
there is indeed privacy maintained. 
 
I’d like to begin by just taking a quick look at the items that I 
have highlighted regarding the definition and how it will fit into 
the amendments that are proposed. 
 
The first one, of course . . . and I think I’ll start with the one 
that I see the least controversial and that is the name change. 
The Saskatchewan Book Bureau has been around and, as 
suggested by its name, it refers to books and we know full well 
that that agency does more than just take care of books. And 
when we look at its scope and its nature, of the definitions that 
it now encompasses, the fact that the suggested name be the 
Learning Resources Distribution Centre, I know it falls much 
better into the actual definition of what the bureau is really 
doing. 
 
So when we look at that particular section it falls into place 
with what is really happening, other than, as I suggested . . . as 
my colleagues previously suggested, we’re a little concerned as 
to what the cost element might be. If we’re doing a name 
change and there are letterheads and there are envelopes, etc., 
that have already been produced, we wonder at what cost will 
all of these things take place. We would hope that the 
implementation of this new name can be done at minimal 
expenses and to the betterment of everyone. 
 
Second situation is around the banking procedures. As I’ve 
indicated, many school divisions currently are relying on 
electronic transfer of funds. Most of them are doing it around 
their payroll, where they have had payment of employees done 
through electronic transfer. What we’re looking at here is that 
not only will we be talking about the transfer of funds to 
employees, we’re also looking at the automatic payroll deposits, 
where we can have that take place. 
 
And as I’ve indicated, the payment to vendors, the bills that are 
proposed to a school division, and if an automatic debit system 
can be established with that vendor, then the school division 
will have the ability . . . not only the school division, but the 
conseils scolaires of course, because this is a revision to a 
number of sections for both the current boards of education,  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

public boards, separate boards, as well as the French boards. 
The current procedure of paper cheques is outdated, and I think 
moving into the 21st century is an example of what will occur 
here. 
 
Third item of course is around the release of records, student 
records. The Education Act, section 146, has relied on this 
procedure for a number of years. And school boards, principals, 
directors, superintendents, have been very familiar with that Act 
and they have been working accordingly. 
 
I understand that about a year and a half ago the privacy Act,  
and I’ll just refer to it as the privacy Act rather than the long, 
full name of it  was introduced. The two are in conflict with 
one another. The Education Act and the privacy Act are not 
following the same pattern. So therefore The Education Act, 
being more restrictive, has been the Act that has had to have 
been followed over the last year and a half, even though the 
privacy Act was in place. 
 
What we see of course in the amendment is that section 146 is 
totally deleted and it’s replaced by the privacy Act. Our concern 
here is that, I think we have to look at sort of the education 
process of the people involved. We need to be aware that 
parents, that students, principals, teachers, all the stakeholders 
involved in education, understand all of the ramifications of the 
new privacy Act. 
 
I’m sure that if we ask people right now in the school system as 
to what the privacy Act is and how it would be replacing The 
Education Act, section 146, there’d be, I’m sure, very short 
answers  the kind that we would not be happy with. So my 
concern of course, there, is that an education process be 
developed by the minister and the department to ensure that this 
new Act is also on the shelves of the different directors and 
superintendents so that they know that that is the Act that will 
be followed. 
 
As far as the privacy Act, as far as the conditions within it, it is 
my understanding from talking with various people who have 
far further knowledge of that Act than I do, they indicate that 
there will be better things for the students. It removes some 
restrictions; it will allow release of information to more people 
that could be of assistance. And I’m referring to people 
involved in social services, people involved in health, and I see 
that this will be better for students in the province. 
 
The shortest little Act amendment involves section 208 of this 
Act. Section 208 talks about the termination of a contract of a 
teacher. And it refers to . . . currently, I think, the words that are 
used in the existing Act say that an employment of a teacher’s 
contract . . . sorry, that a teacher’s contract of employment can 
be terminated by mutual agreement only after the contract 
actually exists. Right now it says, at any time. 
 
Now the situation that develops . . . and I always have to refer 
to an example first, and if I look at an example then I can 
visualize whether or not this might cause some problems. 
Where this has effects — and I know that there are teachers 
who are MLAs now and former teachers — is when a teacher is 
in the last few years of their teaching career and they decide  

that at Christmas time they would like to superannuate; when 
they decide to superannuate they will make that decision, but 
they do not want to leave the classroom right at that moment. 
They would like to continue to finish the school year or the 
academic year running until June 30. 
 
What has had to happen in terms of directors and 
superintendents of education, they’ve had to take a look at that 
and say yes, we know that your superannuation will help us, 
especially in a situation where there are declining enrolments 
and there are staff cut-backs and teachers who are willing to 
help staffing reductions by indicating that they will be leaving 
as the teaching career, those kinds of things are good for the 
board. 
 
However what the directors of education tried to do is to ensure 
that there is a resignation and that that is upfront. So what this 
section is saying is that you can’t have a signed letter of 
termination until you have actually made the job offer. And I 
think there is some room for conflict there because we’re going 
to have directors of education and possible superannuates 
looking at this slightly different. 
 
The last issue, on replacement of teachers. Temporary contracts, 
as I indicated before, have been practices of the past. 
Temporary contracts have been extended by boards of 
education to the same individual four or five or six years in a 
row. And that is not what is the real intent of a temporary 
contract when especially the person is doing the same job. 
 
And I think that those are the kinds of things that have brought 
about concern from the teachers’ federation, and rightly so, 
because they have to be addressed. 
 
(1500) 
 
When we start looking at ongoing temporary contract, we see 
that there is abuse to this; we see that there is uncertainty, but 
because of course a temporary contract is for a very defined 
period of time  one year, year and a half, whatever the case 
may be — so we see that the teacher has that degree of 
uncertainty as to whether or not he or she will be back in the 
classroom, and if indeed what he or she will be doing. 
 
When we talk about now the replacement teacher  that is the 
term that is being described now instead of temporary teacher 
— we need to look at the scenarios that the school divisions 
will be facing. And I’d like to take a quick look at two different 
situations, one involving a very large school division. We have 
a number in the province where we’re talking about number of 
teachers in excess of a thousand. And the other situation where 
there will be somewhat less than that  a school division with 
60 teachers, 50 teachers, whatever. 
 
When we look at a school division with a large number of 
teachers, there are in any given year, a number of teachers on 
leave. They may be on a sabbatical leave, they may be on a 
special leave, any board-approved leave, or they may even be 
seconded by the Department of Education. 
 
So let’s look at the scenario where there is at least three  



1044  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

teachers that are on leave. Currently those three teachers would 
be offered a temporary teaching contract. Now the situation that 
I’d like to look at, Mr. Speaker, is let’s refer to the three 
teachers as A, B, and C, hypothetical situation. All three have 
been granted one-year leaves for the full, and I’ll use the term, 
academic contract. 
 
Three replacement teachers are now hired to be placed in those 
three spots. Because the leaves of course are of one-year 
duration  it’s not known whether there will be a second year 
 the replacement contract is for one full academic year and 
fits the definition of academic year. 
 
Now let’s look at the scenario that says at the end of one year 
 prior to May 31, by the way; it must be prior to that date  
the third teacher, teacher C, applies to the board for . . . and I’ll 
use the example that that teacher was on a secondment and the 
Department of Education, the Department of Education has 
indicated they want the teacher for a second year. And the 
board and the teacher agree that that person can leave for a 
second year. 
 
What this Act is proposing is that automatically the three 
replacement teachers that were hired in the first year, because 
the first and second teachers who were granted the leave have 
returned to their job, the third person is automatically hired to 
be the replacement for the teacher on a permanent contract 
basis. 
 
So the scenario that we’re looking at here is that teacher A, who 
has had a replacement for one year, teacher B, who has had a 
replacement for one year, neither of those two teachers have the 
ability to try to get the position for teacher C, because this is an 
automatic. After one full year in a position, if there is an 
extension into a second year, the replacement contract becomes 
a permanent contract. 
 
So the difficulty here that I am hearing, from especially boards 
of education and directors and superintendents, is around the 
word “automatic”; there’s an automatic hiring. 
 
Now what this says of course is that normally teachers are hired 
by the division. They’re hired to teach in a division, they’re 
hired to teach at different schools in the division, and they may 
be moved accordingly. This is against the philosophy of that 
intent, in that now we are actually hiring a teacher for a specific 
position, the position of a teacher who is on leave, and that 
position may be granted to him just because an extension has 
been allowed. So that poses a bit of a difficulty when we look at 
a larger school division. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Explain that part again. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  We’ll try one with a smaller school division, 
which I’m sure the hon. members will have a much easier time 
understanding — a school division where leaves are not granted 
very often. Occasionally there’s someone that applies for a year 
of sabbatical, and that occurs, and it’s usually a one-year term. 
 
The most difficult situation for smaller school divisions, from 
my contacts with them, is for a secondment. And I’ll use a  

secondment as the reason. Secondments by the Department of 
Education are on a one-year term, and they’re just for one year. 
So we have a board of education that will make a decision to 
allow a teacher to go on secondment for one year. A 
replacement teacher is hired. 
 
Now there’s some contention of course, that if you are 
advertising in the paper in a rural school division many, many 
miles from Saskatoon or Regina, is that of course it’s a term 
position. It’s a one-year because you know that the secondment 
has only been authorized for one year. What will be the number 
of applicants; will there be a fair job type of analysis in terms of 
the number of people; and what will be the quality of the 
applicant. Okay. 
 
If indeed that is still no problem and a teacher is hired, what 
will occur at the end of the first year is that if the Department of 
Education says, we require that teacher that we have seconded 
for a second year, now you have an automatic  the teacher 
that you chose back at the beginning of the first year on the 
replacement contract is now automatically the teacher that is 
hired, and is hired permanently for the second year. What does 
that do for the school division? 
 
Well number one, when the teacher comes back, the teacher 
who is on secondment, and he’s rural school division  and 
over the last number of years I’m sure the members will 
understand when we know that there are declining enrolments, 
and there are reductions in numbers of teachers  we now have 
a situation where we have an overstaffing because we have a 
permanent teacher who has returned from the secondment, and 
we have a replacement teacher who became a permanent 
teacher. 
 
So the net result for a school division is that after two years 
when both people are vying for the job, someone will have to 
be released. Someone will have to be released at a cost, Mr. 
Speaker, because the redundancy clause will kick in. And I’m 
assuming of course that both teachers are adequate and have 
done an outstanding job. 
 
What will occur then in many school divisions of course, is that 
the provisions around seniority will kick in. So some teacher 
will be declared redundant and it will be a cost to the school 
division. Minimum cost of course, is for at least the two years 
that the person was employed. So this will definitely pose a cost 
factor to the board. 
 
The second concern, of course, is that in a rural school division, 
sometimes applicants for these temporary positions are usually 
from the substitute teachers list. And good teachers in terms of 
the substitute teachers list, but when you start to look at the 
permanent situation of saying that they want to carry forward 
for a number of years, these teachers also who have been hired 
for that short period of time, only want to be 
short-period-of-time teachers. 
 
Now they have the right of first refusal. The teacher that will be 
hired in that position has the right of first refusal, but they also 
will be the teacher that will be granted a permanent contract 
after only one year. And I know that in terms of discussions  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

with boards of education and the LEADS group, they see this as 
a very significant problem. And I think that we have to look at 
an amendment as to that situation. 
 
As I’ve indicated, the main concern that we see is around the 
fact that a teacher owns a certain position, and that is contrary 
to any of the hiring that has been done. All the positions that are 
hired within a board of education are for the school division. 
Boards of education then, I see having to deal with this problem 
by May 31. By May 31, they will have to know then if there is a 
second year of leave granted for the teacher that has been away 
from their teaching duties for the first year. 
 
If there is a leave granted by May 31, the board of education 
will have to make some very, very stern and complex decisions 
on the substitute  or I shouldn’t say substitute; I would say 
the replacement teacher. Do they really want the teacher to be 
on a permanent contract? 
 
And I think that we’ll have a situation here where the careers of 
some teachers may be affected, not because they’re necessarily 
doing a negative job but because the board of education knows 
that at the end of the second year, the teacher who is on 
secondment is coming back. They know that they will be 
overstaffed. So the decision is going to be made about the 
replacement teacher to say, you know, we’re going to let you 
go; you didn’t meet our qualifications. That is damaging to the 
teacher who is trying to build up experience and trying to move 
to a job of course where there will be a permanent situation 
involved. 
 
And I think that we have be very careful with this one, and I 
suggest that much discussion, much discussion, has to take 
place between the teachers’ federation and the LEADS group as 
well as the trustees’ association regarding the implementation 
of that concern. 
 
As I’ve indicated before, redundancy automatically is a cost 
factor to boards of education. As soon as you have a position 
that has to be reduced and there are no retirements, there are no 
teachers who have moved away, some person has to be declared 
redundant; or I should say, the job has to be declared redundant, 
and the person who is fulfilling that job will be released. There 
is a cost factor, and my concern is of course, that is, if this cost 
factor is being absorbed by boards of education, we’re now 
looking at further expenditure for boards who are already very 
cash strapped. 
 
My final comment about the regulations — as I’ve indicated 
before, the prescribed forms that will be implemented if this 
amendment takes place indicates that people that are in the 
education process, the directors and superintendents and the 
principals, will have a further set of bookkeeping to do. 
 
And I’m not so sure that when we start to look at the reasons 
for implementing prescribed forms, whether there is the 
problem. I have tried to find out from looking at the Act itself, 
the current Education Act, the proposed amendments, as to 
what problem is trying to be resolved by the situation of 
implementing a prescribed form. And I do not see a value for 
the prescribed form, and I would like to of course share that  

with the minister so that we can maybe get some clarification as 
to the necessity of a prescribed form and that additional time, 
etc., that would have to be spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve raised several issues in this Bill that are of 
concern to myself and to our caucus. The practice of hiring 
teachers for four or five or more years on temporary contracts 
for a full academic year has to be stopped. There’s no question 
about that. And I think boards of education have recognized 
that, and directors especially have recognized that. Teachers 
need to have a sense of security and certainty about their 
positions. 
 
Boards of education must be in complete control of their 
staffing strategy and long-term staffing picture. That’s a board’s 
responsibility. The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association), the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation), 
and LEADS, must all reach agreement on any proposed 
legislative changes. They are the parties that will have to 
operate under any new or changed laws and regulations. 
 
At this point, these three parties are not in agreement and have 
suggested their own changes to the proposed amendment. As a 
result, our caucus may be proposing amendments at a later 
stage, in committee, as I have indicated. 
 
Our caucus believes that education must be a priority in this 
province. We encourage the current government to re-evaluate 
their priorities and join with us to ensure our education system 
remains one of the best in the world. 
 
We also encourage the Minister of Education to continue 
consulting with the concerned parties prior to making any 
decisions, to ensure their voice will receive strong 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that this NDP government 
realizes the impact that these amendments will have. I also hope 
that the concerns I have raised will be dealt with in a 
satisfactory way during the committee stage. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
address this Bill today on behalf of the third party caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the majority of this Bill deals with 
purely housekeeping matters. There are a number of changes 
such as updating the names of the Saskatchewan Book Bureau 
and allowing schools to make better use of technology with 
regards to electronic transfer of funds and payroll. Obviously 
we do not have any objections to this sort of thing and I am sure 
that the schools and school boards around the province 
appreciate the additional flexibility that these changes will give 
them. 
 
(1515) 
 
Likewise we have no strong objections to the amendments of 
section 146 which bring in to line The Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Act. Essentially this amendment  



1046  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

recognizes the sad fact that many students do not live at home 
and do not maintain a relationship with their parents. 
 
Whatever the reasons for these circumstances, it is clearly 
ridiculous for schools to demand, as the previous legislation 
required, that parents be present in order for the student to see 
his school records. Ideally of course, we would prefer that all 
children remain at home and maintain a positive and healthy 
relationship with their parents. However this is not a perfect 
world and this change recognizes the variety of situations that 
students do find themselves in. 
 
As I say, Mr. Speaker, these changes are all well and good and 
we support them. There are, however, other aspects of the Bill 
that are not quite as innocuous, and I wish to address those 
particular issues. 
 
In consultation with the SSTA and other representatives of the 
education sector, I have become aware of objections to a couple 
of major sections of the Bill. The foremost concern of the 
SSTA is in regards to the new provisions for the replacement of 
teachers. Essentially these amendments would tie the 
replacement of teachers to the position of particular permanent 
teachers. If a permanent teacher were to take a second year of 
leave, the replacement teacher filling that position would 
automatically become the permanent teacher for that position. 
 
This takes us back to the ‘40s and the ‘50s when teachers were 
hired for a position with a school board provided they could 
either play hockey or play ball in a particular situation. I think 
with the changes in the educational scene, boards need to be 
able to move teachers in situations where they can effect the 
best education for the students. And to have a teacher for a 
particular position does not do that. 
 
As the SSTA has pointed out, this policy runs contrary to the 
long-held position, philosophy, in our schools that teachers do 
not own a particular position. They are part of a staff, part of a 
team, which the school division administration can deploy or 
redeploy as best suits the interest of the students and the school 
as a whole. 
 
When a school hires a replacement teacher, two things generally 
happen. First, the pool of talent from which the school can 
recruit a replacement teacher is usually poorer both in terms of 
quality and quantity than the pool of talent for permanent 
positions. Most of the best teachers, after all, are looking for 
permanent positions. Consequently, a replacement teacher may 
well not be the best teacher who could have been recruited if 
the objective of the school was to replace a permanent position. 
 
The second thing that happens is that teacher is put in the 
position of the teacher on leave, purely as a matter of 
convenience, as a stopgap measure. In the situation where the 
permanent teacher is on extended leave, the school would want 
to have the freedom to deploy staff as they normally do. 
 
They may well want to keep the replacement teacher but his or 
her talents may lie in some other area. So the school 
administration would want the freedom to take them out of their  

previous position and place them into something where they are 
best suited for the educational needs of the students. 
 
Likewise, there may be another member of the permanent staff 
who is qualified to take over the position of the teacher who is 
on leave and it only makes sense that this teacher, who has a 
longer background in that particular school, should be fairly 
considered for that position. 
 
These fairly normal and logical administrative freedoms which 
schools have always enjoyed in the past are taken away by this 
legislation. The amendments give the replacement teacher first 
dibs on a particular position, regardless of the judgement of the 
administration and regardless of the collective interests of the 
staff and school. 
 
Basically this happens to be catering to the grubby 
individualism of the replacement teachers. This forces school 
boards into a situation where the only way they can work 
around this restriction and treat the permanent staff fairly is to 
fire the replacement teacher so they can put a permanent teacher 
of their choice in that position. 
 
This is obviously a drastic action and one which may well be 
unfair to the replacement whose work record will be marred by 
this dismissal. All in all, this section of the legislation creates 
unnecessary red tape that ties the hands of school boards and 
the school administrations in trying to make our children’s 
education the best that it can be. 
 
The topic of unnecessary red tape leads me to a further 
objection which the SSTA has with this Bill  the requirement 
that offers of employment, acceptances and confirmations all be 
in prescribed forms. Basically this forces further regulation and 
bureaucratization of the hiring process in the schools. As the 
SSTA points out in a briefing note: 
 

Other public sector employees, like the Government of 
Saskatchewan, urban and rural municipalities, the health 
districts, Crown agencies and corporations, have no 
regulations requiring that offers of employment be on a 
prescribed form. The time and energy of government 
officials, as well as the other education partners, is better 
spent on real issues rather than creating more regulations 
and attendant administrative procedures. 

 
And I say amen to that last sentence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our caucus has been trying to convince the government for the 
last five years of the strangling effect of bureaucracy, not only 
on business but on all aspects of Saskatchewan life. Sadly, this 
advice seems to have fallen on deaf ears. 
 
Mr. Speaker, speaking in general terms, I want to emphasize 
the view of our caucus that the goal of all legislation should be 
to make life easier and make life better for people. While this 
Bill does some commendable things, the substantive portions 
of it fail in this test. Rather than making the administration of 
schools easier, it makes it more difficult and makes it more 
complicated. 
 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

The Bill in its current form does not have the support of the 
SSTA, which the minister must acknowledge  or at least I 
hope she acknowledges  is a crucial partner to any of the 
government’s education policies. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, barring any amendment by the 
government to the objectionable aspects of the Bill, I would 
urge the members of this Assembly to defeat this particular 
piece of legislation. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 73 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mrs. Teichrob that Bill No. 73  An Act 
to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since we 
adjourned debate on this Bill last week, we have had some 
more time to look at the specific amendments proposed by the 
NDP government. 
 
We still believe that the majority of changes outlined in Bill 73 
are housekeeping details. Although we have a few suggestions 
on the wording and some questions on these incidentals, we can 
wait until the Bill reaches the Committee of the Whole. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, after talking with some stakeholders and 
discussing the ramifications of these amendments, we do have 
some serious concerns. It is these concerns we would like to 
present to the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Planning and Development Act has a 
significant impact on so many areas of Saskatchewan life. It 
reaches people from all corners of the province and has a very 
substantial effect and impact on people living in the North. 
 
The laws outlined, in both the original Act and in the proposed 
amendments, can affect the livelihoods of individuals, of 
families, and of communities. Brushing it off as a simple 
housekeeping Bill would be cheating the thousands of residents 
who could be affected by these changes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand the mandate behind the Bill. In 1983, 
when the Bill was originally introduced, the government of the 
day said The Planning and Development Act and its procedures 
will ensure that entrepreneurs are able to give physical form to 
their plans with a minimum of red tape while still protecting 
public interests. 
 
Perfect, or so it sounds. Any time we can cut down on 
bureaucratic red tape, we’re doing something right. And any 
time we can encourage entrepreneurs to expand and to develop 
the economy, it’s a good sign. But let’s face it  the present 
NDP government may applaud these words but their actions in 
the past five years have shown their true goal. 

The people of this province are afraid that this government 
wants control over society. They think government wants to run 
the province because they know better. Well we believe that the 
government doesn’t know better than the ordinary people of the 
province. We firmly believe that the power to make the 
decisions should be in the hands of the people. 
 
We as elected officials, and particularly the members opposite 
as government, should be a vehicle of support for the people of 
Saskatchewan. When we stand up in this House to introduce 
legislation or to make amendments to old Bills we should be 
doing it on behalf of our constituents. I am particularly 
concerned that this Bill transfers even more power to the 
Minister of Municipal Government. It seems like this is a 
government pattern that is emerging in every new piece of 
legislation, and a pattern that sounds a signal of alarm to 
residents of this province. 
 
Already the minister is flexing her muscles. Look at the issue of 
rural amalgamation. She is on a see-saw of power. One day she 
gives indications she will force municipalities to amalgamate; 
the next day she claims they will be free to make their own 
decisions. But then she and the Premier agree that 
amalgamation will be done. 
 
These threats are part of this government’s power-playing, 
political games. People of this province do not deserve to live 
under the minister’s threats. They deserve to have a say in the 
issues affecting them. And it is the NDP government’s 
responsibility to make sure they have a say. And it is our 
responsibility as official opposition to hold the government 
accountable to the people of this province. 
 
If with this Bill we let the minister assume more power, we are 
saying that the provincial government should run things 
completely, that they do know what’s best for our community 
completely, and we don’t believe that’s true. 
 
As the legislation stands now, any decisions the minister makes 
have to be published in the Gazette within 15 days. Bill 73 
repeals this section. That means the onus will be on individuals 
and municipalities to find out what these decisions are. And the 
minister can apparently make these decisions without 
consulting with the people involved. As far as I can tell, she can 
overrule decisions. For example, in the section regarding buffer 
strips, the amendment apparently gives the minister the right to 
authorize the sale of Crown property without consulting the 
affected municipality. 
 
This government seems to think it doesn’t have to be 
accountable to the people whatsoever. I think it should be 
accountable to the people, and if the members opposite took the 
time to ask their constituents, I’m sure those constituents would 
wholeheartedly agree with me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have some concerns about the appeal 
process. For example, let’s say a person gets a permit to build a 
hog barn. He has his specifications approved and starts work. 
Halfway through the building, though, he makes some 
constructive changes. How restrictive is this Bill going to be? Is 
there any room for latitude? Or is it going to be strictly  



1048  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

enforced? Are projects going to be constantly entangled in red 
tape, because if they are, the whole reason for this Act becomes 
obsolete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know this Act introduces another level of appeal 
called the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, and I think this is a 
positive thing. But I still worry that even slight deviations to a 
plan could get caught in the bureaucracy. 
 
I would like the Minister of Municipal Government to explain 
the restrictions on building and how strict the parameters will 
be. If this Bill creates a more effective process for appeal, then 
we will support it. However if it just creates another level of 
bureaucracy, then we will oppose it and try to offer some 
positive options. 
 
Unlike the members opposite, we don’t believe more 
government is synonymous with good government. We want to 
create an atmosphere that encourages economic development. 
We want to see more businesses expanding, and we want to 
provide a simple, straightforward path for the entrepreneurs in 
our communities. 
 
It is these people who will build on our progress. It is these 
people who will create jobs. This government certainly can’t, 
no matter what numbers the Minister of Economic 
Development tries to pass off as true. In fact if the NDP 
government stepped back and gave business more freedom, 
maybe some of these optimistic projections would bear some 
fruit. Not only would the province be better off; this 
government wouldn’t have to cover up a poor job-creation 
record with weak excuses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we aren’t suggesting that environmental concerns 
be ignored for the sake of economic development. We are fully 
aware that a healthy environment is an essential part of a 
healthy community. We know that environmental 
considerations and the public good must be included in any 
plans. But we do worry that this legislation may be worded in a 
manner that environmental zealots could use it to prevent viable 
operation from being established. 
 
(1530) 
 
For example, in those same hog barns I mentioned earlier, what 
if someone was violently opposed to them being built for his or 
her own personal reasons? Could that person then use this law 
to come back and prevent an economically responsible project 
from being shut down? And if this happens, would the owner of 
the hog barns be forced to swallow the costs? These are 
questions worth addressing before this legislation is allowed to 
go through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have just emphasised, our main concern with 
this Bill is to ensure that the people of this province are not 
stifled by unnecessary over-government. 
 
I must admit, Mr. Speaker, that we have still not had an 
adequate amount of time to fully explore the problems with the 
original Act and the potential problems of Bill 73. We have not 
yet had input from northern stakeholders, particularly regarding  

Crown lands. I think this is essential if we plan to pass 
legislation that could affect them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would like more time to talk to people, to 
examine the legal ramifications of these amendments, and to 
make sure that any changes are truly in the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people. I move that this debate be now 
adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, 
Implementation and Operation of an 

Emergency 911 System and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce her 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is Ron Davis, assistant deputy minister in the Department 
of Municipal Government. Right behind him is Jim Brickwell, a 
senior policy analyst in the department. And seated directly 
behind me is Diana Milenkovic, who is the vice-president of 
SaskTel Mobility, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to just 
take a minute and welcome Ron and Jim and Diana, the 
officials with the minister, welcome you here today. 
 
Madam Minister, as I think we have previously talked, that you 
know we have many concerns with the basic 911. I think I feel 
myself that when people out in the public realize that the 911 
system that we are presenting here today is not enhanced and it 
is just a basic 911 system, they’re going to be very 
disappointed. 
 
My feeling is that basic 911 is really only a number of 
convenience, and then that is all it is. It doesn’t include trained 
professionals at the end of the line when someone answers. It 
cannot run you through a problem such as a heart attack or a 
person choking. I think these are some of the things that are the 
best part of the enhanced 911, especially for people that are out 
in our areas in rural Saskatchewan that don’t have access at 
close range to the health care facilities now. And I think this is a 
very important part to this Bill that is missing. 
 
I think we must really insist that trained professionals be at the 
end of these phone lines to initiate the calls when they come in, 
but also to follow these calls through from the beginning of the 
call to the very end to see that these calls are received and 
handled in a professional manner to the benefit of the person on 
the other end. 
 
I think out in rural Saskatchewan, the basic 911 concept may 
actually, in one way, create more problems than it helps. As I 
have said earlier, it is a convenient number. As we all know, it’s  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

much simpler to dial 911 than it is that we have now. 
 
But what I am worried about in our smaller communities, 
especially with volunteer fire brigades and the like, is that if the 
one call goes out from central to our fire brigades  and as you 
know, Madam Minister, they’re not always the most organized 
people out there because they are volunteers and they have 
other jobs that have to come first — and what I’m worried 
about, that if a call gets lost, by the time the people at the end 
that initiated the call realize this, there could be a complete 
catastrophe at the other end, whether it’s fire, police, or 
ambulance or whatever it is that they were calling for. 
 
I think also where it’s lacking by not being enhanced and only 
being a basic 911 system is the coordination between services. 
And I realize through the mapping system that’s being set up, 
yes it will map to the specific people that are being called, 
whether it’s police or who it is, but the coordination that I’m 
talking about, in the case of a bigger problem out there where 
we need both ambulance, police, possibly fire, the whole works, 
that . . . and I’m going by the example that in the south-west of 
the Swift Current area that have set one up and I think this is a 
model that we could all follow. 
 
They have a done a tremendous and an excellent job out there, 
these people, but the feedback we get on this enhanced system 
that they have, no matter what the call comes in the person at 
the end of the line answering that call can handle it, all hours of 
the day, and they’re trained. And no matter what the problem is 
that comes in, they will guide you through it one way or another 
to the best of their ability. And I believe in many cases, as they 
can prove, have possibly saved a number of lives. Where I 
believe the basic 911 definitely would fall short in this area. 
 
Again I think, Madam Minister, that this, especially in rural 
Saskatchewan, falls short. I would think I touched on this 
before, but I think many people out in the outskirts of the cities 
are going to realize . . . once they realize what 911 really is as 
it’s presented here, and it’s not enhanced, will be very 
disappointed and not really be willing to support in the funding 
of this project when they realize what they’re receiving. 
 
Madam Minister, I believe when it comes to urban and rural 
municipal governments also, when they’re asked to fund 911, 
and I believe from the feedback that I have and I’m sure you 
will have had this too, that I don’t think there’s too much 
hesitation with them agreeing to take part in the funding if the 
program we are going to be providing is adequate to serve the 
people’s needs. And again I’m suggesting that possibly the 
basic 911 is definitely short on this. 
 
I talked of the amendments we will be presenting later, Madam 
Minister. Our second amendment, and we would like to make 
sure that all municipalities will also have input as this program 
is initiated, and I think what the second amendment, what we 
are talking here, is that the minister may set up a consultation 
process and we would hope that “shall” would be added there 
to make sure that this comes to fruition and that this really 
happens. 
 

We have others that are going to speak to this, Madam Minister, 
and we have a number of questions, so I will be making the 
four amendments later on as the clauses come up. So I believe 
there’s others that will speak to this and then we’ll have 
questions, Madam Minister. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 
Madam Minister, and officials, particularly Ron. I thinks it’s 
been a number of years since the store hours committee was 
part of your responsibility and so I remember that quite fondly. 
 
Madam Minister, I would like to start off really asking you to 
describe the level of service and the concept in detail of what 
you envisage the 911 system that you’re proposing. What it will 
look like; how it will operate; what will its mandate be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the members 
opposite for sharing their concerns with respect to the 
legislation that is before us for discussion. And there are some 
elements of it that I would like to clarify. 
 
First of all, the intent is to move toward a fully enhanced 
system, province-wide. There are two parts, obviously, to the 
911 system. One is the hardware and the software that’s 
required to make it physically possible. The second and most 
important part, and probably the most costly part in the end, is 
the operating end where you have those trained people in the 
enhanced model on a 24-hour-a-day basis, able to be at the 
other end of the line when someone calls 911. And the last 
thing that anyone would want to do  and I hear that reflected 
in your concerns and we agree  is to create any kind of false 
expectations about the level of service that you would get. 
There’s nothing magical about 911; it’s what response you get 
after you’ve dialled it that is critical. So that’s why we do want 
to move to a fully enhanced system. 
 
But because the whole province is not in the same state of 
readiness . . . as you know, we now have three centres who 
already have a fully enhanced 911  Saskatoon, Regina and 
Prince Albert  where when a caller calls the 911 number, 
they’re responded to by a 24-hour, manned call centre of trained 
people, who are able to muster very timely responses, because 
these are areas of concentrated population, concentrated 
services. 
 
What we see is the . . . oh, I should have mentioned the 
south-west 911 as well. So there’s really four; that one will be 
up and running. Then we’ve got North Battleford, Weyburn, 
Estevan, and Moose Jaw, who now provide a basic service and 
we expect that that will move to fully enhanced. We also have a 
number of projects, some of them within health districts right 
now, being organized by the health districts and ambulance 
companies that are using the 310-5000 number. These will be 
ready to be flipped over into the 911 as we make progress. 
 
The problem with providing in the legislation for mandatory 
fully enhanced is that there will be more sparsely populated 
areas of the province that simply don’t have the resources to 
make a sufficient contribution to have locally a call centre of 
trained people available 24 hours a day. That’s the part of the 
cost that they can’t afford. And so we need to make sure that as  



1050  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

the system develops  and we’ve talked about a three- to 
five-year time frame  that communities, health districts, 
groups of people, have the ability to come onto the provincial 
wide system in a coordinated way at whatever level of service 
or whatever level of participation that they’ll be able to muster. 
 
And of course our goal at the end of the day is a fully enhanced 
system province-wide, but we’re not all of equal capability, in 
terms of municipal units or health districts, across the province 
to do that at the moment. 
 
(1545) 
 
And in terms of the volunteer responses in some of the smaller 
communities, my very first personal experience with first 
responders, for example, was the Warman Fire Department, 
which is fairly close to Saskatoon, and people would think of it, 
with three base hospitals there, as not being remote. Yet if 
you’re 35 or 40 miles away from a base hospital sometimes that 
first responder being there in the instance of a heart attack or a 
choking incident, or something like that, makes all the 
difference. 
 
And rather than being uncoordinated and so forth, I found that 
there has been a very concentrated effort in recent years to 
improve the qualifications and the training of those volunteers. 
They certainly need a lot of credit in that they’ve taken that to a 
large degree into their own hands, to develop the training 
courses for themselves to increase their qualifications. And with 
the help of the municipalities that support them with funding, to 
equip themselves to be able to respond to emergencies in a very 
professional way. 
 
So that is . . . in a nutshell, the intent is that it should be fully 
enhanced when it’s fully developed. But at the same time, we 
have to recognize there is some areas of the province that don’t 
have the population or the resources to have manned, 
24-hour-manned, professional call centres, you know, really 
close together. So we have to use the resources of the health 
districts and the municipalities that are able to so that people 
can come onto the system when they reach a state of readiness. 
 
And that’s the objective. But we don’t want to put it in the 
legislation that you can’t be part of the system unless you’re 
fully enhanced, because that way we would be shutting out the 
opportunity for some parts of the province to take part at all. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. If I gathered what 
you’re speaking of here, you envisage these call centres to be 
locally based. Surely, with the technology we have of digital 
telephone systems now and in light of the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) announcing that they’re moving to 
centralized call centres, that we could look at a centralized call 
centre, which would completely make your argument about the 
small, local . . . small population bases needing to support a call 
centre irrelevant. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we must have a 
misunderstanding here because now the members opposite are 
saying that they don’t have vision for local call centres, that the 
technology obviously doesn’t require this, and that’s the same  

thing as I’m saying. 
 
I’m saying we don’t envisage a call centre in every town, for 
example. But also we don’t want to preclude the participation 
of large parts of the province that might be sparsely populated 
because they can’t meet whatever conditions we might put in 
the legislation for the definition of enhanced. But our goal is to 
have as fully enhanced a system as practical. And we will take 
our advice, as we move along, from the advisory committee that 
we plan to appoint pursuant to the legislation as soon as it is 
passed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I still think we’re misconnecting, Madam 
Minister, because as I understand this system or any system, is 
that with technology the way we have it now, there could 
virtually be one call centre for the whole of the province of 
Saskatchewan. The only consideration would be is perhaps 
staffing and how many people you’d need to answer the volume 
of calls coming in to that one call centre. 
 
And I don’t understand that if a call came from Podunk, 
Saskatchewan, population 1, if that call comes in to that call 
centre, would be routed through the SaskTel digital system, that 
that person wouldn’t have equal access to a fully enhanced 
EMT (emergency medical technician) technician to keep that 
communication open while appropriate emergency responses 
are dispatched, recognizing that in some of the more isolated 
areas of the province that those responses may be a little longer 
coming because of the distances and sparsity. But surely the 
two-way communication could happen anywhere in the 
province from as few a number as one call centre. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well I think, Mr. Chairman, we’re 
saying exactly the same thing. I’m saying that’s possible, with 
the technology, to have one call centre for the whole province. 
However, we’re recognizing that we already have three centres 
that have fully enhanced and some that are, you know, the basic 
911, and we’re not proposing by this legislation to do away 
with those. We hope that at some point we’ll all be part of one 
system. 
 
But we’re saying the same thing in different ways. We know 
that that technology is possible. It’s possible to have one call 
centre for the whole province; I don’t think that’s particularly 
desirable in terms of response time. But our objective is to have 
a fully enhanced system throughout the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you. We’ve been joined by a 
number of former members of this House, one of whom is 
seated behind the government benches. It’s Wes Robbins, a 
member from Saskatoon. Wes was — thank you, Wes — Wes 
was a member of the caucus and a member of cabinet renowned 
for his ability with figures. He had quite a memory for figures 
and amounts and would often astound the House by knowing 
the precise amount of something. I’m delighted to see you back,  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

Wes, and hope you enjoy your day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes, leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to join with my 
colleague in welcoming Wes Robbins to the floor of the 
legislature today. As has been stated, Wes Robbins represented 
the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana  which I now represent 
 for many years in the 1970s and early 1980s. And I can attest 
to the fact that he is well-known for his gift with numbers, and 
he certainly would make an excellent Minister of Finance if he 
were running in an election today. So I’d ask all members to 
join me in welcoming him here once again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 43 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A minute ago 
we were having a hard time agreeing on what we were 
discussing there, Madam Minister. I would suggest possibly we 
had a broken line. 
 
Madam Minister, the Melville area  they have a group out 
there that are also, as I’m sure you are aware of, are trying to set 
up an enhanced 911, and they’ve done a lot of work on it. Can 
you tell me where these people would come in now? They’re 
not set up as of now, but they’re definitely almost to that point. 
Can you tell me how they would fit it with this new program 
now? How would you class them, not as enhanced, or 
enhanced? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the procedure would 
be that, in various parts of the province that do not have 911, 
that they would send in a proposal which would be considered 
by the advisory committee and others, and the objective being 
that, as quickly as possible, as many areas as possible would be 
able to become part of the new system. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Okay, that 
brings me then to the south-west area who already organized, 
are up and running great, and . . . talks about in the Bill when 
they’re grandfathered out or when they’re brought on board 
here — how can they be brought on board when they’re already 
enhanced? Like how would they fit in with this program? Will 
they not be brought on until the whole system eventually . . . if I 
understand you, Madam Minister, I hope what you’re saying is 
that eventually everyone will be under an enhanced system in 
time. Will they not be brought on board until that time? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the south-west region 
is not yet fully enhanced. Fully enhanced means that the 
complete locator ingredients are there so that every caller who 

calls 911, their location comes up on the screen. And the 
precursor to that is complete mapping with complete addresses. 
 
I could just add here to that, the way it works on cellular is that 
the locator system would show the tower, but the cell phone 
operator would have to verbally identify the exact location of 
where they were. 
 
So they’re not quite fully enhanced yet; they’re moving that 
way. And it’s the same as these areas in some of the health 
districts that have organized themselves using the 310 -5000. At 
some point they will be able to become part of the system. 
They’re still in the development phase. And that’s the same 
situation that exists in the south-west right now. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Madam Minister. One more 
question. I’m having a hard time understanding though how 
they would become a part of the new 911 system that we’re 
having proposed here when they are enhanced. Like are they 
going to lose that enhancement or how are they going to fit in 
with this program? Because I’m very sure those people are not 
going to be happy coming in and losing what they’ve already 
been used to, with a professional on the end of the line, joining 
up with what we’re seeing proposed here, with having actually 
a non-professional on the end of the telephone, at least to start 
with. 
 
So I’m trying to understand how we’re discussing them being 
brought on board. And I’m sure they’re not going to go along 
with this plan. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think what we’re 
having here is a problem with the definition of enhanced. And 
let me put it this way from our point of view. That with 
enhanced 911, the location of the caller’s phone is displayed, 
along with the phone number, at the 911 centre. With basic 911, 
the location is not sent, just the call line identification, which 
may not be the actual phone number. 
 
So the province-wide 911 service offers a single button transfer 
to the appropriate emergency response agency. So there’s a 
choice of three buttons. There’d be three; there’s ambulance, 
fire, police. And that’s versus the over 600 buttons or the speed 
call numbers. So that’s the important part of any wide area 911 
system that has a number of different emergency response 
vehicles. So I think maybe we could understand each other if 
we appreciate what the definition of enhanced is. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. First of all I want to deal with the 
fact that I think there’s two key promises that relate to 911 in 
one way or another that I’d like to have some clarification on. 
 
First of all, the promise that was made to provide VLT (video 
lottery terminal) revenue to municipalities, which is part of this 
whole debate and discussion . . . and now we’re providing a 
service which had already been committed previously as a 
partial fulfilment of the VLT revenues. 
 
Out of that, three questions. What would the estimated revenues 
to municipalities have been from VLT revenues? How does the 
cost of this service compare with those revenues? And wouldn’t  



1052  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

you agree there’s quite a difference between the promised VLT 
revenues and the provision of this service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I did not see because he was sitting 
directly behind me . . . 
 
The Chair:  Does the Government House Leader wish to 
have leave? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I indeed wish for leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I did not see 
the former Speaker because he’s sitting directly behind the 
member from Estevan. But we are joined today by the former 
Speaker. I’d ask Mr. Rolfes to rise and be recognized again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I don’t know how nostalgic the 
former Speaker is feeling these days about his days here. Some 
days it goes relatively smoothly, and some days you’re probably 
going to be just as happy you’re not back as Speaker. But we 
certainly welcome Mr. Rolfes. 
 
He was here during a difficult period actually. We had such 
things as the GRIP debate, and Mr. Rolfes was here during a 
difficult period. I always thought he discharged those duties 
very well. I never actually had an opportunity to say it because 
we never had an opportunity when he was in the House to sort 
of say goodbye. So I want to take the opportunity now to thank 
Herman for four years of, I think, very good work as a Speaker, 
and I think he was Speaker during some very difficult times. 
 
Thanks, Herman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Our caucus would 
like to join with the Government House Leader in welcoming 
Wes Robbins to the House today and also the former Speaker. 
And I fully agree with the Government House Leader that in 
fact that government did create a lot of problems, not only for 
the Speaker but for the people of the province. 
 
But we do realize that Mr. Rolfes had some very interesting 
times, and we welcome him here today to join with a more 
relaxed period now that they’ve calmed themselves somewhat. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 43 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  To go back to the exchange that we 
were having in the Committee of the Whole on the 911, Mr. 
Speaker, and the questions that the member from Rosthern had 
posed is that the VLT revenues were never, ever promised or 
committed for this particular purpose. The municipal 
organizations, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities), and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations) were asked to make recommendations on 
how the money could be returned to . . . some money, 9.5 
million in last year’s budget, could be returned to communities 
 not municipalities, but communities. 
 
In many months of deliberation, the only consensus that this 
group was able to arrive at was the need for the provincial 911 
emergency response service. So from the $9.5 million, $2.4 
million was devoted to the GIS (geographic information 
systems), the provincial mapping exercise which is required for 
the location function of the 911, particularly in rural areas. 
 
Then $3 million was dedicated, through an order in council 
some weeks ago, for the enhancement to the RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police) police radio system which enables 
them to act as the call centre. Then there will be a commitment 
over the time frame of approximately $5.6 million; that’s in 
terms of the investment that SaskTel will have to make. So this 
comes to a total so far of 11.3 million which is greater than the 
percentage of the VLT revenues that was originally in the 
budget last year. 
 
So that money, as I said, was never specifically earmarked for 
that purpose. But being the only consensus that the groups 
could come to, those amounts were taken out and dedicated for 
this use. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I now see we are joined by the 
former member from . . . I think the riding was called Pelly 
when Mr. Lusney was there. We’ve been joined by Mr. Lusney. 
 
Mr. Lusney was first elected in a by-election; I think, it was 
1977. It was a by-election that we were thankful to win. We 
went on a few months later to win the general election in ’78, 
and I tell you, we were concerned about it when it came. 
 
Mr. Lusney served ably for some years, including the years in 
opposition. From 1982 to 1986, the opposition consisted of the 
so-called gang of eight. There will always be a special bond, I 
think, between the eight of us who served during that difficult 
period. I never see any one of them but what a flood of  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

memories don’t come back. 
 
I welcome Norm Lusney warmly today. Norm. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 43 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner:  The previous two people asking questions 
comment on the fact that there was a problem of 
communication and cut lines. I think there must have been a 
similar problem between SUMA, SARM, and the minister 
because they were fully in belief that they were getting that 
money. So it’s a rather interesting cut there. 
 
Madam Minister, do you think that you’ve damaged the 
credibility of your department and government by reneging on 
those VLT promises? And what reasons would you give the 
municipalities to trust your promises in the future? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure how 
germane this particular question is to the issue of 911 
emergency service in the province, but I will say this: that in 
these times of fiscal restraint and in these times of offloading by 
senior levels of government where we back-fill dollar for dollar 
the federal cuts in health care for example, that’s it’s 
unreasonable to think that we would leave a sum of money just 
sitting in a fund somewhere where people couldn’t make a 
decision on how they wanted it to be spent. 
 
The opportunity was given from early 1995 for almost a year, 
until early 1996, to come up with some tangible way of 
returning this money to communities. The only consensus that 
was able to be reached was this one: that 911 was a priority for 
all of those groups. We acted on what they identified as their 
priority. The results are here before you today in terms of this 
Bill and in terms of the financial commitments that we’ve 
already . . . not only commitments made but money expended in 
terms of that. 
 
So I don’t think it’s a matter of credibility at all, Mr. Chairman. 
We have asked them for their views. We have responded to 
what they have identified as the most important initiative that 
they had agreed on, and the result is what is before us today. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. The comment of back-filling is 
an interesting one. We had offloading, and you take credit for 
back-filling. Now you’ve offloaded on SUMA and SARM, and 
I guess they’ll have to back-fill out of the back pockets of the 
people down there. 
 
Something which is fairly close to the constituency that I’m 
from . . . If we’re doing some work with 911 and looking at 
service districts, telephone exchanges, and these sorts of things, 
are we also prepared to review the size of telephone exchanges 
as well while we’re sort of looking at this whole issue? 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the size of telephone 
exchanges is under review. There are approximately 345 
telephone exchanges. Some of them are very small. And as the 
member probably knows, it’s because of the way that our 
telephone system evolved, where there were small cooperatives 
and local associations who built the lines and operated their 
local telephone companies. 
 
When they eventually became part of the SaskTel network or 
the provincial network, some of them were . . . I’m sure of the 
exact date, but I think it’s not more than about 15 years ago that 
the last ones actually became part of the provincial network. I 
can remember being the secretary of our local telephone 
company, the Moon Lake Telephone Company, until I believe 
about 1976 or thereabouts. 
 
We recognize this as a problem, and work is being done on it; 
however, it isn’t simple, and it is not inexpensive. But we are 
making progress on it, and we hope to have some 
announcements on some realignment of at least some of the 
boundaries, the very smallest exchanges, in the fairly near 
future. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I think this is one of those places 
where amalgamation is working from the grass roots up, and 
you’ll probably get a whole lot more support than you had on 
some of the other ideas. 
 
A question regarding display of addresses on 911 service, this 
was supposed to happen this term. It seems to have been put off 
till some unspecified time. I’m wondering if there is a time line 
in place to have that all in place. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, if I understand the 
question correctly, the geographic information services that are 
required to provide the complete enhanced service, including 
the location which will be indicated when a caller calls 911, is 
going to be an evolutionary thing. 
 
And of course those urban areas that already have complete 
addresses and so on are already enhanced, and work will 
continue. 
 
That’s what we mean by saying that it is a three- to five-year 
time frame. And in order to make the fully enhanced service 
available, the full addressing or the mapping service is a 
precursor to that. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  I’m glad it’s in the works. And I just feel that 
it’s unfortunate that this time rural Saskatchewan is left out, 
being in second place for a substantial period of time. 
 
Dealing with the operation and administration of this particular 
system, how much . . . if a board will be established to 
supervise policies and implementation, will municipalities be 
able to select representatives to that administrative board, and 
how will those representatives be chosen? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we’re just having 
some discussion here about the future advisory committee. But 
the advice that we took from the Emergency Services Advisory  



1054  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Committee that was in place previous to the drafting had 
representation from SUMA and SARM. And they have both 
indicated a desire to participate in the development of this as it 
moves forward. 
 
We had representation from SAHO, the health organizations; 
the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations); the 
existing enhanced 911 areas, being Regina, Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert, and the developing south-west region. There were 
senior government officials from Municipal Government, 
Health, SaskTel, Justice. And we would want . . . Nothing is 
cast in stone. We would want to make sure that some 
emergency service providers and other relevant personnel 
whose advice would be valuable would be included in the 
advisory committee. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, I 
would just like to ask you, if in the event that SaskTel is 
privatized, how would this affect your plans for this 911 
service? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is not to be a 
subsidized service. There has to be a cost recovery of the 911 
service as SaskTel is moving in that direction, not on the basis 
of any privatization initiative but because of the competitive 
aspect of the business environment that they’re now operating 
in which represents, as you know, a departure from the past. 
 
So as this is developed, it’s always borne in mind that there is 
no subsidy to this service, that it would at least be at cost 
recovery. So it shouldn’t make any difference what the mandate 
of the company is, that surely any corporate citizen in the form 
of a telephone company operating in the province of 
Saskatchewan would realize the value that this initiative has to 
the people of the province, and that as long as there was full 
cost recovery for the service, it shouldn’t make any difference. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
would further like to ask that if in fact SaskTel is privatized, 
what would happen to the appropriation of the VLT 10 per cent 
funding that you have promised towards 911? And would the 
appropriation of these monies then be disbursed to the 
telephone companies involved? 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there is absolutely no 
tie in the future to any revenue from VLTs and the 911 system 
or its development. 
 
And I hasten to add that I wouldn’t want to presume what the 
outcome of the Crown review will be, but we’re certainly not 
proceeding on the basis that there will be a privatization of 
SaskTel. The role of SaskTel in the business economy of 
Saskatchewan and Canada and the social role that it may have 
to play will all be considered by the terms of the Crown review 
that everyone is aware of and that will be taking place over the 
months in 1996. And I see no reason why the activities of the 
review will have any effect in any way upon the development of 
the 911 system. 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, 
then if telephone companies would not be subsidized in any 
way or form in the event of privatization, can we get some 
assurance from the minister and the present government that the 
10 per cent funding that was promised to municipalities would 
then be reinstated to those municipalities in some way or form 
for their benefit? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it was announced that 
there would not be an appropriation from the VLTs for that, the 
purpose that was thought of or the notion in 1995 when the 
original allocation was made. The organizations were not able 
to agree on a tangible way that they all could find consensus on 
for how the money could be used. 
 
Now the money is going into the General Revenue Fund which 
is being . . . and so from there it’s being used to back-fill the 
federal cuts in health, in education, in social services. If that 
money wasn’t being used for those purpose out of the General 
Revenue Fund, then the tax bill, the property tax bill, the 
education bill, at the local level, would be higher; there’s no 
doubt about it. And so in that sense that money is being 
returned to all the people of the province, but independent 
completely of the 911 initiative. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, in 
view of the cutting to municipalities, the funding cuts to 
municipalities, I am positive that should the 10 per cent be 
reinstated for the use of municipalities, that you can be sure that 
they would find some very even-handed ways of distributing 
this money in order to help municipalities run efficiently. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I just want to state again that around 
the language of how the VLT money could be spent with the 
advice of the municipal and health organizations of the 
province, the word municipality was never used. It was to be 
returned to the community, the larger community, in some way 
that they could identify. And frankly I can’t think of a better 
initiative than this, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  With this process being sort of a made in 
Saskatchewan process, my question is how will the 
effectiveness of this service be assessed? Like who is going to 
make judgement calls on it as to how well it is working and 
where it needs improvements? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I would assume 
there’d be a couple of levels of this. The members of the 
advisory committee which would include I would think, service 
providers, would measure the effectiveness from their point of 
view, but at the end of the day the true effectiveness of the 
system has to be judged by the public, by the user of the system. 
And if they feel comfortable and secure and well served by it, 
then it would be deemed a success. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  What further technical requirements, Madam 
Minister, will be made of local ambulance and police 
departments to enable them to work in conjunction with this 
particular system? Do you have any idea how much those 
technical requirements would cost and who’s going to be  



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

responsible for those costs? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, one of the 
positive aspects of this initiative is that it will provide a 
consistent provincial framework for all emergency service 
providers and their communication needs. And they will be able 
to . . . well just the same as they are now. 
 
Some of these systems are funded by health districts; some of 
them are funded by municipalities; some communities have 
fund-raising events. There’s just a whole range of ways that 
money is raised for these purposes. And some, the new one in 
the south-west, there will be a service fee on the telephone bill. 
So there’s just . . . as many systems as there are out there right 
now, there are different ways of funding them and different 
ways of enhancing them. 
 
But, for instance, on the matrix that I’ve seen a demonstration 
of, or on the system, my rural legal location was punched in in 
this case, because it was a hands-on demonstration where there 
wasn’t a call line to call in. And a map of the province was 
scrolled up and a light came on right where my rural residence 
is. 
 
And then it’s framed and moves up closer and it says . . . a 
matrix comes up for this location saying, for this location the 
fire number is this, the police number is this, and the ambulance 
number is this. Or in this case the operator, say an RCMP 
officer in his car, would just press the appropriate button to put 
it through to the response that has been identified as the need. 
 
So the next step, I’m told, is that there could be mobile units in 
all emergency vehicles that would indicate . . . When I called in, 
the operator at the call centre or in the car would see not only 
where my location is and what the appropriate responses are, 
but there would be an indication that there might already be an 
emergency vehicle of some type in very close proximity to my 
location. 
 
And the technology is unfolding and changing as we speak, and 
of course it gets more and more affordable all the time as well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Minister, you 
partially answered the question in the direction that I was going 
to head in in questions, in terms of describing the system as you 
envisage it. 
 
And I understand that you’re saying that the first step in this 
process, or an important initial step in this process is the 
mapping of the locations. Can you tell me, please, what the time 
line is on this part of the program and what its approximate cost 
will be? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the entire GIS, the 
$2.4 million that was allocated for the mapping, has not been 
completely expended yet, and so, I mean, it’s a system that is 
being built. So when a community or a health district or a 
region indicates that they’re ready to put together all of the 
elements that are required to bring their area into the provincial 
911 system, then the mapping will be part of that. There’s 
addressing, mapping, the communications system  all the  

parts. And that’s why we’re saying that there’s a three- to 
five-year timetable to put all the pieces together. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, if I understand that right, then 
until . . . let’s use Melfort as an example. If Melfort has not 
indicated, or the Melfort health district or whatever the 
appropriate authority is representing the community of Melfort, 
using that as an example, if they have not indicated to this 
process that they are ready to join the 911 system, then the 
mapping does not take place; will they then, in that time, be 
excluded from any 911 service? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are a number of 
components that have to go together in order for an area, 
whether it’s like the town of Melfort, city of Melfort, or 
whether it’s a rural area like the south-west, that all have to be 
brought together including, you know, the . . . And it’s not 
enough to just have the addressing. Like it has to be entered 
into the database that is compatible with the computer hardware 
and software in the telephone system. 
 
So there’s a lot of work to be done to bring all of the elements 
together. And when communities indicate that they’re ready and 
they need advice to make sure that they’ve got everything that 
they need in place to be part of the province-wide system, then 
they would so indicate to the advisory board. And the timing of 
bringing areas into the provincial system, and the staging of it, 
would be determined at that level. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. Well let’s again, using 
Melfort as the example because it’s familiar, let’s assume then 
that the community has indicated to the 911 system that they’re 
interested and that this mapping process of that community . . . 
and I recognize that that could be any community in rural areas 
or whatever, and we recognize that that community is now 
included into the 911 system. And if I as a person having a 
residence in that community then dial 911, will you tell me, step 
by step, what happens? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well the vision is that  and it’s a 
big technical job to do this  but the vision would be that, just 
say that there’s going to be one . . . there’s no call centre right 
now that would be available in Melfort. So there would be the 
one that’s going to be established, outside of the ones that there 
currently are, would be the RCMP call centre in Regina for 
example. 
 
So first of all you would have to have Melfort all addressed. 
You would have to have all the SaskTel hardware in place. You 
would have to have the database of the information relative to 
Melfort. You’d have to have that all done. Then someone . . . 
you’d have to be aware of what all the emergency responses 
available in Melfort were and where they were and what the 
numbers were to access them and so forth. And then someone 
dialling 911 would get the call centre who would have the 
location. Then all these other things, having been in place, 
determine the appropriate response and would have the facility 
to stay on the line until the connection was made with the 
appropriate response. 
 
(1630) 



1056  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Okay, Minister, I appreciate all these things 
that have to come together in order to make any 911 system 
effective and functioning. 
 
When that call goes into the call centre, I would think that it 
really is irrelevant if that call centre is in Melfort or in Regina. 
With the technology, that would be transparent. It really doesn’t 
matter where that call is directed, isn’t that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  That is correct, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Well I recognize that you say that like, for 
example, Prince Albert, who has a fully enhanced 911 system 
existing and has their own call centre, that it may be appropriate 
for the calls in that existing 911, fully enhanced 911 system to 
continue to go to that call centre. What you’re providing here, 
as I understand it, is a call centre system that would cover all 
the rest of us in the province. 
 
Using Melfort as an example again, when that call goes into this 
call centre  Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, wherever it’s 
feasibly determined that that should be  as I understood from 
an answer you gave to a previous member, that the computer 
screen would come on and would indicate that it is a location in 
Melfort. The screen would expand and show that button A is 
the fire number, button B is the ambulance number, button C is 
the police number, button D is whatever  that might be . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . There’s only the three? Health, 
police and fire? Okay. 
 
So then what you do . . . the operator then would determine 
from the nature of the call if they push A, B, C, or any 
combinations, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s correct. 
And the reason . . . It’s a good example that you raise  the 
Melfort, Prince Albert, for example. Like it would be, I 
suppose, reasonably practical, given the distance between those 
two centres to, for example, include Melfort in Prince Albert’s 
area. Melfort might contribute something towards the cost of 
operating the call centre in Prince Albert. You know, some 
arrangement could be made. 
 
The danger in that is that in other communities that are farther 
away from where there already is a service, or where it’s simply 
not practical for them to join up with somebody else, that there 
is a possibility by letting these things develop, these kind of 
alliances develop, that we would end up with a number of 
systems in the province that were not compatible with each 
other in terms of the kind of hardware . . . computer hardware 
and software they use. 
 
And there might also be great gaps in service to the rest of rural 
and northern Saskatchewan, which would be really unfortunate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I’m less impressed than the hon. member is. 
If for example that same call came from Zenon Park, further out 
and more remote, I fail to understand why there is any 
difference because of the technology, where the call comes 
from or where the call centre is located. Is that not all totally 
transparent with the digital network that SaskTel now has in  

place? 
 
I don’t follow the argument about . . . it shouldn’t matter on the 
call, if it comes from the most remote community in 
Saskatchewan. Where the call centre is answered at should be 
totally irrelevant. It’s much more important is where the nearest 
emergency respondent service is, not anything to do with the 
call centres. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that is the important 
thing. And again, we’re talking about the same thing. All I’m 
saying is that, in the absence of this legislation which provides 
the framework and establishes that there’ll be one call centre for 
those that are not served now, you might have areas of 
population that are large enough to provide an enhanced service 
for themselves. And then there might not be enough population 
or enough cohesion among the people that were left out of 
those arrangements, to make a provincial service affordable. So 
that’s basically the reason for this legislation. 
 
You’re right, like it doesn’t matter where the call comes from. 
But if you have too many systems develop on their own, 
covering just a local area and leaving out fringe areas, you 
could foresee a scenario where those fringe areas didn’t have 
enough population or were too far apart to support a 
self-financing, at least, participation in the 911. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Except that . . . I mean if we’re in 
agreement that it doesn’t matter where the call comes from and 
it doesn’t matter where the call is received at or answered at, 
then why would that make any difference if the call comes from 
2 miles outside of Saskatoon or 2 miles from the Manitoba 
border? Because once the connection is made, once you make 
the digital linkages through SaskTel’s network, there’s no cost 
differential between where that cost originates from on the cost 
side. Like from the 911 call going to a 911 responder operator, 
surely there’s no cost difference on that instance. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, Mr. Chairman, and that’s not the 
point. The point is just that in order to justify a call centre that 
can be comprehensive for the province, if a number of 
independent call centres were allowed to develop all over the 
province wherever there was sufficient population to support it, 
then a call centre that could serve those who were left out of 
that process might not be viable. That’s what I’m saying. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Well then surely that’s the responsibility of 
the provincial government to make sure a call centre system is 
all comprehensive to all citizens of this province, not just to the 
ones that happen to be sitting next to Prince Albert or 
Saskatoon or Regina. And surely, that that’s the whole 
motivation of a 911 system, is first of all that it is something 
that all residents of the province have equal access to. And 
that’s why I’m trying to make the point. It doesn’t matter where 
that call originates from if you exercise your responsibility for 
establishing call centres. If the call centre . . . if there was only 
one here in Regina, and in order to look after that one citizen 
out in the most remote corner of the province . . . that it’d just 
be one more call in comparison to the thousand or 500 or 
whatever each operator would handle in a day. 
 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

So I’m trying to make the point that surely the cost of the 
system coming from the originator of the 911 emergency call to 
the call centre is not a critical factor with the technology that 
SaskTel now has. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Yes. Well, Mr. Chairman, again we’re 
agreeing. That’s exactly the purpose of this legislation, is to 
make sure that every person in Saskatchewan has access to a 
response, a qualified response, when he or she dials 911. And 
so we’re completely on the same page in this. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Not quite. What you’ve indicated to me so 
far is that a major component of the cost of this is (1) the cost 
of mapping and identifying all the locations throughout the 
province; (2) the technological side of it which is the hardware, 
the database, the software and things of that nature that you 
have to put into place; (3) the establishment of call centres with 
the equipment that shows the location of the call, and then, I 
guess, where we say okay, now the matrix comes up and what 
the numbers are of the three main areas. And you have an 
individual sitting there, at the other end of that screen in 
whatever call centre it is, to answer that call. 
 
Would you say that the things that I’ve outlined are the critical 
components of the system as you’re outlining it and that that 
represents the very greatest cost of the whole system? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, basically we would 
agree with that. The part that is missing is  what we’re taking 
for granted  is the communications infrastructure, and that’s 
where, you know, a lot of technical work has to be done. And 
that’s why some of the Maritime provinces are  they have a 
much smaller area than we do  are working at this initiative at 
the same time. It’s technically quite complicated and it takes 
some time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I appreciate the difficulty that you have 
here. And I guess where I’m heading in this, is that where I 
have a great deal of concern between what you’re proposing, 
where you end up with all of this effort, all of this work, all of 
the technology being brought to bear and all you end up with is 
a call-forwarding station in essence, where the very next step to 
get to what you defined as the fully enhanced system is to have, 
instead of a telephone operator at the other end of the line, is a 
fully trained emergency measures technician who can provide 
on-line counselling to the individual that’s initiated that 911 
call. That’s a critical component of it. 
 
And while that is happening, then that person has the 
technology that indicates — as you said, is technically possible 
by putting the locators in emergency vehicles — that on that 
same screen that you discussed earlier, that they know that if 
it’s coming from my residence and an ambulance or a police car 
happens to be two blocks away, that they know that that’s the 
most appropriate person to direct to that emergency situation as 
indicated. 
 
I recognize that if you’re in Zenon Park or out in remote areas 
of the province, that the likelihood of that response time is 
going to be much greater because of the scarcity of population 
and the availability of services. I recognize that. But that makes  

it even more important that there is the live, on-line advice in 
order for that person to try to deal with the emergency. 
 
And surely we’re still talking to people and surely we’re now 
talking to get that last step, to a fully enhanced 911 system 
being not the most significant part of the overall cost of this 
project. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, this is exactly 
the reason that we’re providing for the advisory committee. 
People that are working in the emergency service area will be 
members of that committee, will give us advice on that. 
 
But what you’re describing is my vision of an enhanced service. 
So I think that we’re agreeing on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I want to, with leave, make an 
introduction. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I would like 
the House to recognize a former member from Regina for many 
years, former colleague in cabinet and a Finance minister. 
Those are the good old days, Walter, when we had lots of 
money. I want Walter Smishek to rise and be acknowledged. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Walter Smishek came out of a trade 
union background and worked with the RWDSU (Retail, 
Wholesale and Department Store Union), went on to serve in a 
number of portfolios and indeed was minister of Finance for 
some years. Walter proved himself to be a person of many skills 
and many talents before he finally left. 
 
Thanks, Walter, for coming. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 43 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I recognize that 
what you’re saying is that you’re making a commitment to us 
today in terms of where you’re heading. But that is not 
anywhere in this legislation, in terms of where you’re heading. 
 
All what we’re getting is a description of this sort of matrix 911 
system, and that isn’t what people are going to expect when 
they dial 911. Because what we’ve ended up doing is 
short-changing people into believing that they’re going to get a 
911 system, not as you’re describing it, but as they’ve come to 
believe it exists. And 911’s top-of-mind awareness if you like, 
in people’s mind, does not come from anything you or I say. It 
probably comes from television in terms of saying if they dial  



1058  Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 1996 

911, and how many people wouldn’t expect that there’s going 
to be helicopters and everything else arriving? 
 
But certainly they expect to have someone at the other end of 
the line that is more than a glorified telephone operator who has 
only the training to decide to punch one of three buttons. Surely 
we need an operator that has a lot more technical background in 
emergencies, and I don’t understand why that is such a leap 
compared to what you’re putting into place. 
 
How much more would it cost to have fully trained EMT 
technicians on the other end of that 911 call? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for his advice. And it’s exactly this kind of detail that 
we’ll be looking to the members of the advisory committee, 
who are from the health organizations and people that are 
engaged in emergency response, to help us design exactly the 
kind of a system that he describes, because that’s what comes 
within the definition of fully enhanced. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Then I suspect, from your response, that 
you have no problem supporting the amendments that we’re 
going to make that defines the answering point as a fully 
enhanced 911 answering point. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think we already 
addressed this point in questioning by a member earlier, is that 
while it certainly is our goal to end up with, at the end of the 
development phase, a fully enhanced system responsive to the 
needs of all of the people in Saskatchewan, be they rural or 
urban, and the one thing that one must be very careful to do  
which is why we keep on stressing that it’s a three- to five-year 
implementation process, that it is very detailed and complicated 
 is that the worst thing we could do is to raise people’s 
expectations of what kind of response they’d get when they 
dialled that emergency number and have that response be less 
than adequate. That would be very undesirable. 
 
So that is why we will be looking to the members of the 
advisory committee for advice in how to design that. But again, 
that’s why we can’t incorporate that into the legislation because 
then we would be precluding parts of the province, who are not 
completely ready to take part at that level of service, from 
coming on the system until they’ve achieved that. And we think 
that with care and with listening to the advice of the advisory 
committee, that we will be able to have a system that meets the 
needs of all the people in Saskatchewan, rural as well as urban. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Well, Minister, I’m sorry but I think that by 
the very day that you proclaim this legislation in the form that 
you’re proposing it, you are going to then build the expectations 
in people’s minds that there is a 911 system in place, and there 
is not. There is no further 911 system with this legislation the 
day after it’s proclaimed than what we have right now, and yet 
you’ll have created the expectations that throughout this 
province that there’s a 911 system. And the simple truth is there 
is not. 
 

And that’s why I do not understand why your government does 
not have the ability to make the commitment at this time to the 
fully enhanced service. I recognize that you can’t snap your 
fingers or wiggle your nose and it’s instantly going to happen. 
We recognize that. But surely it’s an important commitment to 
the people of this province to embody in this legislation the 
commitment that what you’re going to end up with is a fully 
enhanced 911 system and that that should be able to be 
embodied in the legislation so that there are no false 
expectations of what’s happening. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, you know there are 
some things that you can’t legislate, and part of what we need 
to build this system is partnerships. And like we have some 
three municipalities in the province already that have a fully 
enhanced system, one that’s moving towards that, a number of 
people that have basic systems, a number of people who are not 
even close to having a system; some health districts that are 
going ahead on the basis of using another temporary number for 
the time being. 
 
And so I think it’s very important that first of all we establish 
the government’s commitment to providing the framework that 
the legislation provides. We will then, having made that 
commitment, then work with members of the advisory 
committee, with the other partners that are necessary to make 
the system fully enhanced. And then we will incrementally 
move in that direction, providing resources where necessary, 
acting cooperatively with all the other people and elements that 
are necessary, in order to move towards the system that serves 
everybody at the highest level. 
 
But we do keep stressing that it is a three- to five-year timetable 
in order to do this and that there are many other players in the 
system, and their needs and the investments that they’ve made 
so far and their advice as to the expectations and the mechanics 
of the system that will serve the people of Saskatchewan in the 
best possible way needs to be taken into account. 
 
So we acknowledge that the legislation is a first step that 
indicates our commitment, and then the development of the 
system that will meet everyone’s needs is a partnership that has 
to be developed over a three- to five-year time frame. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I absolutely accept your 
commitment that you’ve given here today in terms of your 
government’s intention of moving towards a fully enhanced 911 
system. Hansard will show that in the record, but excuse me, I 
would rather have it in the legislation, because we’ve had an 
Agriculture minister in the past say that you wouldn’t have to 
pay back the GRIP bills and we know what happened with that. 
 
So despite the pronouncements of ministers, it’s not necessarily 
that’s what’s going to end up being delivered to the people of 
this province. And if the commitment that you’re making today 
is indeed there, and I am not questioning it, why are you not 
willing to put that commitment down in legislation? And if it 
requires a time limit extension in order to make that 
commitment reality, surely that that could be a commitment that 
you’re prepared to make in the writing of the legislation. 



April 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the problem with the 
approach that the member opposite describes is that this is 
incremental; it is developmental; it needs to have a lot of 
working together of the partners in order to devise the best 
possible system. 
 
You’re not going to wave a magic wand and have a 911 system 
wall to wall in Saskatchewan. And so we need to provide a 
framework that’s practical, that can be built on through those 
partnerships and with the incremental investment and 
incremental development work. 
 
So if we pass the kind of legislation that contemplates an 
instant enhanced 911 across the province, that would be the 
biggest barrier towards getting there, because the whole 
province is not ready at this time for it. So this is why we’re 
providing the framework and moving with our partners towards 
that goal. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I appreciate what you’re saying, 
but nowhere in the legislation does it make that kind of a 
commitment to moving even towards a fully enhanced 911 
system. What it defines is what is the only obligation that you 
will have, is that you end up with a minimal answering point 
that is a glorified call forwarding or call despatching kind of a 
service, and that’s the only commitment you’re making. 
 
I am again asking why your government is not prepared to make 
that commitment. I recognize that it can’t happen 
instantaneously, but I don’t understand why you’re not, in the 
legislation, willing to make the commitment to the fully 
enhanced 911 system. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it’s quite simple 
actually  is that the government is not the only partner in 
building this system. And so what we need to do and what we 
are doing here is providing the framework. The people of 
Saskatchewan have spoken through the municipal 
organizations, and through SAHO, the health organizations, 
that they have identified this as a high priority for themselves. 
 
A questionnaire was used somewhere about a year ago in 
soliciting the views of people as to what kind of a system they 
thought would serve them the best and how it could be funded 
and how it should be organized and so on. And we’re 
responding to that. And as I said in response to another 
member’s question, at the end of the day the people who will 
make the judgement as to whether this is a successful system or 
not will be the users, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we have faith in them. We’ll get feedback from them, 
we’ll get the advice from the advisory committee, and within 
the framework that we’re providing by the legislation we will 
move towards the best possible level of service for the people 
of Saskatchewan and they will be the judge of that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I think that in parts of your 
legislation that you define that you can require certain 
partnerships or certain stakeholders to participate in the terms 
of this whole process of 911. And I accept that logic, because 
you can’t have a patchwork thing where there could be  

compliance or non-compliance, participation or 
non-participation. And any of the arguments that you’ve made 
so far to define the system that is going only part of the way are 
the same arguments that you would make if you were going to 
go to the full, enhanced system. 
 
Your people have consulted with people. They’ve talked to the 
911 committee in the north-east and they have said that this 
does not go far enough. What they need is a fully enhanced 
system. And my question is this again  why will you not 
commit to the fully enhanced system, recognizing it’ll take 
time, recognizing all the partners have to be put into place. But 
why will you not exercise the leadership that you should have, 
and saying clearly within the legislation that this is where we’re 
going? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well part of the reason, as I’ve said, is 
that the whole province is not ready all at the same time. 
Everybody is not in the same stage of readiness, be it a health 
district, a rural area, a city, one of the large cities, the small 
cities and towns; they’re not all at the same state of readiness. 
And so we need to work with them and we are showing 
leadership in terms of saying, here’s the framework; we’re 
willing to work with partners to bring us all to the state that we 
want to be in at the end of the day, which is the best possible 
level of service. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

Committee of Finance 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1029 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1029 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1029 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1030 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Whitmore ..................................................................................................................................................................................1030 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1030 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1030 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1030 
Shillington ...................................................................................................................................................1038, 1050, 1052, 1057 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1052 
Atkinson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1051 
Lorje ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1038 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
National Volunteers Week  

Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................1030 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1031 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1031 

Earth Day  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1030 
Murrell ......................................................................................................................................................................................1032 

Northlands College Student Residence  
Goulet ........................................................................................................................................................................................1031 

Saskatchewan Elocution and Debate Association Mock Parliament  
Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................1031 

Claybank Brick Plant Historical Society  
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1032 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Seniors’ Health Services  

Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1032 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1032 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1033 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1034 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1034 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1035 

Agriculture Trade Mission  
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................1035 
Renaud ......................................................................................................................................................................................1035 

Emergency Health Services  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1035 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1035 

Rental Damage Deposits  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1036 
Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................1036 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS  
Nipawin Awarded Saskatchewan Winter Games  

Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1037 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1038 

 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
Bill No. 76  An Act to amend The Health Districts Act, to repeal The Union Hospital Act and The Lloydminster Hospital 
Act, 1948 and to make consequential amendments to other Acts  

Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
Bill No. 77  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act  

Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act  
Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1038 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1039 

Bill No. 54  An Act respecting Conservation Easements and to make consequential amendments to other Acts  
Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1040 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................1040 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................1041 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1045 

Bill No. 73  An Act to amend The Planning and Development Act, 1983  
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1047 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 911 System and to 
make consequential amendments to other Acts  

Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................1048 
Gantefoer ........................................................................................................................................................................1049, 1055 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................1051 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1054 

 


