













































April 19, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1001 

 April 19, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 

respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the names on the petition are from Punnichy, Maryfield, 

Salisbury, and all small communities around Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also am 

presenting petitions of names of people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Most of the signatures and petitioners are from the city of 

Regina. 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

The petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Moosomin, Francis, and throughout Saskatchewan. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Assiniboia, Grenfell, and Kayville. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the future of the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, 

Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, truly 

represent a rather broad cross-section of the province. We have 

Regina, Saskatoon, down to Yorkton, up to Esterhazy, Grenfell, 

Milestone, White City, Wapella, and numerous other centres. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, on 

day number 34  the 34th day running that I have been with 

my colleagues and the people of Saskatchewan in presenting 

petitions in regards to saving the Plains Health Centre. The 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, I see 

are basically all from the Regina area; in fact many from the 

Regina South constituency, Regina Coronation Park, Regina 

Victoria, Regina Lakeview, Regina Centre, Elphinstone, 

Northeast, Regina Dewdney, Regina Sherwood, Regina 

Wascana Plains, and Regina Qu’Appelle Valley constituencies, 

and I’m sure . . . I would like to present these today. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to present some petitions on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Some of these were collected at the Foam Lake 

firearms information rally. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally pass the Bill to 

protect the rights of firearms owners, otherwise known by 

short title as The Saskatchewan Property Rights Act, and 

as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

  



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

These petitions come from the Kelliher, Estevan, Sheho, Foam 

Lake, Springside, Kelvington, Wynyard, Sturgis, Theodore, 

Yorkton, Kuroki  all across the north-east part of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I also further have petitions that were collected up at the 

Saskatchewan Meat Processors Association that I also would 

like to turn in also. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition from people from Regina, Saltcoats, but mainly from 

the area of Kamsack. And I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 

Amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, which will 

benefit all property owners in Saskatchewan, and 

specifically firearms owners, in order to halt the federal 

Liberal government from infringing upon the rights of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 

present petitions on behalf of the people from the Maple Creek, 

Piapot, Eastend, Swift Current, Rush Lake, and Morse areas. 

I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to support Bill 31, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (Property 

Rights), which will benefit all property owners in 

Saskatchewan, and specifically firearm owners, in order to 

halt the federal Liberal government from infringing upon 

the rights of Saskatchewan people. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 12(7), and they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the government to 

take action to allow an increase in security deposits on 

rental properties. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the House, 10 grade 11 and 12 students from my 

home community, from Prince Albert. These are students from 

the Prince Albert Christian School. 

 

They are accompanied by the principal, Dale Hassett, and two 

teachers, Dale Ehlert and David Haynes. And I’m hoping I 

pronounced Darren’s name properly. The writing on this is, I 

think, almost as messy as mine, so it’s a little difficult to 

recognize. 

 

But I would want to say to you that the school is situated on 

River Street in Prince Albert and it’s served a number of 

functions. In 1991 it was the building that we used to house our 

election campaign. And some might argue that it’s gone to a 

much better purpose, serving the Prince Albert Christian School 

students. 

 

So I’d like all members to join with me and welcome them to 

the legislature today. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the House, a 

group of students from Sask. Valley School Division from the 

community of Osler. Osler is a growing community, as are all 

the nine schools that are part of Sask. Valley School Division. 

And the Osler School has a great reputation for academic 

excellence. 

 

We have 36 students from that community and they are here 

with their teachers, Glen Osmond and Dwayne Heidt, as well as 

chairpersons, Brenda Andres and Loretta Sawatzky. 

 

I would ask them to stand and let’s give them a good welcome 

to Regina and to this House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this 

opportunity to join the member opposite, the member from 

Rosthern, in welcoming the students here from Osler. I was the 

reeve of the municipality that . . . of Corman Park, that Osler is 

in, for a long time and have many good relationships with the 

people in the town of Osler and the Sask. Valley School 

Division, and know it to be a very great place in Saskatchewan 

to come from. And I want to wish the . . . I met the group on the 

stairs this morning on the way down to the House, and I just 

want to wish them again a very pleasant stay in Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of our 

caucus I would also like to welcome through you, the people 

from the Prince Albert Christian School. It’s good to have you 

here as well, and hope this will be an informative time as you 

visit the House and Regina. 

 

And I’d also forgotten that we had a number of Osler people 

behind me. Welcome as well. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 

a couple of groups that I’d like to introduce this morning,  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

 

Mr. Speaker. First, seated behind the bar, Mr. Speaker, are three 

members of the Manitoba legislature who are here visiting with 

us this morning. And I will be meeting with them later this 

morning along with my colleague, the minister responsible for 

Northern Affairs. 

 

So I would like to introduce at this time, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Eric 

Robinson, the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 

Rupertsland and is currently the critic of Northern Affairs. The 

member, Mr. Oscar Lathlin, who is the MLA from The Pas and 

is the critic of Northern Affairs as well, in the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) caucus. As well as, Mr. Gerard Jennissen, 

who is the MLA for Flin Flon and the critic for Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

And I would ask the members of the Assembly to join with me 

in welcoming our members from Manitoba this morning to our 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  As well, Mr. Speaker, this morning it 

gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and to members of 

the Assembly, seated in your gallery, a number of individuals 

and persons who are involved, through their leadership roles 

with groups or organizations, who have made a very significant 

contribution, in the development of legislation, to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Because I have a number of individuals whom I wish to 

introduce, I would ask that when I do that that they rise, and 

then the House may wish to acknowledge them at the 

conclusion of my introduction of all of my guests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the STEP (selective traffic enforcement 

program) committee members . . . and STEP is the coordinating 

body who has been actively involved in the enforcement 

dealing with vehicle implementation, seat belt use, child 

restraint use and suspended drivers, and their main enforcement 

issue has been drinking and driving. And I would like to 

introduce to you the members of the STEP committee. 

 

And I’ll begin by introducing first Constable Randy Armitage 

from the Moose Jaw Police Service; Sergeant Cliff Burnett and 

Corporal Murray Klatt from the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police) Regina F Division, Bag Service 2500; 

Constable Bob Simard and Constable Landis Chaulk, Regina 

city police; Sergeant Dave Longueil and Constable Steve Kaye, 

Saskatoon Police Service; John Meed, executive director, 

transport compliance branch, Highways and Transportation; 

Mr. Tom Savage, director, Saskatchewan Police Commission 

Services; Mr. Mitch Crumley, manager, law enforcement 

services; Mr. Bill Todd, supervisor, traffic safety promotions, 

SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 

 

I would like to also introduce Mr. Jason Dubois, who is the past 

president of Students Against Drinking and Driving; Mr. Mike 

Fedyk, the provincial co-ordinator of SADD (Students Against 

Drinking and Driving); members of the Sheldon Williams 

Collegiate and the University of Regina SADD chapter are also 

in attendance; and Maureen Murray, manager of  

public-government affairs, CAA (Canadian Automobile 

Association); Bruno Klassen, president of the Saskatchewan 

Driver Education Association; Mr. Warren Smith, who is 

general manager, Saskatchewan Trucking Association and the 

Saskatchewan Professional Driver Safety Council. 

 

At this time I would like to ask all members of the Assembly to 

join with me in welcoming this distinguished group of 

individuals who’ve assisted in the promotion of some important 

legislation in this province. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Women of Distinction Awards 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 

YWCA celebrated the leadership efforts of women of southern 

Saskatchewan with the annual Women of Distinction Awards. I 

would like to recognize some of the winners from that 

ceremony. Sharon Wheatley captured the science and 

technology category for her efforts as a science teacher at 

Robert Usher Collegiate; Verna Alford won the business, labour 

and professions category. She is the president of Alford’s floor 

and interiors. 

 

Pam Barber and Mavis Palmer were both honoured with the 

community and humanitarian service awards. Both of these 

women are extremely active in a variety of community 

organizations. Gerry Peppler won the contribution to a rural 

community award for her extensive volunteer work in the 

Yorkton area. 

 

Mary Bluechardt was honoured in the health and wellness 

category for her physical activity studies at the University of 

Regina. Roshni Dasgupta was named the Young Woman of 

Distinction. Pat Stellek was awarded the sports and recreation 

class for her time and effort spent in a number of different 

sports organizations. 

 

And finally, Jacqueline Shumiatcher won the arts and culture 

category for her intensive involvement in Regina’s arts 

community during the past 40 years. 

 

I think it’s extremely important that the YWCA celebrates the 

accomplishments and efforts of these women and all the 

nominees. I ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 

extending their congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Speaker, as is mentioned by the previous 

speaker, last night nine outstanding women received awards at 

the 14th annual Regina YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 

banquet. Our member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster was able to 

represent government at this event. So I’d like to now 

congratulate, on behalf of all the members of the Assembly, 

those women who were nominated and those who were 

recipients of the awards. 

 

  



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

In doing so, I don’t think it will be an overlap of the many 

accomplishments of the women who have in many ways added 

so much to the life of their communities. The arts and culture 

award went to Jacqueline Shumiatcher for 40 years of 

outstanding contribution to the visual, literary, and performing 

arts. Verna Alford, president of Alford’s floors and interiors 

received the award for business, labour, and professions. 

 

Both Pam Barber and Mavis Palmer received awards for 

community or humanitarian service. Pam Barber has been 

active in a number of community organizations, while Mavis 

Palmer is a strong voice for immigrant rights in our community. 

 

Gerri Peppler of Yorkton is an active volunteer, media 

personality, and organizer. She received the contribution to a 

rural community award. 

 

Health and wellness award went to Dr. Mary Bluechardt, a 

professor of physical activity studies at the University of 

Regina. 

 

Roshni Dasgupta, a graduate of Campbell Collegiate, received 

the young woman of distinction award. She is in her final year 

of medicine at the University of Toronto. 

 

There are two new awards this year. And Sharon Wheatley, a 

former high school teacher of mine, a chemistry teacher now at 

Robert Usher . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. The member’s time has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Oklahoma City Tragedy 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in 

remembrance of one of North America’s greatest tragedies. One 

year ago today a massive explosion rocked Oklahoma. It 

shredded the federal building in downtown Oklahoma and 

many lives in the process. 

 

This terrorist act claimed the lives of 168 people, including 

dozens of innocent children who were only guilty of attending a 

day care in that building that dreadful morning one year ago. It 

was the most devastating attack ever carried out on North 

American soil. Anyone watching television reports on that 

attack cannot forget the shocking pictures of people being 

carried out of the rubble. 

 

Terrorism of any type cannot be tolerated and will be swiftly 

condemned. Today in Oklahoma, people are lighting candles at 

the site of this tragedy in memory of these victims. I ask all 

members to join in remembrance of these innocent victims of 

terrorism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Lakeland Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, today I would like to recognize 

an outstanding achievement of a constituent of mine. 

Edward Walker of Christopher Lake has been chosen the 

Lakeland Citizen of the Year. Edward, who is a retiree, spent 

some 37 years with the Department of Natural Resources. 

 

He has led a forestry club for youngsters, volunteered as a 

Scout leader, and led both hunter safety and first aid courses; 

other activities Edward has been involved in, including being a 

member of the Royal Canadian Legion since 1978 and serving 

as secretary-treasurer for about 17 years. He is a member of St. 

Christopher’s Anglican Church and participates with the local 

seniors’ curling club. 

 

Edward feels it is important for people to stand up for the things 

they are concerned about in the community. He remains very 

active in the area of working as a commissionaire at the 

Victoria Union Hospital. 

 

He will receive the honour of Lakeland Citizen of the Year at a 

potluck supper on Saturday. I extend my congratulations to him 

and his family and ask the Assembly to show its appreciation in 

the usual manner. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Flood Volunteers Appreciation 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend my 

appreciation to all volunteers across Saskatchewan who have 

been spending countless hours battling this spring’s flood 

waters. Once again mother nature has played some nasty tricks 

on several areas across southern Saskatchewan, but it is 

heart-warming to see the amount of compassion Saskatchewan 

people have extended in lending a helping hand. 

 

The communities of Moose Jaw, Eastend, Pense, Regina, 

Crooked Lake, Kronau, Richardson, are just some who have 

nervously watched the onslaught of the heavy spring run-off. 

But as soon as anyone was in trouble or homes were threatened, 

people pitched in, filling sandbags and helping building 

temporary dikes. 

 

These past few weeks have seen a remarkable show of 

Saskatchewan spirit and I would ask the other members of this 

Assembly to join me in extending appreciation for their efforts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Life Job Creation 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize an announcement made yesterday that is definitely 

good news for Regina. It’s good news for Saskatchewan; maybe 

bad news for the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

The announcement comes from Crown Life, and as the member 

for Thunder Creek would say, they’re at it again. Although this 

time they’re creating jobsonce again creating jobs in our city 

— as they’re moving 18 new technical, administrative, and 

supervisory jobs to our community over the next six months. 

 

As you know, Crown Life is in its 96th year of operation. It is  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

 

ranked in the top 5 per cent of North American life insurance 

companies and it is a very positive and progressive employer in 

our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the management of Crown 

Life for their commitment to Regina and their ongoing support 

of our business efforts. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Melville SARCAN Anniversary 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to bring to the 

attention of the House today a more pleasant but a very 

important anniversary celebration that’s taking place in Melville 

later today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was eight years ago that the SARCAN program 

was established in the city of Melville. They are marking the 

anniversary with a celebration later this afternoon which I have 

the honour of attending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in this House knows the value of 

the SARCAN recycling program throughout Saskatchewan. On 

the one hand SARCAN serves the public very well in terms of 

environmental concerns by recycling empty cans that would 

otherwise end up in our already overburdened landfill sites. 

And equally as important, SARCAN gives meaningful work to 

those in our society who might not otherwise be employed. 

 

Melville SARCAN depot, which recently recycled its eight 

millionth container, is operated by Rail City Industries, which 

has a long-standing history in Melville, giving mentally and 

physically challenged citizens a place to contribute greatly to 

their community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wherever SARCAN depots are set up, 

communities benefit. There are other communities in this 

province, and I encourage the government to give all the 

assistance it can in setting up these depots wherever they are 

needed and wanted. It can only serve to enhance our province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regina IODE 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to pay brief 

but heartfelt tribute to a national organization and its Regina 

chapter that deserves recognition for its long service to Canada. 

I recently represented the government at the 82nd annual 

meeting of the Regina chapter of the Imperial Order of the 

Daughters of the Empire  the IODE. 

 

The national organization was founded in 1900, at a time 

perhaps when its name more accurately reflected the make-up 

of Canada than it does today. But, Mr. Speaker, if the origins of 

their name have been overtaken by natural political evolution, 

the objectives and works of the IODE are still worthy and 

laudable. 

Quite simply, the members of this organization love their 

country and are working to make it better, as they have done 

from their inception. They promote education by providing 

scholarships and supporting special programs, they provide 

grants to the arts and to local hospitals and institutions, and they 

assist in the study of our history by preserving tangible 

reminders of our past. 

 

Many of us as MLAs know their work in promoting citizenship 

by their welcoming presence at citizenship court. In other 

words, the IODE is a significant part of our nation’s past, with a 

valuable role to play in its future. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding for Providence Place 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

night it was confirmed by the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health 

District that they do not have enough health care dollars to fund 

the geriatric unit at Providence Place in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health promised funding for 

this unit, and that was funding over and above the usual funding 

for the district. Many volunteers spent a great deal of time and 

energy raising money for this facility based on the promise of 

this government. 

 

Will the associate minister of Health commit today to finally 

making good on his department’s promise for separate funding 

for the geriatric unit for Providence Place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of 

Health, let me make it perfectly clear to the member from 

Thunder Creek who raises the issue today that health care 

funding in Saskatchewan  if he doesn’t know, he should 

know  has significantly changed in the way districts are 

funded. 

 

Health is now funded on a needs-based funding formula that is 

based on the needs of a district and based on having health care 

funding fairly allocated to that district according to its 

individual needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member will also know that it has been made 

very clear since 1994 in correspondence from ministers of 

Health to both the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health Board and 

to the Providence Place board that the funding for the geriatric 

assessment unit, as for all other programs in the district, would 

come through the needs-based funding formula. There is no 

mystery about that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the associate  

  



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

minister has failed to recognize is that what also has changed in 

this province is the meaning of a promise on the part of this 

government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, last week the people of this province got a 

good taste of what the Health department is in fact doing. This 

department is taking money away from rural areas and small 

centres and gives it to larger ones. These cuts force other cuts, 

which give the department even more reason to reduce funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Moose Jaw built Providence Place 

expecting separate funding for the geriatric unit. The minister 

broke that promise and told the district that they must fund the 

geriatric unit out of the needs-based funding grant. Will the 

associate minister admit that this needs-based funding formula 

is destroying rural health care and that this issue serves as just 

another example? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell that 

member and tell all members that Saskatchewan is pioneering 

the fairest funding formula for the distribution of health care 

dollars anywhere in Canada, anywhere in North America. 

 

I can tell that member, Mr. Speaker, that individuals and 

delegations are coming from across the world to learn of this 

system of funding health care because, Mr. System, it is fair and 

it provides to the needs as best as we are able. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we would be further able to provide to the 

need of health care in our province if of course their friend . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The Speaker’s having a difficult time 

hearing the minister make his remarks and I will ask all 

members of the House to allow the minister to make his 

remarks in such a way that the Speaker and other members of 

the Assembly are able to hear him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

would know that the funding of health care across 

Saskatchewan would be an easier task if their federal Liberal 

counterparts had not pulled out over $50 million this budget 

year alone. And, Mr. Speaker, if I may say, all we’ve heard 

from this caucus  this Liberal caucus  is to sing the 

hallelujah chorus for that federal government. 

 

We had a vote in this House, Mr. Speaker, calling on that 

federal government to be responsible to the health care needs of 

the people of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen 

members duck a vote. I’ve never seen a caucus duck a vote until 

that day they all walked out and wouldn’t support that motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Now I want to bring to the attention of 

the minister, that it is . . . order. Order. Order. Order. I will ask 

 I will ask members on both sides of the House to come to 

order. 

 

Now the minister knows that it is inappropriate to make 

reference to the presence or absence and it is not allowed to do 

indirectly what you are not allowed to do directly. Order. I will 

ask the member to come to order. I remind the . . . I will ask the 

minister to withdraw that unparliamentary remark and then I’ll 

go to the next question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I certainly withdraw that 

unparliamentary remark. 

 

No-fault Insurance 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday I raised in this House one example to demonstrate 

how faulty the no-fault insurance scheme of this government 

truly is. 

 

Another accident victim, Teresa Zulner of Saskatoon, stated 

recently on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio 

that, and I quote: 

 

If my accident had been 21 days earlier, I could have sued 

the driver for speeding through a red light. I also would 

have been responsible for my own recovery and could have 

used the money to pay for therapy as I needed it . . . but the 

bottom line for an accident victim is once you submit to 

the authority of SGI, you aren’t supposed to just get better, 

you’re supposed to get better according to their budget and 

their time-line. 

 

Given the problems with this legislation, what commitment is 

the minister going to make in this House today to address these 

obvious problems? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

appreciate the question from my colleague from Canora-Pelly. 

 

First of all in my response yesterday, Mr. Speaker, to the 

House, I’d indicated to you and all members that the conversion 

of the SGI no-fault program was, by and large, to assist with the 

rehabilitation services that we can provide to people across this 

province. And clearly, when you take a look at the kinds of 

programing that we have in Saskatchewan for people who are 

injured in car crashes, the new program far exceeds anything 

that we have . . . that we’ve had in this province in the past, and 

certainly compares favourably to above that with any other 

province that we have across the country. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as the member talks about the kinds of 

benefits that are provided for rehabilitation services, as I said 

yesterday, under the old program, under the old tort program, 

we provided up to a maximum of $10,000 for rehabilitative 

services. Today, Mr. Speaker, we provide in excess of . . . up to 

$500,000 for medical services and benefits to individuals. 

 

Now if the member opposite believes that we should be 

resorting back to the old tort system and not providing that kind 

of medical services, he should be telling that to the people . . . 

 

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

 

The Speaker:  Next question. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, the cases involving Jan 

Markwart and Teresa Zulner are more than simply statistics. 

They are people  people whose lives have been dramatically 

changed because of accidents which occurred through no fault 

of their own. Yet, as Ms. Zulner states, and again I quote: 

 

If you’re not over your injury in six months, then they label 

you chronic . . . then the pressure is on . . . adjusters badger 

their clients into feeling bad about getting the therapy and 

rehab they need. They say things like “maybe you’re not 

taking responsibility for your pain” or “maybe this is all 

psychological”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people did nothing wrong, yet they are being 

treated as if they have. Will the minister indicate when Jan 

Markwart and Teresa Zulner, who’ve suffered multiple injuries 

through no fault of their own, can expect a full review of the 

no-fault insurance legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

In response to the member’s question, I want to indicate to the 

member again that it is not the practice of this Assembly to 

have members respond to individual cases, as is the question 

that’s being asked of me by the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

But I want to assure the member from Canora-Pelly, and the 

folks whom which he’s talking with, that we understand the 

kinds of tragedies that families incur when they’re involved in 

these kinds of car crashes. And where there is tragic loss, we 

understand that, Mr. Speaker. And it is my sense and my 

opinion and my understanding that the people who work within 

the SGI system are very compassionate, are staff that are very 

understanding, meet with the individuals on a regular basis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that under the new program, we have 

the kinds of benefits that I’ve already talked about in terms of 

rehabilitation, in terms of income replacement, in terms of death 

benefits and permanent injury. Mr. Speaker, we have, as I’ve 

indicated, some of the best programing for rehabilitative 

services in Canada. And currently we’re involved in that with 

the World Health Organization in putting together some of the 

best . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Next question. Next question. 

 

Flood Conditions 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard the 

commendations for those people that have assisted those 

victims of the floods this spring. I raise one question about 

having been kept apprised of the flooding situation around 

Regina and immediate areas. Other parts of our province have 

gone somewhat unnoticed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve received many phone calls from my 

constituents telling me of the devastating effects flood 

conditions have taken on homes and businesses around  

Crooked Lake; places like Melville Beach, Cedar Cove, Sunset 

Beach, and Indian Point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people have told me that they received little 

warning from Sask Water until the water was literally moving 

in by the foot. My question to the minister responsible for Sask 

Water is whether the government is considering reviewing its 

notification procedures for those people who are in danger of 

flooding that has wiped out homes and businesses in my 

constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m pleased today to answer the question from the 

Leader of the Opposition. As he indicated earlier this week, the 

experience that I personally had might manifest itself in the 

pain much lower than the incision that my surgeon inflicted 

upon me a few days ago. 

 

I want to say that the people from Sask Water, the corporation, 

has been working very closely over the past weeks and months 

with communities, municipal governments, towns, in terms of 

informing them of the conditions that they may experience. And 

I want to commend the communities who have bonded together, 

worked to help their neighbours in terms of dealing with some 

of these issues. 

 

I want to say that there are some circumstances that Sask Water 

can’t predict. They can’t predict when an ice jam will back up 

water. Those are the kinds of things that mother nature in her, 

or father nature in his, wisdom cause to happen. But I want to 

commend the folks from Sask Water for the kind of input that 

they have had in terms of informing communities and the 

people of this province what they may in fact expect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know it is 

comforting, and again I commend those people, where you can 

draw on from a population of some 170,000 to come out to 

adjacent areas. In that particular area I referred to, they do not 

have that luxury. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year when flooding was taking place in 

north-eastern Saskatchewan, this government found money for 

disaster relief. Of course, Mr. Speaker, we were heading into an 

election campaign last year. This year we’re not. My question 

to the minister is whether or not victims of severe flooding can 

expect anything in terms of disaster relief, or do they have to 

wait until the next election cycle? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 

opportunity to answer that question, Mr. Speaker. We all, as 

always, are available to provide assistance to communities in an 

emergency. Then after the emergency has abated and insurance 

adjusters have done their work and the full extent of the damage 

 insured and uninsured  can be determined, that is the point 

at which we decide whether there will be compensation or not. 

  



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

And I would like to address one further point, Mr. Speaker. In 

Hansard of April 15, I said in this House: 

 

Sask Water . . . (has) . . . I . . . (had an) advisory . . . that is 

dated April 12 which warns of potential flooding in 

Crooked Lake and Round Lake five to six days hence in 

order to give municipalities and communities time to 

respond. 

 

So in this House, Mr. Speaker, the advisory was read six days 

ahead of the event. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Political Function Advertising 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 

a minute to just quickly review the SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) minister’s story about his 

faxing violation. 

 

First we were led to believe that his office, a provincial MLA’s 

office, had to notify Saskatchewan’s five federal NDP MPs that 

their federal leader was going to be in Saskatchewan. And then 

the story gets even better, Mr. Speaker. Then one of those NDP 

MPs, who is secretly a Conservative, turned around and leaked 

that fax to me. That’s what we’re supposed to believe. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you table . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Now I’m having difficulty 

hearing the question being put by the hon. member for 

Cannington. I’ll ask all members to cooperate. Order. Order. I 

will ask the members of the government caucus to allow the 

hon. member for Cannington to put his question. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re 

supposed to believe, that one of their MPs faxed us the 

information. Mr. Minister, will you table your telephone records 

to support this ridiculous story or will you admit that this fax 

was sent out to more people than just the five MPs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

sure that there is not one NDP member for the federal ridings 

that has any interest in being a Conservative. And if he did, I’m 

sure he would keep that the best well-kept secret. And I concur, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Now I’m going to have to ask the 

members of the opposition to allow . . . I’m having difficulty 

hearing the answer being put by the minister, and I’m going to 

ask the members of opposition to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Order. And it would be helpful if the members of the 

government benches would remain quiet as well — all members 

of the government benches. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

going to add that yesterday I’d indicated that the fax was in fact 

sent from my office, and a fax in fact did go to the five federal  

NDP ridings in Saskatchewan. And I don’t know what 

happened with those faxes when they arrived in their offices 

and can’t make any comment as to that. 

 

But I am in the process of getting the billing from SaskTel, who 

are responsible to send us that billing, to provide for the House 

in the immediate future  I don't have that yet because the 

billings haven’t yet arrived  but when those billings arrive, I 

will bring that to the House and I will table it for the member 

opposite for his viewing to see how much the cost of billing 

those five . . . or sending those five faxes to those five federal 

NDP offices in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Firearms Regulations 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan’s 

responsible firearm owners have been informed that you and 

your department have now received a copy of the regulations 

for Bill C-68, the new federal firearm laws. 

 

Would you table those regulations today, Mr. Minister, so that 

the opposition and interested firearms owners and organizations 

can have a look at them, so that we can evaluate just how bad 

these new regulations will be in relationship to the firearm 

laws? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

of the third party for this question. 

 

I would confirm that we have received a copy from the federal 

Department of Justice of the draft regulations. They’re not final 

regulations. They arrived in our office approximately a week 

ago, a little more than a week ago. They are given to us on the 

basis that we would not share them with other groups until such 

time as we received the approval of the federal government. 

 

We are actively pressing them to allow us to consult widely 

with the various groups in Saskatchewan. We’ve been able to 

release and deliver a detailed summary of all of these 

regulations to the organization that the member opposite 

referred to, as well as many other members in the community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well since 

you’re sharing the regulations or a summary of them with other 

organizations, will you also share them with members of this 

Assembly? 

 

And, Mr. Minister, SARFO (Saskatchewan Association of 

Responsible Firearm Owners) has also informed us that 

yesterday and today, meetings are taking place between the 

Regina city police, Canada Customs, RCMP, your chief 

provincial firearms officer, and the U.S.(United States) Bureau 

of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. 

 

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

 

Can you tell us what exactly is the purpose of these meetings? 

Is it to discuss the new firearms regulations? What role is your 

chief provincial firearms officer and your department playing in 

these meetings? And why are the new regulations being 

discussed if they haven’t yet been officially released? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

member for the further question. I didn’t stand up earlier to 

introduce our chief firearms officer, but Mr. Mitch Crumley is 

sitting up in the top row. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I’m going to have to call 

the minister to order. It is improper to involve guests in the 

Assembly in the debate in the House, and I’ll ask him to simply 

proceed with his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, but practically, basically the 

meetings that have been going on over the last couple of days 

have been to look at questions relating to the transport of 

firearms from Saskatchewan into the United States. There has 

been no discussion whatsoever of the new legislation — it’s 

been dealing with the previous legislation — because we are 

not in a position to discuss that legislation. 

 

I would also like to make it clear that if people wish to hear a 

more detailed report on what is happening with our 

government, I will be speaking to 500 to 1,000 owners of guns 

this evening in Vibank and I invite you all to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Right-to-work Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today, 

Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, the 

SaskTel strike continues to drag on, and there is no end in sight. 

Now this is causing considerable financial hardship to the 

striking workers, some of whom do not even support the strike 

to begin with. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have spoken to some of the workers who 

would just like to return to work, and they would just as soon be 

able to get back to their jobs and do what is the reasonable thing 

to do. But they fear retributions from the unions if they do that. 

 

Right after question period, I will be introducing the 

right-to-work legislation, legislation that would protect the 

striking workers who want to lay down their picket signs and go 

back to work. But we see this as a matter of individual rights, 

the individual’s right to choose whether or not to work. 

 

Mr. Minister, we would ask you if you would support this 

legislation today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I thank the hon. member for his 

question. No, I won’t support right-to-work legislation. 

Right-to-work legislation doesn’t work. I think the member 

should know that. He’s playing a bit of a political game  

pretending to support working people when every progressive 

piece of legislation that holds up the rights of working people in 

Saskatchewan, that party opposes. 

 

Even in the province of Alberta, which the Conservatives quite 

often use as a shining example of a better place to be, they’ve 

studied right-to-work legislation and turned it down. They see 

no advantage of having right-to-work legislation. I say, get on 

with the business of joining with the good, positive things in the 

province and supporting that instead of bringing in regressive 

legislation into this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you,. Mr. Speaker. My question is 

now to the Premier. Mr. Premier, last Tuesday we debated a 

motion on the right to work, a motion that was defeated by both 

the NDP and the Liberals in this House. 

 

Mr. Premier, we weren’t too surprised at the NDP and the 

Liberals were against the right-to-work legislation and the 

motion that we made. However, I was a little shocked at some 

of the inflammatory rhetoric coming from the NDP members 

The member for Regina Coronation Park called employers who 

support right-to-work legislation, abusive Luddites — and 

that’s a quote — and while the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast suggested that right-to-work legislation in the US 

somehow led to Oklahoma City bombings, and Waco, and the 

Unabomber. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, do you support the right to work, or do you 

support the radical position taken by those members in your 

own caucus? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I can be very clear with the member 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, that the government position is not one 

of supporting right-to-work legislation. I don’t know a member 

of this caucus or a member of the government who would 

support right-to-work legislation. 

 

As I pointed out earlier, if you look at the examples in the 

United States of America where they have right-to-work 

legislation, it doesn’t work very well. There’s all kinds of 

indicators that’s is not a functional piece of legislation. 

 

I again repeat that in the province of Alberta, that they hold up 

as a shining example from time to time, they’ve studied 

right-to-work legislation and turned down the concept. 

Right-to-work legislation does not work. I want to be very clear 

to the members opposite; this government does not support 

right-to-work legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Child Prostitution 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, my 

question today involves a sensitive topic that many would like 

to sweep under the rug simply hoping that it will go away. 

Unfortunately, that is not and will not be the case. 

 

  



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem of child prostitution in Saskatoon and 

Regina streets can no longer be ignored. Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatoon alone there are at least 50 prostitutes between the 

ages of 12 and 15 working the streets. And it is reported that 

there are at least 100 juvenile prostitutes in the city of Regina. 

 

Juvenile prostitution in Saskatoon makes up one-quarter of that 

city’s sex trade. This is 10 per cent higher than other cities 

across western Canada. It is distressing, to say the least, to see 

societal moral decay of this magnitude in our province. 

 

My question to the Minister of Social Services is this: how 

many young teens have to turn to the streets in our cities before 

this NDP government will take action to help our young people 

at risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for this 

question. We truly realize that there are some problems with 

child prostitution and prostitution in general in our cities and 

that they’re very serious and that we need to do some things 

about this. 

 

We are working together with the city police in Saskatoon and 

in Regina. We’re also working together with the Department of 

Social Services and various community groups in the things that 

we need to do to prevent and reduce this problem. 

 

One of the examples is the COTS program, Children Off The 

Streets, in Regina. We are working together with the 

Department of Social Services and attempting to deal with this 

based on the suggestions that we get from the people who are in 

the community who are directly affected by that. And that is the 

way that we intend to work on this. 

 

We ask that any suggestions and concerns that the members 

opposite might have that would assist in this problem for all of 

Saskatchewan, that they would make those. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 75  An Act respecting the Right 

to Work (RTW) in the Province of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to move 

first reading of a Bill respecting the Right to Work in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Question 73 is converted to motions 

for returns (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Table the answer to question no. 74. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 74 is tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain 

Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

gives me great pleasure to give second reading to The 

Highways and Vehicles Statute Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I present to you and other members of the 

House the details of this legislation, I feel it is important to lay 

the foundation for how we arrived at the proposed measures 

that are before the House and the people of Saskatchewan 

today. 

 

The automobile was a wondrous invention that revolutionized 

travel in the early 1900s with the introduction of the first Model 

T. At that time, the importance of this invention  its effect on 

our society, both positive and negative . . . proved positive and 

negative — have come to light in many, many different ways. 

 

Had our forefathers had the ability to recognize the negatives in 

terms of the effect alcohol consumption would have on a 

person's ability to operate a motor vehicle, I suppose that things 

would be much different today. However, Mr. Speaker, time 

allows us to learn and experience, allows us to adapt to 

ever-changing needs of our society. From the advent of the 

automobile, through the ‘50s and now into the ‘90s, time and 

intervention has resulted in improvements and new 

technologies. However, unfortunately, time has also brought us 

some growing problems. The problem is drinking and driving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been said that in the ‘80s, it was a watershed 

decade for programs, policies and laws related to this serious 

problem. New laws were passed, community groups were 

formed, awareness campaigns were launched, and law 

enforcement was strengthened to deal with this problem. 

Although it increased awareness of the achieved . . . but it did 

not achieve some of the successes of decreasing the problem of 

drinking and driving, and it is an ongoing and unacceptable 

health and safety issue that required more attention and 

certainly more action. 

 

The recognition of these facts resulted in the formation of a new 

committee in the early ‘90s, the Saskatchewan Interagency 

Committee on Impaired Driving, where it was struck to develop 

a plan to reduce the problems associated with the incidence of 

drinking and driving. The committee included representatives 

from SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), 

Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Addictions Council, 

Saskatchewan Health, Education, Highways and 

Transportation, Justice, and Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority. 

 

They took a coordinated approach, Mr. Speaker, to researching  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

 

and recommending alternatives aimed at dealing effectively 

with this issue. The result, Mr. Speaker, was a detailed report 

outlining a wide range of drinking and driving programs and 

policies that could eventually further reverse this terrible trend 

and its effect on our society. 

 

However, members of this House felt that while the committee 

did an exceptional job researching and consulting on what to do 

about this issue and making recommendation, further 

consultation and study was required on a wide range of safe 

driving initiatives. So in the spring of 1994, it was agreed that a 

committee consisting of representatives from all political parties 

be formed to consult with the people of Saskatchewan on the 

recommendations contained in the report of the Interagency 

Committee on Impaired Driving as well as other safety driving 

issues. 

 

The Select Committee on Driving Safety held 35 public and 

high school hearings throughout the province. The committee 

heard from 214 witnesses and received 104 written briefs and 

more than 6,800 completed questionnaires on the topic of 

impaired driving. The committee travelled to 15 different cities 

and towns and visited 19 schools to gain input prior to tabling 

its report in the legislature last spring. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

testament of the consultation process that this government has 

undertaken on many issues and a commendation to the people 

of Saskatchewan for their extensive participation on this very 

important issue. 

 

Through this committee, it is the government’s belief that we 

have now reached a consensus with members of the House and 

respective government departments, special interest groups — 

particularly youth — and the people of Saskatchewan on the 

issue of drinking and driving. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

the proposed measure before the House will begin to resolve the 

very serious problems of drinking and driving. 

 

As I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, this is a serious problem in 

our province. Unfortunately Saskatchewan has a distinction of 

having one of the worst records in Canada for drinking and 

driving. Although the number of deaths due to alcohol-related 

vehicle collision has dropped slightly in the past couple of 

years, Saskatchewan’s incidence of drinking and driving is still 

nearly twice that of the national average. 

 

(1100) 

 

Impaired driving is the leading criminal cause of death in 

Saskatchewan. From 1988 to ‘93, there were 447 deaths due to 

alcohol-related crashes. As well, more than 1,000 people are 

injured annually due to impaired driving. The number of 

drinking and driving charges laid in Saskatchewan is 35 per 

cent higher than in Alberta and 57 per cent higher than in 

Manitoba and 88 per cent higher than that of all of Canada. 

 

There are many other statistics that support the need to get 

tougher with those who ignore the seriousness of this problem. 

Getting tougher with people who choose to drink alcohol and 

drive is exactly what Saskatchewan people have asked members 

of this House to do and told the committee that travelled around 

the province. 

I am pleased to say that the Bill before us today is one of the 

most comprehensive road safety packages in Canada. 

Specifically, the new legislation deals with drinking drivers, 

new drivers, and disqualified drivers. 

 

First the drinking driver — the select committee’s 

recommendations were as follows. We decrease the blood 

alcohol content for roadside suspensions from .06 to .04; 

immediate 24-hour licence suspension for all who exceed the 

blood alcohol content of .04; education and addictions 

screening provisions for drivers who exceed a .04 of blood 

alcohol count; and increase statutory licensing suspensions and 

mandatory screening and rehabilitation as a condition of 

licensing reinstatement; and immediate vehicle impoundment 

for people who drive while their licences have been suspended. 

 

In terms of the drinking driver, Mr. Speaker, the proposed 

legislation increases the statutory licensing suspension. For the 

first offence, for six months to one year; for the second offence, 

from one year to three years; and for the third offence, from 

three years to five years. And while the fourth offence remains 

at five years, there will be no opportunity for early 

reinstatement of a driver’s licence. 

 

Aside from the provinces of Alberta and Manitoba, where there 

are five-year statutory licensing suspensions after the second 

offence, Saskatchewan will have some of the toughest drinking 

and driving laws in the country if this legislation is passed. 

 

Getting tough is only part of the solution. As the people of 

Saskatchewan, as you, well know, for their spirit of helping 

those in their communities, the legislation also provides ways of 

assisting the problem of the drinker. 

 

This is not to say that the legislation allows the problem drinker 

to avoid more swift and severe punishment; however, it does 

provide opportunities to deal with the problem by dealing with 

the drinking driver’s addiction to alcohol. 

 

Therefore the Bill will allow for the establishment of mandatory 

addictions screening and assessment, where appropriate, before 

licence reinstatement. 

 

Another important aspect of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that 

of the provision of vehicle impoundment. Driving while 

disqualified is a very other serious problem in Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore those who choose to drive while disqualified will 

have their vehicles they are driving impounded for 30 days for 

the first offence. If they are caught a second time in two years, 

the vehicle they are driving will be impounded for 60 days. 

 

We believe this measure is necessary, Mr. Speaker, because a 

maximum of 75 per cent of drinking and driving offenders 

continue to drive while in fact they are suspended. 

 

However, to avoid punishing a vehicle owner who did not know 

the driver of their vehicle was suspended, there will be an 

appeal mechanism. Again, Mr. Speaker, our proposed vehicle 

impoundment measures are very similar to other jurisdictions 

such as that of Alberta and that of Manitoba. 

  



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

In addition, the legislation also includes probationary measures 

for all new drivers. Statistics show that new, particularly young, 

drivers are over-represented in vehicle crashes and convictions 

in Saskatchewan. The proposed measure will help new drivers 

gain the knowledge and experience needed to meet the 

challenges of driving. 

 

Under the program there will be a two-year probationary period 

for all new drivers with a maximum six-month learning period 

before they receive their licence. If passed, this new drivers’ 

program will take effect in the fall of 1996. New drivers will 

also be required to enrol in driver education programs effective 

August of 1997. 

 

Ultimately, Mr. Speaker, the goals of this proposed legislation 

are fourfold. Firstly, they’re to reduce the alcohol-related traffic 

deaths by 20 per cent within the next five years. Secondly, to 

reduce insurance, health, and other economic costs by 7 to $10 

million annually. And number three, to reduce new driver 

involvement in crashes and driver convictions. And fourthly, to 

reduce claim costs by up to 3 million annually through the 

probationary driver program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these recommendations are due in large part to the 

feedback received from interest groups and the public as a result 

of the consultation process undertaken by all political parties 

represented in this legislature. And this proposed legislation 

also demonstrates the kind of accomplishments and consensus 

that can be reached when people work together. 

 

I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank the 

members of this House who were involved in the select 

committee for their input and guidance in developing these 

proposed legislative amendments. 

 

My thanks to the hon. member from Cannington. My thanks, 

Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member from Cypress Hills, to the 

hon. member from Meadow Lake, the hon. member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin, and the hon. member from Moose Jaw — 

Mr. Speaker — who chaired this committee so eloquently. 

 

And I want to publicly thank the former members of this 

legislature who participated: Mr. Reg Knezacek, Mr. Armand 

Roy, and Ms. Anita Bergman. 

 

It shows the public that we can work together in the spirit of 

cooperation that results in positive programs and services for all 

people in Saskatchewan. Some may argue, Mr. Speaker, that the 

proposed legislation doesn’t go far enough in addressing the 

problems of drinking and driving. However, we believe that the 

proposed legislation sends a strong message to those who drink 

and drive, that society will no longer tolerate that type of 

behaviour. 

 

The proposed legislation before the House will ensure that 

punishment for impaired driving is swift, that it’s certain, and 

severe. But help is there for those who may want to have the 

addiction . . . who have the addiction problem and need that 

assistance as well. 

 

In conclusion, the proposed Highway and Vehicle Statutes  

Amendment Act will provide tougher driving . . . drinking and 

driving countermeasures, and a program for new drivers that 

will increase safety on Saskatchewan roads, will reduce injuries 

and death due to drinking and driving. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce this Bill this afternoon. I move second reading the Act 

respecting The Highway and Vehicle Statutes Amendment Act, 

1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is with 

a great deal of pleasure that I’m able to join in the debate on the 

second reading of The Highway and Vehicle Statutes 

Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

I will not take very long, but I really do want to say a few things 

regarding the development of this Bill and somewhat from a 

personal perspective, I suppose. Before I forget, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to say how much I enjoyed getting to know other 

colleagues of mine in this legislature from both sides of the 

House just a little bit better. And dare I say, as we spent those 

long days together, I think a bit of camaraderie was even built 

in those long hours on the bus. And I surely want to take this 

opportunity to commend all the members of the select 

committee for their dedication to the task. 

 

I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge Mr. Dave Abbey, 

our researcher. Dave must have wearied of us at times, but it 

never showed as he always seemed only too willing to search 

out any bit of information that we wanted, and somehow record 

generally what the witnesses and committee members were 

trying to say. It was certainly no small task and he did a very 

admirable job I think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course also to the Hansard staff, Donelda Klein and 

Teena Embury. You were a lot of fun and always had the 

recording equipment set up for us on time and under some fairly 

trying conditions. To Meta Woods and to Gregory Putz, from 

the Clerk’s office, as usual you did a great job, and certainly 

thanks must be extended to you also. You put in long hours, 

along with everyone else, and always, it seemed, with a cheery 

attitude. So thank you very much to you. 

 

But to you, Mr. Speaker, I believe most of the credit must go. I 

know how much this has been a part of you, and how much a 

part of your life it has been, and how important it is to you. You 

were involved in these activities years prior to the creation of 

this committee. As Chair of this committee, with a very mixed 

troop of individuals I might say, you provided objective 

guidance that was required, I believe  a bit too paternalistic at 

times, perhaps, but nonetheless we’re here today and that’s all 

that really matters. 

 

When I was first asked to be a member of the all-party Select 

Committee on Driving Safety and to be a part of the public 

hearings on this legislation, I must admit that I had some 

relatively naïve, preconceived notions about drinking and 

driving. One was always hearing on the news and reading in the 

papers about drinking-related car accidents, but it never, ever  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

 

happened to me. And when it’s someone else, it’s so easy to 

simply not pay any attention to it. 

 

Slowly I began to grasp just how disproportionately high our 

rate of alcohol-related car accidents and deaths were compared 

to almost anywhere else in North America in fact, Mr. Speaker. 

I remember going through the training and information sessions 

with the SGI representatives, the Saskatchewan Alcohol and 

Drug Addictions Council, Saskatchewan Health, the 

Department of Education, Highways and Transportation, 

Justice, and the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority  

there may have been more, but at this time I couldn’t remember 

any of the others  and often the information seemed just far 

too much to absorb. 

 

Then began the long road trip. As the minister said, we travelled 

to 16 different communities, visited 19 schools, heard from 214 

witnesses, received 104 written briefs, and had more then 6,800 

questionnaires turned into us. We were not very long into the 

process, Mr. Speaker, when I began to realize who and what 

this was really all about. 

 

We started to hear from many SADD chapters across the 

province. In many, many ways it was the youth, I believe and in 

my opinion, who showed a great deal of leadership. And one of 

the real leaders was their then president, Jason Dubois, and for 

you, Jason, I will always have the greatest respect. 

 

I think as a young person, you have maturity and wisdom far 

beyond your years. 

 

Sometimes when we travel to communities, we would not know 

for sure who was going to show up, but more often than not it 

was Jason and the local SADD chapter who was at the door to 

greet us. You deserve a great deal of credit, Jason. 

 

As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I was just a bit naïve about this 

drinking and driving issue, thinking that many of the 

proponents of stricter laws were not “living in the real world.” I 

thought they were idealistic and unrealistic. Then we began to 

hear the presentations from witnesses, often so emotional that it 

would tear your heart out. 

 

Many were still raw with the pain of having just lost a son or a 

daughter or a father to a drinking-related accident. And always, 

it seemed, the innocent ones were the ones maimed and killed. I 

have to admit that often at the end of the day I was simply 

emotionally worn out from listening to so many horrific and 

terrible stories. 

 

The pendulum for me began to swing the other way. I wanted to 

make sure that anyone who was the cause of any alcohol-related 

traffic accident never drove again. I wanted revenge for all of 

the hurt that they had inflicted on innocent people. 

 

And then one day, Mr. Speaker, and I will never forget it, a 

young woman, perhaps in her late 30’s or early 40’s, made her 

way slowly to the microphone. She needed a cane for assistance 

in walking and I couldn’t help but notice as she seated herself, 

she was missing several fingers and had scarring on other parts  

of her body. She had some difficulty in speaking, but very 

slowly and very concisely she told us her story. 

 

I don’t remember the specifics, but I think what I’m about to 

recount would fairly accurately duplicate what she said. She 

had been standing at a bus stop waiting for a bus when suddenly 

and with no warning a speeding car drove straight at her. She 

didn’t remember being hit and she didn’t remember the six or 

seven months that she was in a coma, but she did remember the 

terrific physical pain that ensued and she did remember the 

numerous subsequent operations and how her life changed. 

 

The vehicle was driven by a highly intoxicated individual who 

had no licence. You see, Mr. Speaker, it had been taken away 

apparently numerous times before that for similar violations. 

 

After listening to her story, I know there were many of us who 

shed tears with others in the room that day. 

 

There was a period of silence and then our questioning began. I 

don’t know who asked, and it doesn’t really matter, but it was 

the obvious question. So what would you like to see happen? 

 

(1115) 

 

I do not believe any one of us could have been more wrong in 

anticipating what her response might be. If anyone had the right 

to be filled with hate and vengefulness, surely it was this 

person, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This will not be a quote but rather a rough accounting of what 

she said. And with a quiet power in her voice, this is roughly 

what she said: 

 

I came here today because I wanted to make some difference. 

For me to suggest that this individual be thrown into jail for 

the rest of his life for what he did to me would be too easy, 

and would it really make any difference? In my opinion, the 

person needs help. He was an alcoholic who still has no 

recollection of what he did to me. I want to see legislation 

that will take a person like this and give him or her 

counselling and, above all, give them treatment so they will 

never again be involved in something like this. 

 

If what I’ve said here today helps to bring about that kind of 

change, then as difficult as this has been, it’s all been worth 

it. 

 

We all sat there, Mr. Speaker, as you will remember, I think, in 

stunned silence for a few moments. Others on the committee 

may not remember this incident as I do, but it was for me one of 

those moments in one’s life that you never forget. 

 

And thus a key part of this legislation, along with the stricter 

penalties, was I think the progressive portion of this Bill: the 

aspect dealing with rehabilitation. The legislation proposes that 

if you are involved in an alcohol-related accident, you must be 

assessed. If it is determined that the problem was that you drank 

too much and then still chose to drive, you will be required to 

participate in a driving-without-impairment course before you  

  



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

will be able to get your licence back. 

 

If however it is determined that you have an addictions 

problem, before you can get your licence back, then you must 

be treated. And then when it is determined that adequate 

treatment has taken place and the assessor is convinced that you 

can separate the acts of drinking and driving, only then can you 

apply to have your licence reinstated. 

 

To me this is the key part of the whole legislation. The 

impoundment of vehicles aspect and the probationary licences 

are also very important, but I think the minister has adequately 

spoken to those points already. 

 

So to all the families who have felt the pain of losing someone 

close to them or, perhaps even worse, to those who have been 

innocently left as paraplegics or quadriplegics, I hope this 

legislation makes some difference. 

 

To have played a small part in developing this legislation and to 

have heard the testimonies of the witnesses is something I shall 

never, ever forget. To all the witnesses, you are the real heroes. 

“Thank you” is not nearly enough. You have bared your hearts, 

and you have bared your souls, and you did make a difference. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The highway and 

vehicle statutes Act has a potential to cause a great deal of 

controversy in Saskatchewan. Although some of the changes 

are straightforward, others have implications that will seriously 

affect Saskatchewan people. The proposed amendments to this 

Act are not simply a change in wording. They question the 

behaviours of Saskatchewan people. And we, as elected 

representatives, must decide if these mandatory changes will 

better protect society or if they are just a public relations 

campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, laws are designed to provide a sense of order and 

to protect society. Therefore when we create laws or amend 

existing laws, we must delve into the long-term consequences. 

We cannot change the Act just for the sake of seeing the new 

words in print or to make members of a political party happy. 

There must be practical, solid reasons behind our decisions. 

Laws are ineffective if they can be changed on a whim. 

 

Before Bill 17 is passed, we must ask some very serious 

questions. Are these changes going to benefit society? Will 

these changes take away individuals’ rights? Where is the right 

balance for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some of the changes to this Bill seem very clear and very 

reasonable. I don’t imagine the people will object to certain 

amendments and we’re certainly not going to fight them. For 

example, this Bill changes the speed requirements when passing 

construction crews. Current legislation requires drivers to slow 

down to 60 kilometres an hour only when passing workers or 

flagmen. 

 

This Bill suggests that the lower speed limit should apply when  

passing highway equipment as well. This concern seems to be 

in the best interests of driver safety as well as the safety of the 

equipment. People and equipment can be very unpredictable 

and it’s not always clear if people are around a construction site 

 workers could be hidden by equipment. If a worker steps out 

from behind a truck, a car would have a better chance of 

stopping if it was going 60 kilometres an hour instead of 100. 

 

Studies have shown that lower speeds may help prevent 

accidents, and there is no reason this scenario should be any 

different. Although many people slow down out of common 

sense, legislating a lower speed limit may help prevent 

impatient drivers from making foolish choices, choices that 

could harm not only themselves but other people as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another section of this Act should improve road 

safety, deals with headlights. The Act tightens up the 

restrictions. It’s now clear that you must have your headlights 

on from half an hour after sunset until half an hour before 

sunrise. Although most new vehicles have lights that turn on 

automatically, not everyone has a new vehicle. Also they show 

up from the front only, so if you’re following a car without 

lights on, it can be almost invisible until you’re right up behind 

it. And again, with bad weather and our poor highway 

conditions, this is potentially dangerous. 

 

I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, after spending an average of 20 

hours a week on the highways and passing thousands of cars, 

it’s a lot easier to see cars with lights on, especially in bad 

weather. 

 

This section of the Act also states that you must turn on 

headlights when poor visibility exists. Of course this seems like 

another common sense rule, but it’s basically housekeeping and 

we definitely won’t fight it. 

 

There’s some of the changes to this Act that aren’t particularly 

controversial. Other changes have triggered some questions that 

need to be answered. 

 

For example, we have some concerns about the section that 

gives police officers permission to disconnect their headlights. 

There have been accidents involving vehicles that turn their 

lights off at night. Although we understand the underlying 

reasons for this amendment, we must not forget to look at the 

safety factor for our police officers as well as other drivers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, this section also essentially 

repeats the rights of our police officers. They can disobey the 

rules of the road at their discretion, which is usually in the 

interest of public safety. The police officers in our province are 

highly trained and we certainly hope they won’t abuse this 

right. 

 

Another amendment to this Bill will allow school buses to stop 

right on the highway when letting our children off the bus. As 

the Act now stands, buses, like all other vehicles, must pull over 

to the far right of the highway. Any change that could put our 

children in danger warrants further investigation. 

 

We are also curious about a new section in this Bill  the  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

 

section that deals with traffic lights and locations other than 

intersections. As we interpret it, the section outlines certain 

cases where a light will contain a green arrow as well as a red 

light. The law would make it clear that drivers can turn only in 

the direction shown by the arrow. We don’t necessarily disagree 

with this, but we are certainly asking for clarifications with 

respect to the situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed changes to section 8 are worth a 

close look. The key section gives a police officer the power to 

seize a vehicle and either impound it or immobilize it if he or 

she thinks an unauthorized driver has driven it on the highway. 

In unusual cases, if immediate seizure would cause undue 

hardship or jeopardize safety, the officer can issue a notice of 

seizure and direction. This, in a nutshell, lets the driver or 

owner drop it at a designated place within a short time period. 

 

According to Bill 17, a police officer would have to serve a 

copy of the notice to the unauthorized driver, the owner, the 

garage keeper, and the administrator of the program. Under this 

same section, the garage keeper can put a lien for all unpaid 

amounts from the seizure, the immobilization, and the 

impoundment. The regulations would apparently set the 

amounts, but we question the minister on the amounts he has in 

mind. 

 

We certainly hope this is not a back door to further taxation. We 

will not let the Minister of Highways, or any other minister for 

that matter, take advantage of Saskatchewan people by abusing 

the power of his or her office. I won’t go into great detail about 

section 8 because it is something we’ll need to discuss in the 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

At that time, we will bring up several other concerns we have 

about the proposed rules. We’ll also be asking questions to help 

clarify the rules surrounding new drivers. Changes to The 

Vehicle Administration Act outlines new rules for taking breath 

samples and suspending licences of new drivers. We have some 

concerns that there is no clear definition of a new driver. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, creating confusing legislation is 

counter-productive. If we allow such an amendment to go 

through, we must ensure that it’s clear and that it provides 

definite parameters for the legal system. 

 

We must also discuss one of the most controversial changes to 

the law — the change that could punish people who do not 

deserve to be punished — the change that lowers the threshold 

for blood alcohol content from .06 to .04. Currently if you have 

a reading over .06, your licence is suspended for 24 hours. Mr. 

Speaker, with this Bill, the members opposite want to lower the 

level to .04. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all want to stop drunk drivers. We know that 

their selfish actions can cause unbearable pain and suffering for 

innocent people. We hear the anxiety from organizations like 

Mothers Against Drunk Driving and Students Against Drunk 

Driving, and we know their concerns are very valid, and we 

agree that changes must be made. 

 

Getting tougher on repeat offenders is absolutely mandatory,  

and we’re happy to see this addressed in the Bill. Our courts 

must provide a real deterrent for these criminals, or the problem 

will continue to plague our society. We believe longer licence 

suspensions for impaired drivers will help prevent the problem, 

because repeat offenders do deserve harsher punishment, and 

for the sake of society, maybe this will act as a deterrent. Mr. 

Speaker, anything we can do to protect society from criminal 

activity is a step forward, and I believe most of our constituents 

will strongly agree. 

 

When it comes to changing the 24-hour suspension rule 

however, the answer is not quite so cut and dried. We’ve talked 

to people in our communities who agree that zero tolerance for 

alcohol is the only answer, and we have talked to people who 

just as strongly believe that changing the suspension rule won’t 

necessarily get to the root of the problem. 

 

If we look at the legal ramifications, the Criminal Code of 

Canada states that anyone over .08 is guilty of a criminal 

offence. We must assume that .08 is not a number they pulled 

out of the air. I’m sure the federal courts have extensive studies 

and research to back this decision. In this case, some people 

argue that driving at half the limit should probably not be 

considered impaired driving. 

 

But the other side of the issue is the emotional side. This is the 

side that sees countless lives destroyed each year by drunk 

drivers. And as responsible citizens of this province, how can 

we possibly come out against the safety of our fellow citizens? 

Mr. Speaker, we need to delve more extensively into this aspect 

of the Bill before we can take it any further. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of these reasons I’ve just outlined, among 

others, we believe this issue needs a long, serious discussion 

before it is allowed to pass into legislation. Therefore, I ask that 

we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 74  An Act to amend 

The Government Organization Act and 

to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Government Organization Amendment Act, 

1996. The amendments we are proposing today do two things. 

First, they give cabinet ministers the authority to enter into 

agreements with governments outside Canada; and secondly, 

allow ministers to make grants or enter into agreements with a 

dollar value up to $50,000 on their own authority. 

 

When the new Department of Economic Development Act was 

passed in 1993, it allowed the Minister of Economic 

Development to enter into agreements with governments 

outside of Canada. Since that time, circumstances have arisen in 

other portfolios  Agriculture, for example  where such 

authority would be beneficial. 

 

(1130) 

 

With this change we are also proposing the following  

  



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

requirement: that notice be given to the Minister of 

Intergovernmental Affairs when an intergovernmental or 

international agreement is being contemplated. This 

complements the minister’s coordinating role respecting 

intergovernmental matters. It will ensure the minister has an 

opportunity to provide advice and assistance to the department 

involved in negotiating the agreement. 

 

The second amendment being proposed in the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, respects the dollar limit ministers can use for grants 

and agreements without the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. Today’s amendment will increase that 

limit to $50,000 from the current $10,000. The current level has 

not changed since the late 1970s. After almost 20 years it is 

appropriate to adjust it to meet the changing needs of today’s 

society. By enabling ministers to authorize grants and 

agreements up to $50,000, individuals and groups who rely on 

government funding will have access to the funds on a more 

timely basis. 

 

The spending of funds will still be subject to scrutiny by the 

legislature as part of the budget approval process. All 

disbursements will be fully disclosed in the Public Accounts. 

 

The purpose of all but two of the consequential amendments is 

to raise the dollar limit from $10,000 to $50,000, above which a 

minister requires Lieutenant Governor in Council approval to 

make a grant or enter into an agreement. 

 

Amendments to The Department of Energy and Mines Act and 

The Department of Economic Development Act, 1993 add a 

requirement to provide notice of intergovernmental and 

international agreements to the Minister of Intergovernmental 

Affairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Government Organization Act and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

take this opportunity today to briefly discuss the amendments to 

The Government Organization Act that were tabled in this 

House for the first time yesterday. 

 

It is my understanding that this Bill for the most part deals with 

the entering into intergovernmental and inter-organizational 

agreements by the minister on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan with other governments within or outside of 

Canada, or with persons, agencies, organizations, associations, 

enterprises, institutions, or bodies within or outside of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As I understand it, these agreements are for any purpose related 

to the exercise of the minister’s powers and responsibilities. We 

will assume for the time being that any exercise of the 

minister’s powers and responsibilities will undoubtedly be in 

the best interests of the citizens of this province. 

 

Further amendments that are proposed through this Bill  

increase the expenditure level that the minister is allowed to 

make before consulting with and gaining approval from the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. Since the original Act is close 

to 10 years old, increased levels of expenditure are necessary to 

keep on track with today’s economic realities. 

 

Further to this, consequential amendments to a number of other 

somewhat related Acts have been proposed through this Bill. 

The proposed changes to these Acts also deal with 

intergovernmental and inter-organizational agreements and with 

the expenditure levels allowed to the minister without prior 

approval. 

 

Due to the short amount of time that has passed between the 

first two readings of this Bill, we would like to take some time 

to consult with stakeholders and to perhaps gain some legal 

insight into the possible consequences of the changes proposed 

through this Bill. It is for this reason that I would like to request 

that debate on this Bill be adjourned. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  In the interest of clarity for proceedings of the 

House, I’ll ask if the hon. member will move that debate be 

now adjourned. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the reasons 

outlined, I will now move that debate be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the 

Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund Act. This Act, Mr. 

Speaker, was created to segregate and consolidate the 

provisions for underwriting annuities for pension plans into one 

Act. 

 

The public employees superannuation plan annuity fund was 

created on March 31, 1986. The fund provides annuities for 

members of the public employees superannuation plan. The 

annuity fund is governed by The Superannuation Act. The 

intent of the Saskatchewan pension annuity fund is to continue 

to provide annuities for members of the public employees 

pension plan who choose an annuity as their preferred method 

for receiving retirement income. 

 

In addition, the annuity fund can provide annuities for members 

of any other designated pension plans. As in the past, the 

annuities will be underwritten by the Government of 

Saskatchewan General Revenue Fund. The Saskatchewan 

pension annuity fund will be audited annually and will be 

subject to The Tabling of Documents Act. 

 

The Saskatchewan pension annuity fund may consist of one or 

more funds. Each of the funds may have unique investment 

policies. The separate funds can be used for different 

investment purposes or for the payment of annuities on behalf 

of a designated pension plan. This means that specialty funds 

can be created to allow the fund to provide and pay annuities on  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

 

behalf of other pension plans. The segregation of funds will 

ensure that one fund is not subsidizing another. 

 

Annuities underwritten by the Saskatchewan pension annuity 

fund will provide for the splitting of an annuity upon the 

marriage breakdown of a pensioner. The Public Employees 

Pension Board will administer and be the trustee of the fund. 

 

Unless otherwise provided, the fund will be subject to the terms 

and provisions of this Act alone. The assets of the fund will be 

invested in accordance with The Pension Benefits Act, 1992, 

and the Income Tax Act of Canada. Mr. Speaker, I move 

second reading of The Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 

Act. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at this 

time we are pleased to deal with Bill No. 63, The Saskatchewan 

Pension Annuity Fund Act. 

 

It is our understanding that this new Act consolidates the 

provisions for underwriting annuities for pension plans under 

one Act. If correct, the fund will provide annuities for members 

of the public employees superannuation plan. 

 

Presently, this superannuation plan has a budget of 

approximately $13 million. We are not clear as to the 

motivation for this Act, nor what its benefits would be, 

therefore we feel it would be wise to consult interest groups to 

draw from their knowledge on this matter. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Minister, I move that debate on this Bill be now 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 64  An Act respecting 

Pensions for Public Employees 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Public 

Employees Pension Plan Act. Mr. Speaker, the public 

employees superannuation plan was created in 1977 and has 

since operated under The Superannuation Act, along with seven 

other pension plans. 

 

Revenue Canada has advised that for the purposes of the 

Income Tax Act, it is necessary to create an Act that strictly 

applies to the operations of the public employees 

superannuation plan. With the creation of this Act, the 

legislative policies governing the plan will be consolidated into 

one document. This will enhance timely and correct 

interpretations of the plan by the plan administrator and others 

referencing the Act. 

 

It is timely to introduce changes to the plan with the 

implementation of this Act. First of all, Mr. Speaker, it is 

desirable to change the name of the pension plan to the public 

employees pension plan. The term “superannuation” is 

inconsistent with the benefit available to members at the time 

they retire. Members of this money-purchase plan have the 

option to purchase the pension benefit that best meets their  

needs. The benefit can be purchased at the time of retirement or 

it can be deferred to a date that is no later than that allowed 

under the Income Tax Act of Canada. 

 

This Bill provides for the vesting of a member in the pension 

plan after one year of pensionable service. This means that 

members who terminate employment after one year of 

pensionable service will be entitled to use the employee and 

employer contributions, plus accrued investment returns, for 

their future pension purposes. Members who terminate with less 

than one year pensionable service will receive a refund of their 

contributions plus accrued investment returns. The current 

vesting provision is based upon age and service. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, provides for the establishment of 

specialty funds. This means that the Public Employees 

Superannuation Plan Supervisory Board can create separate 

funds to be invested in a manner different from the current 

balanced fund. With the creation of specialty funds, the plan can 

offer investment choice to its members or offer funds with a 

different asset mix that may be more suitable to the needs of 

specific groups of members. An example is a pre-retirement 

fund which would be invested in short-term investments, 

thereby protecting the equity of members who plan to retire in 

the near future. 

 

With the implementation of this Bill, members who take a leave 

of absence will have the option to contribute to the plan for a 

period of leave up to the maximum permitted under the Income 

Tax Act of Canada. This will be most appreciated by parents 

returning from maternity or parenting leave on reduced hours of 

work. 

 

The portability of a member’s pension asset is enhanced in this 

Bill. Members who, prior to becoming a member of this plan, 

made contributions pursuant to a pension plan registered under 

the Income Tax Act of Canada, may elect to transfer monies 

from that plan to this pension plan. In addition, members may 

transfer monies from their registered retirement savings plan to 

this pension plan as a voluntary contribution or for the purpose 

of paying contributions for a period of leave of absence. 

 

The Bill allows the plan administrator to take action on 

employers who are tardy in remitting contributions to the plan 

on behalf of members. This tardiness has a negative impact on 

the retirement savings of plan members to whom those 

contributions pertain. In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Bill will 

allow for the division of a member’s account upon marital 

breakdown up to a maximum of 50 per cent of the member’s 

account balance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the primary purpose of the public employees 

superannuation plan is to provide lifetime retirement benefits to 

its members. The intention of this Act is to align the pension 

plan with The Pension Benefits Act, 1992.  

 

The public employees superannuation plan has approximately 

26,000 active and non-active members, the majority of whom 

live in Saskatchewan. The changes created with the introduction 

of this Bill will enhance the pension plan and will meet the 

ever-changing needs of plan members. 

  



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Public Employees 

Pension Plan Act. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have before us 

an Act that proposes to replace those sections of The 

Superannuation Act that pertains to the public employees 

superannuation plan. Presently, the superannuation plan 

encompasses a wide range of provisions related to the pensions 

of public employees. It is our understanding that this Bill was 

drawn in response to a request from Revenue Canada that this 

plan be established under its own statute. 

 

As we understand the Act, an employee will be vested after one 

year of service, rather than after one year, and at age 25. Also, 

there are a number of . . . variety of investment funds 

established for members of this plan. Employees will have the 

opportunity to contribute during a leave of absence or to forgo 

this choice. There will also be improvements to transference of 

the funds in and out of the plan upon termination of 

employment. 

 

At this time, we would like to consult stakeholders and get their 

position on each of these changes. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we 

respectfully move that debate on Bill 64 be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1145) 

 

Bill No. 65  An Act to amend 

The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Superannuation Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is necessary to amend The Superannuation Act 

to repeal those sections that pertain to the public employees 

pension plan, which has a Bill before this legislature for the 

creation of its own Act. 

 

With this amendment, The Superannuation Act will only pertain 

to seven defined benefit pension plans as follows: the 

Anti-Tuberculosis League superannuation plan; the Liquor 

Board superannuation plan; the Power Corporation 

superannuation plan; the public service superannuation plan; the 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications superannuation plan; the 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company employees 

superannuation plan; and the Workers’ Compensation Board 

superannuation plan. 

 

Although most of these pension plans have their own pension 

legislation, The Superannuation Act addresses those issues 

common to these pension plans. These plans have been closed 

to new members since 1977. 

 

It is necessary to address the issue of marital breakdown. At 

present, the only time a member’s pension asset can be split is 

when a benefit becomes payable. To meet the growing needs of 

its members, the pension plans need to split a member’s pension 

asset prior to the time that a member becomes eligible  

for an allowance. The split will be based upon the commuted 

value of the pension asset. 

 

In addition, it is prudent, on behalf of the pension plans, to 

provide a surviving spouse benefit where a marital breakdown 

occurs after retirement and the member dies. The changes 

recommended are consistent with The Pension Benefits Act of 

1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members are eager to continue their contributions 

to their pension plan while in receipt of disability benefits, to 

protect their future pension. Although members have been able 

to contribute to the plan while in receipt of benefits, it is 

desirable to create a section within the Act to clarify this issue. 

In doing so, the section will also require that employers who are 

required to match the contributions of members continue to do 

so while a member is in receipt of disability benefits and 

continuing to make contributions to their pension plan. 

 

It is also desirable to amend the plan to provide consistency in 

the surviving spouse benefits payable upon the death of a 

member. Under the normal form of pension benefit, a spouse is 

currently entitled to a higher lifetime death benefit if the 

member dies prior to age 65. Surviving spouses should be 

entitled to benefits on an equal basis. 

 

As a final point, it is prudent to amend the legislation to clarify 

the maximum benefit that can be paid on behalf of dependent 

children upon the death of the member. Although the current 

provision is correct, it is difficult to readily interpret the 

provision. 

 

The amendments proposed in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, focus on 

protecting a member’s pension asset at the time when the 

pension asset is a critical issue in the minds of a pension 

member and/or the member’s spouse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Superannuation 

Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

although this amendment may seem like a simple, unimportant 

amendment, the consequences are significant to everyone 

involved in marital disputes. 

 

This amendment to the Act accommodates splitting of pension 

assets upon a marriage breakdown, pursuant to The 

Matrimonial Property Act. The amendment also clarifies what 

will happen to a pension asset after a marriage breaks down 

following retirement. 

 

Under the existing legislation a pension asset can only be split 

when the benefits become available. Under this amendment, 

these benefits may be divided based upon the commuted value 

of the benefit accrued from the date of marriage and ending on 

the date of order or agreement pertaining to the marriage 

breakdown. The amount of the division of the commuted value 

entitled to by the spouse will be transferred to a prescribed 

RRSP (registered retirement savings plan) that is subject to The 

Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 

 

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

 

This amendment will also repeal sections pertaining to The 

Public Employees Pension Plan Act, which is before us as its 

own Act, referred to as Bill No. 64. Since the implications of 

this Bill are far-reaching, it is our wish to consult with the 

vested groups and receive their wise counsel. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I move that debate on this Bill be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 12  An Act to amend 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 

and to enact consequential amendments 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to introduce Susan 

Amrud, from the public law and policy branch, and Mr. Lionel 

McNabb, who is the director of the maintenance enforcement 

office. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome the 

official with the Minister of Justice to assist us. What I would 

like to do by your leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and if it’s okay 

with the Minister of Justice on this, I would like to proceed 

directly to 31.9(1). 

 

Mr. Chairman, I have spoken to this Bill previously with the 

concerns. There are some other questions that will be presented 

by the hon. member from Humboldt. 

 

What I would like to express my concerns about is what I spoke 

to concerning the impact and the effects of some of the 

amendments to this Bill, particularly as it relates to the 

revocation of driver’s licences. And in that respect, what I 

would like to do . . . And I apologize for not having given the 

minister in advance a copy of our proposed amendment. 

Perhaps you have an opportunity to just review it. 

 

Basically clause 5 of the printed Bill, and the motion to amend 

is to: 

 

Amend clause 5 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause 31.9(1)(b) as being enacted therein the 

following new clause: 

 

“(c) a person’s ability to earn an income would be impaired 

by the suspension.” 

 

And that is the amendment that we would propose to that 

particular clause, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair:  I would recommend to the Leader of the  

Opposition that that amendment is to clause 5, and we would 

move it when we get to clause 5. The amendment is to clause 5 

of the Bill? 

 

Mr. Osika:  Yes, it is. 

 

The Chair:  Well we will go to clause 5, and when we get to 

clause 5, then we will move the amendment if you are going to 

do that. 

 

We are on clause 2 of the Bill now. If there’s no amendments to 

clause 2 or no questions to clause 2 . . . 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, as 

I understand it though, when we are proposing an amendment to 

clause 5, whether that amendment is successful or unsuccessful 

will depend upon how we’ll deal with clauses 2, 3 and 4. 

Therefore, that is why we’re looking at an amendment to clause 

5, and then we’ll proceed from that point of view. 

 

The Chair:  I bring it to the attention of the committee that 

that . . . to the opposition that that should have been done in 

clause no. 1. If the minister is agreeable and with consent, we 

will go with leave back to clause 1, where your general should 

have took place. 

 

Now if that’ agreeable with the minister . . . Agreeable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, that’s okay. 

 

The Chair:  Okay. With leave, we will go back to clause 1 

and propose the amendment there. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I sincerely thank 

the minister for allowing us to do that, and I apologize for the 

oversight. 

 

If I may reiterate, as I have previously, the concerns and the 

impact that some of the proposed amendments to this Act, to 

this Bill, what impact it will have on those who are 

unfortunately caught up in these kinds of situations and 

primarily the effects on the children that are involved in these 

types of matters. 

 

Therefore I once again, move: 

 

That we amend clause 5 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately following clause 31.9(1)(b) as being enacted 

therein the following new clause as: 

 

“(c) a person’s ability to earn an income would be 

impaired by the suspension.” 

 

This, Mr. Chair, relates to an order for suspension of a person’s 

driver’s licence and that person having to rely on continuing to 

make either full or at least even partial payments within the 

context of a maintenance order. 

 

(1200) 

 

The Chair:  I understand that the amendment has been  

  



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

distributed to the minister and that he has a response to make to 

it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes. I’m not certain that the amendment 

is in order right at this time, but our position would be that we 

would be opposed to this amendment. It basically defeats the 

whole purpose of the provisions that we’re introducing, which 

is to provide some lever for the director of maintenance 

enforcement to have the person pay the maintenance that’s not 

paid. 

 

There are protections already, including application to the court 

for changing the order  going to the director of maintenance 

enforcement to make arrangements to pay. And practically, this 

may be one of the issues that could be dealt with by the 

director. But if this provision was included in the legislation, it 

would make it quite difficult for the suspension of driver’s 

licence to be used as an effective tool. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess again  and I 

want to reiterate  our concerns are that if in fact it is decided 

then, perhaps the discretion of the courts is perhaps somewhat 

limited in this regard, that if a person who is a courier driver or 

a transport driver who cannot make the full payment amounts of 

maintenance but is making some and becomes into arrears 

because it builds up from month to month . . . If you’re asked to 

pay a thousand dollars a month and you can only pay 600 

because of your employment and inability to achieve that, then 

the other $400 gets built up and built up. But at least there’s 

some effort. 

 

By taking that individual’s driver’s licence, it now totally 

disallows the opportunity to maintain any kind of employment 

which requires that ability to drive to earn some income to catch 

up or at least pay something. 

 

And I agree wholeheartedly. We want desperately as well to see 

that people who are responsible for taking care  particularly 

of the children  have a responsibility, and let’s go after them. 

 

There are a couple of things on this driver’s licence issue as 

well: the reciprocal agreements between provinces. And I’m not 

sure that that’s actually addressed, which would be effective. So 

you pull somebody’s licence, and they go to Alberta, and they 

get a driver’s licence in Alberta. I mean, is that sufficient? 

 

This way it may still encourage someone to continue, but that 

seems just a little drastic. And we do support the need to 

actively enforce these maintenance orders, however with some 

consideration that those that are trying and may be able to 

continue trying if they have the means to do it. And a driver’s 

licence is pretty important in this day and age. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think your question in a sense reflects 

that you don’t totally understand how the whole system works 

because practically the initial order has to be made by a judge 

based on the facts at the date that the judge makes the order. If 

there’s a change in circumstance subsequent to that time, for 

example another expenditure that is required  maybe a person 

is sick for a while and can’t work or any of those kinds of 

things  it’s possible to go back to the court to get the order  

buried. That’s the most common way that you would deal with 

the problem you described. 

 

But in addition to that, the director of maintenance enforcement 

and all of the people within the maintenance enforcement office 

are very willing to work with people to set up payment 

schedules that would allow them to meet the orders and help, I 

guess, give them suggestions about how they would go and get 

their order buried so that they wouldn’t be in the problem. 

 

The other thing is the use of this driver’s licence suspension is a 

last-resort measure. The person has had, you know, at least, 

well two notices that this is going to happen, and it’s very much 

used in some very specific circumstances where all other 

methods of collecting money have failed. And practically, if a 

person has a job and is receiving income, they wouldn’t use this 

remedy. They would use a continuing garnishee of wages as the 

method of obtaining the money. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one more 

question then relating back to the movement out of the 

province, the reciprocal agreements. Can you touch on that 

while we’re talking about this driver’s licence issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think that’s actually a matter for SGI, 

and I think it’s quite difficult to get a driver’s licence in another 

province unless you’ve moved to that province and reside there. 

So it would be a situation like that because you’re not . . . I 

think that the rules are clear that if you live in Saskatchewan, 

you can’t have an Alberta driver’s licence unless you do it in 

some way where you’re not telling the truth to the registration 

officials. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’d also 

like to welcome your officials today, and I’m very pleased to 

have them here. 

 

I would just like to refer them to page 3 of the amendment, 

section 31.2 (b), okay. There’s a statement there: “in the 

opinion of the director, all reasonable steps have been taken to 

enforce the maintenance order.” 

 

Could you provide for us possible examples of what might 

constitute “reasonable steps” to enforce the order on the part of 

the director? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I could give you a number of 

examples. In the normal course, you would try to do the thing 

that is the easiest for the director to get the money. And often if 

they know there’s a bank account, you go and attach the bank 

account, get the money paid out there. If a person is employed, 

you would use an attachment of the wages and usually in the 

form of a continuing garnishee so that every pay cheque a 

certain amount would be paid into the director of maintenance 

enforcement. If a person had assets, a car, you know, some 

other kinds of larger assets that are available, those things could 

be seized and sold to pay for this. 

 

I think practically what we’re saying here is that the taking 

away of the driver’s licence is still is the last resort except in 

those situations where you have . . . it may be that that’s the  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

 

only thing that they have of value that you can grab, and that’s 

why we’re introducing this amendment. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to refer you 

to section 31.4(a)(i). I understand from this part of the clause 

that a respondent may be making pension plan contributions but 

is not making maintenance order payments. In this case the 

pension cannot be attached, it says. 

 

Now are there situations where that director could deem it 

appropriate to attach the pension plan contributions so that 

maintenance orders are to be fulfilled? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question . . . I 

mean, it’s a good idea. But what happens is that when a person 

is making contributions to a pension plan that are required, that 

means that they have a flow of income. And so what we would 

do is attach the income that a person . . . Say a person is making 

$2,000 a month, and $200 is required to go into a pension plan. 

This provision is set up so that we can’t go and take the pension 

plan of somebody who is employed and making payments into 

the plan. And so the idea is that we would have a chance at the 

other $1,800, if I can put it that way. 

 

The whole idea here is that if a person is paying into a plan, 

then they are employed and are receiving income, and we can 

have a continuing garnishee of those wages. And then I think 

the reverse side of it is when a person has stopped paying into a 

plan and moved to another province, which is quite a common 

situation. 

 

They may still have money tied up in a pension plan, but 

they’ve moved to Nevada and are avoiding all responsibility for 

their family here in Saskatchewan. This would give us the 

power to go and take that sum of money that’s held in the 

pension plan because they’re no longer in Saskatchewan, 

working here and contributing to the plan. We didn’t want to 

give the power to take somebody’s pension plan while they’re 

working and contributing to it. And that’s the effect of this. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In section 31.5, the 

respondent may go to court to fight the enforcement of a 

maintenance order by attaching a pension plan. My question is, 

who pays the legal fees that will result from court action? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  In this situation, the parent who is not 

paying the support would pay their legal fees, and the 

government would pay the legal fees for the maintenance 

enforcement officer. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I’m just asking for clarification. You’re saying . . . 

could you please repeat that just for me again. I’m sorry, I 

didn’t hear you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The deadbeat parent pays their own legal 

fees if they can. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Is there any 

legislation that can allow somebody that has earned money in 

Alberta, that has a pension plan there, to attach so we can get 

Saskatchewan legislation to attach to that pension? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We can’t use Saskatchewan legislation to 

attach that. And my understanding is that Alberta does not have 

similar legislation at this time to attach Alberta pension plans. 

Now what we do know is that each province, as they develop 

and refine their maintenance enforcement procedures, shares the 

information on what they do with other provinces. And I would 

not be surprised if Alberta doesn’t ask us how well we’re doing 

with this new legislation and then make changes there as well. 

But at the present time, we couldn’t go to Alberta and get a 

pension plan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there any plans in place to see if we can 

make a reciprocal agreement amongst provinces so that we can 

work together with everyone? 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If the person that you’re talking about is 

working in Alberta, then Alberta’s maintenance enforcement 

procedures would be followed and they’d use whatever 

remedies they have. But I think your broader question is, how 

well do provinces across Canada cooperate on this issue? And I 

think that we’d have to say that they cooperate very well and 

that we do share information on the various types of procedures 

that work better and so that practically, for example, the 

procedures on the driver’s licence suspensions . . . 

 

We know from other provinces like Manitoba, where they’ve 

used this, that it’s increased a lot of payments right around the 

time the new law is to come into effect and that many people 

show up at the maintenance enforcement office with cheques, 

making sure that their driver’s licence aren’t suspended. 

 

But I guess what I would say is that there’s a basic level right 

across the country of maintenance enforcement, and some 

provinces have enhanced their maintenance enforcement, and 

we’re, I think, leading the pack on some things. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. This is such a very 

interesting topic because I have had constituents that have been 

in this situation and that were trying to have maintenance orders 

enforced. In one case, the woman that came to me had 

mentioned that the non-custodial parent, we will say, had gone 

to Alberta, and in fact they were having some difficulty finding 

that person. 

 

So with this amendment that you’re putting in here, it’s going to 

make it easier to revoke driver’s licences. So for clarification, is 

there enough cooperation from Alberta that that driver’s licence 

can be revoked there or even tracked down so that person 

tracked down through their driver’s licence, etc. so that in fact 

there is a much quicker effect on maintenance orders for the 

person in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If it’s a Saskatchewan person, for 

example, that goes to Alberta and works on a temporary basis 

or a seasonal basis and still drives on a Saskatchewan driver’s 

licence, then we can suspend that Saskatchewan driver’s licence 

and then have the effect that we want. 

 

If it’s somebody who moves to Alberta after their driver’s  

  



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

licence has been suspended here, there is a notification 

procedure between provinces so that Alberta will not issue a 

new driver’s licence to that person so that they can escape the 

fact that they’ve lost their licence here. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, I’m really very happy to hear that. I 

would just like to ask how a director would come to make a 

decision to either attach a pension entitlement or make the 

decision to revoke a driver’s licence? I suppose you would, you 

know, if he or she would do what seemed most reasonable as 

you’ve mentioned before. But is there any sort of direction for 

the director to do one or the other first? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think practically, based on my own sort 

of personal experience as a lawyer in this field for, well I guess, 

close to 20 years and then also knowing from my new role how 

the office works, that when a problem presents itself, the 

experience of the director and the staff in the office can identify 

fairly quickly where the quickest way to get some money from 

this person. And practically, that’s how the decision is made on 

which procedure to use first. 

 

Now, for example, if it was a truck driver who was a sort of an 

interprovincial truck driver with a home base in Saskatchewan 

who decided to live in their truck to avoid paying their support 

payments, that that might be a candidate, and they had no other 

assets other than their truck and cash that they got paid with 

from their . . . whatever deals they made, well we might move 

right through all of the other normal procedures of enforcement 

right to the suspension of the driver’s licence to make sure that 

there was some pressure on that fellow to pay his bill. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Minister. Mr. Minister, does the 

non-custodial parent who is responsible for maintenance, do 

they have any say at all into whether or not their pension may 

be drawn from or whether their driver’s licence would be 

revoked? Do they have any say, or is that strictly up to the 

minister responsible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, they would have notice of this 

procedure. This is a fairly drastic procedure, and so they would 

get notice, and they could come and make representations. How 

it would normally work would be that if, for some reason, they 

didn’t know that their, usually, wife and children needed some 

money. . . You know, that’s often how they present themselves: 

oh, I didn’t know I wasn’t paying . . . you know, that kind of a 

response. 

 

But if that was the case and they would get notice that their 

pension was going to be attached, usually what happens is that 

they very quickly come into the office and make some 

arrangements. And if they don’t have all the money right there, 

they would maybe give postdated cheques over two or three 

months and get everything cleared up. 

 

But the whole idea is to have another sort of remedy that is 

useful in some tricky cases. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Manitoba’s legislation 

with regards to the revocation of driver’s licence has proposed 

amendments that would also allow for the refusal to renew  

vehicle registrations or permits. This is stated in section two 

seventy-three point one. Was this a consideration of this 

government, to, you know, also refuse to renew vehicle 

registrations or permits. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We have not done that in this legislation. 

There are a couple of factors; one is that the computer system 

with SGI does not make it that easy to do that. But we have 

similar remedies which I think work as well, which is we go 

and seize the vehicle and the plates and basically deal with it 

that way. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would . . . there’s also 

a question of visitation rights and I want to present some 

concerns that have been brought to us. One of their questions is, 

does the custodial parent, through this Act, have to abide, or 

made to abide, by court orders with respect to visitation once 

pensions are attached or a driver’s licence is revoked? 

 

I mean, it seems as though this is a measure being taken to 

ensure that monies are there for children. On the same hand, 

there has been some question about whether visitation rights 

have been honoured by the custodial parent. So we’re 

wondering whether or not there’s anything in place to ensure 

that visitation rights are respected. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is that 

as far as it relates to maintenance enforcement issues, that’s in 

the Act that we’re discussing now. The answers about the 

enforceability of access orders of various kinds, that’s all under 

The Children’s Law Act and those orders are orders of the court 

in the same way that orders requiring payment of maintenance 

are and they can be enforced using all of the remedies in The 

Children’s Law Act — and there are substantial remedies. 

 

Now we acknowledge that there are . . . I mean, that requires 

applications to the court and there are, I suppose, difficulties 

endorsing some of those orders as well; but it’s in The 

Children’s Law Act and not in the Act we’re discussing now. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess that answers my 

next question. I would like to read it to you anyway because it 

is on behalf of people in our province that have a concern about 

fairness in this way. 

 

What kind of safety net is in place for non-custodial parents 

who are paying maintenance and do not get the opportunity to 

see their children on a regular basis? Because there is just a lot 

of complaints about this, and the feeling that they haven’t got 

very much to help them out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That issue that you raised has been a 

concern within the Department of Justice for a number of years, 

and over the last two years now, we have a whole area of the 

family law division, which includes provision of services to 

help people understand what their rights are and help them with 

some of the access issues. That includes facilities for providing 

supervised access. It includes some counselling and things like 

that. So it is a concern that we’re attempting to address, and 

we’ve actually done some things over the last two or three 

years. 

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I just have 

a question on the same line, and I understand it’s not part of this 

Act, but I’m just asking it. When you’re considering these 

changes or amendments or for visitation rights, is there 

consideration being thought of for grandparents as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  They’re already included in the 

legislation. So if you have some problems as a grandparent, you 

can just go and see your lawyer. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, I 

want to give you a little bit of a scenario here. Let us assume for 

a moment that most non-custodial parents who have their 

licences revoked or their pensions attached will likely appeal to 

the courts for a reversal of this decision. What will the 

estimated additional case-load on the provincial courts be with 

the implementation of this Bill? Have you been able to make 

any kind of an assessment there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  My assessment would be that it wouldn’t 

be a substantial load on the courts with this, basically because 

of the reasonableness of the other steps that are taken. This is a 

last-resort measure and that we would not end up with very 

many cases that are being argued that would require lots of 

court time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there any estimated 

costs to taxpayers or any . . . assuming, I guess, that taxpayers 

will have additional costs to them for the additional court costs 

that might arise out of the Bill. I mean if there’s not that many 

court cases that you’re assuming will come out of this, I guess 

that the cost won’t be very much. But what is the estimated cost 

to taxpayers, if any, out of this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  My information is that there’s no 

incremental cost. We would use the existing staff lawyers that 

we have to handle this matter. So we’re not anticipating that it’s 

going to increase costs in the Department of Justice at all. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one more question. 

If in fact the non-custodial parents . . . parent rather, is out of 

the province and there is some need to track that person down 

and so on. That implies to me that there would be some extra 

costs. And I think that implies to other people that there would 

be some extra costs on behalf of the government because, in 

fact you know, we are enforcing these maintenance orders 

through our legislation. And so I believe that it would be our 

responsibility to pay for anything to follow up finding a person 

or, in fact, any procedures that might follow with the garnishee 

of wages that persons are making in another province. 

 

So I’m assuming there should be, and probably will be, some 

extra court costs . . . or not court costs, but extra costs 

associated, and I’m just wondering if there has been any 

estimation of those kind of things, those kind of costs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think if you understand how the system 

works, we only have jurisdiction to go after those people who 

are in the province of Saskatchewan. And so that practically if a 

person is in another province, then . . . and a request is made to 

enforce a maintenance order, we then forward it to Edmonton  

or Winnipeg or Vancouver or Victoria. And then it’s enforced 

in that province where the person who is not paying resides. 

And that’s how the system works. So we would not end up 

paying that cost. 

 

Now one of the things we do end up having to do, is try to 

explain why a system in another province isn’t quite as efficient 

or as quick as the systems that we have developed. That’s . . . 

but the way it is, is we can only pass laws in Saskatchewan that 

affect people that are here as it relates to this. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I certainly don’t know the law inside 

out, I can assure you. That’s why I appreciate your 

contributions here to enlighten us. It seems then that another 

province would be responsible for a good number of costs 

associated. Is this sort of a good neighbour policy that we’re 

going to have, hopefully, throughout the country and hoping 

that everybody will comply? Or at this point, when there isn’t 

an integrated system that’s totally efficient yet as far as tracking 

down people and so on, and the cost associated with that, have 

you noticed any kind of frustration on the part of other 

provinces to have to pay the costs of your requests? 

 

(1230) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it is a truly reciprocal thing. But I 

think one aspect we haven’t talked about, which you may have 

heard about but don’t remember, is that we can use the federal 

government’s assistance in obtaining refunds of income tax 

that’s overpaid. And what that does do is allows us to find 

people wherever they work in Canada and obtain the payment if 

they are working. 

 

The other side of it is, is that if we’re trying to trace somebody 

and find out where they are located, if we don’t know where 

they are and they’re not in Saskatchewan, SGI is able to help 

with some of that as well. But the basic point is that we would 

then pass it on to the other province and the enforcement would 

take place, paid for by that province. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I have no more questions in this 

regard. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

we were talking about drivers’ licences just a few moments ago 

regarding looking at suspended drivers’ licences for people who 

refuse to maintain the maintenance payments. And I noticed . . . 

I think you made the comment about, Manitoba has this. In fact 

I think maybe a number of other provinces as well have this 

suspension. 

 

I believe Manitoba has also made their . . . or implemented 

some tougher maintenance enforcement measures that seem to 

be working fairly well. In addition to suspending or refusing 

drivers’ licences, Manitoba added vehicle registration as well. 

Is that true? Did your office take a look at vehicle registration 

regarding the maintenance orders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This is the same question I just answered 

about 10 minutes ago. But basically what we’ve done in 

Saskatchewan is we haven’t gone that whole, next step for two  

  



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

reasons: one, that SGI’s system is not totally . . . we’re not 

totally able to do it through the way their computer system 

works. But we also find that by seizing the licence plates and 

the vehicles themselves that we have a more effective method 

of getting payment. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I didn’t quite hear that 

response earlier on, about that specific issue. 

 

Another question. There’s a measure that isn’t devastating, 

however seems to be effective in Manitoba, regarding reporting 

delinquent payers to the credit bureau. Now for some, this 

measure may be no big deal, but as you mentioned earlier, Mr. 

Minister, there are professionals that, for whatever reason, take 

any measures to avoid making maintenance payments to their 

spouse and children. While they don’t seem to care much about 

supporting their families and living up to their obligations, such 

individuals don’t want their credit rating hurt. 

 

Do we report delinquent parents to the credit bureau, and if we 

don’t, why not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  We don’t do that yet. We are looking at it. 

We need to change some of the regulations under the freedom 

of information legislation to allow us to do the reporting. But 

we are actively pursuing that. 

 

And this is once again an example of where we are observing 

how something works well in another province; and then if it 

works well there, then we will introduce it here. So that is one 

that we are actively pursing. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as well, 

you were talking with other members regarding pension plans 

and the fact of being able to dip into pension plans if a person 

doesn’t maintain their orders or make their payments. 

 

And I’m not sure if the question was asked, whether a person 

starts putting money aside under another individual’s name  

let’s say a girlfriend or another friend  where they’re taking it 

out of their income and putting money into a pension plan or 

whatever that may be under somebody else's name so it makes 

it impossible for your department to follow up and see whether 

or not this individual has the funds available to pay their 

maintenance orders. 

 

And are there other measures whereby you follow up on 

individuals? If their income is at a certain level and yet they 

don’t have . . . they’re saying that . . . playing that they’re a fact 

but they just don’t have the access to those funds, but they’re 

hiding it in another form. 

 

What does your department do to make sure that you’re 

following up on every avenue to maintain or enforce the fact 

that a person just doesn’t try and get around the specific 

guidelines that are already there or that will be there under this 

new piece of legislation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well that’s a very good question, because 

basically the reason that we’re doing the pension attachment 

and the driver’s licence together is that self-employed people do  

have that power to put money into a pension plan for somebody 

else, a spouse usually, and we can’t get at it directly. But often 

it does relate to self-employed truck drivers or other people who 

need their driver’s licences, so we are then using the driver’s 

licence suspension as a way to get around that problem. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, do we have a registry of TD1 forms 

submitted for all employees to provide information to local 

payers . . . to locate payers and their place of employment? If 

not, why not? Again, I believe Manitoba does. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to your question is we 

already have that power in our Act, under section 11, to request 

the information from the employer. Manitoba has just done it in 

a different way. They don’t have the power under the legislation 

so they cooperate with the federal government income tax, 

Revenue Canada, people. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I believe, just in a response to one 

of my questions earlier, you mentioned that you have been 

looking at other jurisdictions. And I take it you’ve been 

following up fairly closely with the Manitoba example, to 

follow as the different principles that they have involved and 

implemented through their enforcement legislation. How 

closely are we following Manitoba’s examples and maintenance 

orders in this legislation? 

 

And I think you just indicated earlier, there are some areas that 

we’re not totally right on with what Manitoba’s doing but we’re 

studying them to see whether they will fit; and other areas you 

say we’ve already gone beyond that and we have the access and 

we are following up probably in a . . . it may be a little different 

format but we are there. 

 

And I’m just wondering, with the specific legislation we have 

before us, how close are we now to what Manitoba is doing? 

And is Manitoba what we would consider the prime example 

for taking the leading role in maintenance enforcement orders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think we can say that we’ve learned a 

number of things from Manitoba. I’m certain that they’ve also 

learned some things from us, like the previous example that I 

gave you where we actually have in our legislation the power to 

get that information from employers, which they don’t have. So 

they look at some of the things we do. 

 

The other jurisdictions that have dealt with, the drivers’ licences 

are Nova Scotia and Alberta, so we’ve been looking fairly 

carefully at what they do as well. And I think I can say that 

there’s a very good sharing of information, especially in light of 

the fact that . . . of the questions I was asked previously about 

the cooperation and the sharing of the cost where a parent who 

is not paying, moves to British Columbia, well then it’s the 

British Columbia expense to track the person down and get 

them to pay and then forward the money to the parent and 

children here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I guess the answer to your question is, Manitoba has done 

many good things. We’ve done many good things, and we are 

sharing information all the time and that I don’t think we can 

say that any one jurisdiction is way out ahead of anybody else  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

 

because we’ve all been working together on it. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, you talk about sharing information. 

Does the maintenance office in this office presently share 

information with Revenue Canada and other federal databanks 

to help locate payers and their place of employment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  At the present time, once a year we can 

get that information. And if you were really carefully looking at 

the enforcement of maintenance orders, you would notice that 

in May and June are the bumper months for payments because 

of so many income tax refunds that are garnisheed. We are 

working with the federal government and looking at expansion 

of that sharing of information to assist us in more payments so 

that we would maybe do it with . . . well other types of 

payments that come to individuals in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Once this piece of legislation is enforced and 

brought into being, how much additional money do you 

anticipate that will be collected through the implementation of 

this Bill, or maybe I could even ask, in the area of percentages? 

As far as the defaults, what do you expect to happen regarding 

default of payments as a result of the implementation of Bill 

12? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s quite a difficult question to answer, 

but because of the refinements we’ve been making each year, 

we’ve been sort of increasing 10 or 15 per cent each year. What 

we do know from the experience in the other provinces is, is 

that we will have a big surge in payment just before this 

driver’s licence provision comes in. 

 

Mr. Toth:  And maybe, Mr. Minister, just for my 

information — I’m not sure if the question’s been asked — 

what percentage of default do we have in this province as far as 

payment of maintenance orders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  At the present time it’s 75 per cent that we 

collect; 25 per cent that we don’t collect. And that’s been a very 

dramatic improvement since we’ve concentrated in this area and 

expanded the resources for the maintenance enforcement 

program. 

 

Mr. Toth:  I believe you said earlier these changes would 

affect approximately 1,000 people. Are you referring basically 

to 1,000 payers? I take it that’s what you’re referring to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  That’s correct  1,000 payers. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, another thing that was brought to 

my attention  I believe it was on the national news the other 

evening. And I’m not exactly sure what all the details are, 

whether it comes out of one of the other provinces. But there 

was something on the news regarding grandparents being . . . or 

provinces or areas looking at garnisheeing grandparents’ wages 

to maintain maintenance orders. I’m not sure if you’re aware of 

it. It kind of caught my attention because I . . . 

 

And I think they interviewed a couple of grandparents who 

ended up in this situation, and in many cases . . . It just so 

happened the two couples that they happened to be talking to  

were not set with a large, if you will, retirement fund and all of 

a sudden they find themselves having to pay for some 

maintenance. 

 

And I was just wondering if you’re aware of this, Mr. Minister, 

and whether or not this is an avenue that you might be pursuing 

down the road. It just caught my attention. I was just wondering 

whether you’d heard of it, or what your views are of it. 

 

It seems to me it’s the parents we need to be looking at and 

when we start looking at grandparents we’re really . . . 

especially when you get older people who are on very low, 

fixed incomes to all of a sudden be asked to maintain . . . for 

maintenance for their grandchildren, it’s going to create a 

problem. 

 

So I’m not sure where we’re at, but I just bring it to your 

attention. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’m not sure of the specific situation 

you’re talking about. I think it’s possible it’s two different 

situations. One may be a situation where in Social Services 

department where there are expenses within a family, that they 

would do something. We’re not thinking about that. 

 

Another possibility is that there are some discussions, I think, in 

the United States, about whether children should be paying for 

their parents, rather than have the social assistance program pay 

for their parents. There are some very specific pieces of 

legislation in the United States that deal with the Medicaid 

program and transfers of money from parents to children so that 

they can qualify on the Medicaid program and have their 

hospital care paid for. And I think there may be some 

discussions around that in the United States. And if it was a 

U.S. report, that may have been what you heard. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, I do have one more 

question. If the non-custodial parent is in a situation where, in 

fact, he has outstanding debts in many places and there is an 

order to garnishee that person’s wages already from businesses 

or whatever it may be or from Revenue Canada, my question is, 

is there a determination of which garnishee will come first? 

Will it be for the benefit of the children here of the 

non-custodial person or will the right be given to garnishee to 

the federal government or to other businesses first? Like I want 

to know where the priorities are here, and if we have done 

anything in this province to ensure that children come first? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I can answer by saying children do 

come first. The only possible sort of claim that’s on an equal 

basis to maintenance orders is the federal government for 

Revenue Canada, but most often where it’s a question of 

whether the children get the money or Revenue Canada gets the 

money, I’m informed that Revenue Canada actually backs out 

and lets the money go to the children. So that’s a good policy 

that they have, and practically the law for many, many years has 

been that child support and spousal support payments take 

priority over all other creditors. 

 

  



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 1996 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you, that’s all the 

questions, I think. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. At the end 

of my brief remarks, because this has been touched on quite a 

bit today, I’ll be moving an amendment to clause 5, 31.9(1); (c) 

is where I’ll have the amendment. 

 

But just a few things, Mr. Minister, on what the intent is, I 

guess, of your department. Is it to penalize the dead-beat parent, 

or is it really for collection? Because this is where I think a lot 

of people are viewing this as more of a penalty than it is of a 

fair form of collection. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think it’s very simply a method of 

collection. And the reason I say that is it’s the last-resort 

measure to gain the attention of some people who seem to have 

ignored court orders, notices, attempts at garnisheeing bank 

accounts, many things. They ignore all of those, and finally as a 

last resort you take their driver’s licence and suddenly 

communication seems to work. 

 

So I think practically that this is not any kind of a penalty for 

this person. It’s more just to get them to live up to their 

responsibility and go and make arrangements to make the 

payments that they should. And if there’s some problem with 

their own employment because they don’t have a driver’s 

licence, then they can make arrangements with the director of 

maintenance enforcement, or they can go back to the court and 

get an adjustment made in the method of payment. They can go 

back to the court and have an adjustment made in the original 

order to deal with the problem. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But I’m not sure 

that your intent here  we’re talking collection  that we’re 

going to be having a lot of luck. Now as my colleagues have 

raised before earlier today, people that are living out of 

province . . . and I’m just wondering how . . . You know, you 

talked about provinces cooperating very well. So if in fact 

you’re going to be suspending a driver’s licence, what then 

happens to those people, if they’re a dead-beat parent, just to 

move out of the province? I mean, there’s nothing that you can 

do to do any more collections, so really you’re only penalizing 

those that wish to stay here, right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, that’s not correct because if we take 

that driver’s licence away here, then that suspension is 

registered with SGI, and that information is transferred to 

Alberta or BC (British Columbia) or anywhere else, and they 

can’t go and apply for another driver’s licence in that 

jurisdiction. They cannot apply for another driver’s licence 

because they have a suspended licence in Saskatchewan. 

 

And if you . . . you know, when you look at your application 

form for your new licence, it always asks that question: have  

you had your licence suspended in any other jurisdiction. And 

the only way you could get a licence somewhere else is if you 

didn’t tell the truth on that question. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  All right, Mr. Minister, but if in fact they 

know they’re going to be running into this sort of a problem, if 

they move to Alberta and get the licence first then they’re out of 

your reach, right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well, they would have to use a different 

name. Also Alberta has some legislation to deal with the 

suspension of driver’s licence. Alberta has legislation that can 

allow them to suspend drivers’ licences as well, and so . . . and 

Manitoba does. So I’m not sure. 

 

You’d have to go perhaps to South America or some place like 

that where there would be little checking back to Saskatchewan. 

But in the normal course within Canada, it would be quite 

difficult to get another licence when your licence has been 

suspended here, unless you changed your name and all your 

identification and started over in a somewhat fraudulent 

manner. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, but the 

point I’m making, if you know that you’re somewhat down on 

your luck, really the route that you’re going to go . . . Mr. 

Deputy Chair, it is so hard to hear in the House today. I don’t 

know why, but if you could just keep your members quiet. 

 

The Chair:  Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I just 

remind members that we have minutes left in this session. The 

Chair, as well as some other members, are having some 

difficulty hearing all the discussion in this important matter. I 

ask for the cooperation of all members as we deal with this Bill. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. See, the 

concern is then that if people are in a somewhat desperate 

situation with their income, they’re not going to wait until their 

licence is suspended here; they’re going to move to Alberta, get 

the licence, and that’s out of your reach then. It would have to 

be suspended here first, I take it. 

 

And I’m also wondering what then would happen with truckers. 

Don’t they have some interprovincial licences? If it’s not the 

licence, then in fact it’s the plates. You were talking about 

taking vehicles and licence away. So I’m just wondering how 

that would work with interprovincial stuff? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think the answer to the first part of 

your question is that if a person anticipated that they were going 

to lose their licence and then moved to Alberta to avoid 

payment of support here, they could do that. They could move 

to Alberta, but we would then forward the information to the 

maintenance enforcement office in Alberta, and they would use 

whatever remedies they have with ultimately using the 

suspension of a driver’s licence there to collect the maintenance 

payments. So that’s . . . you know you wouldn’t really be able 

to escape by going to Alberta or to Manitoba. 

 

The second part of your question about the interprovincial 

licence, when a trucker gets an interprovincial licence, they  

  



April 19, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

 

have to have a home province before they get the 

interprovincial licence. And if their licence was suspended in 

their home province, then they don’t have the interprovincial 

licence anymore either. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I don’t 

think you’re going to convince enough people in the province 

that this part of the Bill has been well thought out. And it still is 

going to be viewed more as a penalty as something that’s very 

much an effective tool, so at this time I would move an 

amendment: 

 

Amend clause 5 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause 31.9(1)(b) as being enacted therein the 

following new clause: 

 

“(c) a person’s ability to earn an income would be impaired 

by the suspension.” 

 

I so move. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:56 p.m. until 12:57 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  7 

 

Aldridge Draude McPherson 

Bjornerud Julé Krawetz 

Gantefoer   

 

Nays  20 

 

Van Mulligen Lingenfelter Shillington 

Johnson Whitmore Goulet 

Kowalsky Renaud Calvert 

Pringle Scott Teichrob 

Nilson Stanger Murray 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Sonntag Thomson  

 

The Chair:  Why is the Deputy Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. To 

introduce guests, by leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery, I would like to introduce a special person 

who is with us today, Kusyairi Bostani; if you would stand and 

be recognized. Kusyairi is with the gas distribution company of 

Sarawak from Malaysia. And with our guest is Russ Pratt, who 

is one of our vice-presidents of SaskEnergy. 

 

The reason that Mr. Bostani is in Saskatchewan is because a 

contract that SaskEnergy did in Malaysia some months ago 

resulted in a training program of which Mr. Bostani is in 

charge. And he is with us here today looking at some of the  

work being done by SaskEnergy here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’m sure that all members will want to wish Mr. Bostani a 

pleasant visit in Saskatchewan and a safe return home, and 

know that there is a close connection between your country of 

Malaysia and the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 12 

(continued) 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12  An Act to amend 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 

and to enact consequential amendments 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read the third time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  With leave, today. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:05 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1001 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1001 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1001 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1001 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1002 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1002 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1002 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1002 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1002 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1002 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1002 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1027 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women of Distinction Awards 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1003 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1003 

 Oklahoma City Tragedy 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1004 

 Lakeland Citizen of the Year 

  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1004 

 Flood Volunteer Appreciation 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1004 

 Crown Life Job Creation 

  Thomson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1004 

 Melville SARCAN Anniversary 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1005 

 Regina IODE 

  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1005 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Funding for Providence Place 

  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1005 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1005 

 No-fault Insurance 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1006 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1006 

 Flood Conditions 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1007 

  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1007 

  Teichrob ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1007 

 Political Function Advertising 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1008 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1008 

 Firearms Regulations 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1008 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1008 

 Right-to-work Legislation 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1009 

  Anguish .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1009 

 Child Prostitution 

  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1009 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1010 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 75  An Act respecting the Right to Work (RTW) in the Province of Saskatchewan 

  Goohsen ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1010 



 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 1010 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 17  An Act to amend certain Acts respecting Highways and Vehicles 

  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1010 

  Sonntag .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1012 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1014 

 Bill No. 74  An Act to amend The Government Organization Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1015 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1016 

 Bill No. 63  An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Pension Annuity Fund 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1016 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1017 

 Bill No. 64  An Act respecting Pensions for Public Employees 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1017 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1018 

 Bill No. 65  An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 

  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1018 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1018 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to enact consequential amendments 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1019 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1019 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1019 

  Julé ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1020, 1025 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1021, 1023 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1023 

  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1026 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1027 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to enact consequential amendments 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1027 

 


