
























































June 12, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2517 
 June 12, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 82  An Act 
respecting Health Facilities be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 
Central Plains Health District, which is part of my constituency, 
administration and government bureaucrats speak of the 
underlying strategy of health reform. They are not concerned 
about the words spoken by the hon. minister, and they are not 
concerned about the assurances and the promises of the 
minister. They are not concerned either about the reams of 
propaganda put forth by the minister’s department, propaganda 
assuring the people of Saskatchewan and their local community 
leaders that the new health system will involve them and serve 
them. What concerns them is the underlying strategy, and it is 
this underlying strategy, this unspoken directive, this hidden 
agenda, that concerns me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to be asked is: what is really going on 
here? As I review these health Bills in front of us and I reflect 
on the words put on these papers soon to become law, to be 
inflicted on the people of Saskatchewan, I find myself asking 
the simple question: why? What has gone wrong with the 
original hidden agenda of this government? What does the Hon. 
Minister of Health have to fix? 
 
Mr. Speaker, upon further reflection on this question, this 
government and its ministers, I recall the Minister of Health’s 
disrespectful remark in this legislature to me. I recall his 
statement that I should have my head examined, and I recall this 
glimpse of the minister’s true nature that he shared with the 
people of Saskatchewan through his statement in this House. I 
recall this unparliamentary and personal attack, the arrogance 
contained in the minister’s words, the thoughtlessness and 
disrespect contained in their meaning. 
 
And this is important, Mr. Speaker, because it gives us a brief 
picture of the true nature of the minister and this government. It 
gives the people of Saskatchewan a vision of the philosophy 
and the leadership contained in these pieces of legislation. It 
also shows what to expect as this legislation is enforced. 
 
This is important to the matter at hand, as it shows how much 
respect or lack of it this government holds for the people of 
Saskatchewan. At this point in the debate, it is time to put 
everything into perspective so that we can get to the essence of 
the legislation. We must get to the true nature of the hon. 
minister and his government, and we must get to the underlying 
strategy, the unspoken directive and the hidden agenda, of this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I refer my comments to the Hon. Minister of  

Health, but I also want to frame my comments in the context of 
other health-related happenings of the day. Closures of 
hospitals and nursing homes throughout Saskatchewan are the 
direct result of intentional funding reductions by the minister. 
The minister’s reactions to these situations, when questioned in 
this House, is to deny any responsibility. 
 
The minister says the district health boards are responsible, that 
he is not responsible. Mr. Speaker, please do not misunderstand 
me. I am not saying that the Minister of Health is irresponsible 
but I certainly agree that he is not a responsible minister. I do 
not rise to offend the minister but merely to agree with him on 
this statement. 
 
Whenever the Minister of Health stands up in this House and he 
states that he and his government are not responsible for 
hospital or long-term care facility closures, I am reminded of 
the personal attack that he made upon me previously in this 
House. I do not believe that remarks made by the minister in 
either situation are those of a responsible minister. I am sure 
that in this matter we are in agreement. 
 
The nature of my comments, Mr. Speaker, must be framed in 
the reality that the people of Saskatchewan now find themselves 
and in the new reality that these Bills will form. 
 
In order to properly and fully frame my comments, Mr. Speaker, 
I must first identify the reality of Saskatchewan’s health care 
system today. I must also refer back to the non-responsibility of 
the Minister of Health with respect to hospitals and nursing 
home closures. The reality is that the Department of Health 
officials attend district health board meetings and guide them 
behind closed doors in an underlying strategy of health reform. 
The unspoken directive, the hidden agenda. 
 
To help the minister not to be responsible, these district boards 
are given their funding in restrictive pools that ensure that they 
cannot choose to keep hospital beds open. Then, just to ensure 
that they cannot make an uncontrolled decision for which the 
minister is not responsible, they must formulate a health plan 
that must be approved by the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is the minister responsible but he is also 
in complete control of these health districts through influence 
and approval control. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in my reflection, 
I have come to the conclusion that the minister is in fact, 
through legislation and action, responsible for the decisions of 
the district health boards. I am strongly in agreement with the 
minister that he is not a responsible minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a moment to see what the minister has 
been responsible for. Let’s step back and take a look at the big 
picture. We have to be able to look at what has happened thus 
far in health reform, where we are today, and where this 
government is taking us. 
 
What do we see in our publicly funded health services? We see 
a teen sex line that takes families out of the picture. We see 
government enforce sex education for our youth. We see  



2518  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

government-controlled district health boards. What do we see 
elsewhere? We see education reform and we see municipal 
reform. 
 
But what do we really see? We see complete social 
restructuring. We see the tentacles of this government reaching 
into every community, every home, and every family. We see an 
attempt at comprehensive social restructuring. We see 
restructuring to a such extent that the average person in 
Saskatchewan cannot begin to imagine. What is really 
happening here? 
 
I would like to return to my original question. What does the 
Hon. Minister of Health have to fix? Let’s consider The Health 
Districts Amendment Act. What is the substantive changes that 
this legislation contains? This government had a slight 
oversight in its original legislation in that it forgot about the 70 
health agencies in Saskatchewan which are not district owned 
and operated. These agencies are referred to as affiliates. Now 
how do you suppose that happened, Mr. Speaker? 
 
In the information of our health services system, a number of 
health agencies were given the choice to be taken over by the 
government-controlled district health boards. More than 70 of 
them chose not to be taken over, yet this government forgot 
about them. How can this be? It appears to me that they weren’t 
forgotten at all. It appears to me that this government expected 
to take them all over, but this did not happen. 
 
So what does the government do when unsuccessful at 
orchestrating a voluntary hostile take-over? It’s very simple. 
Change the legislation. I respectfully suggest that the underlying 
strategy of this government was the complete and total control 
of all health service providers through the formation of district 
health boards. It is also readily apparent to me, on review and 
reflection, that the hon. minister and his government failed at 
round one. 
 
As a result, round two calls for the Draconian measures 
contained in The Health Districts Amendment Act that will 
affect affiliated health agencies. And just who are these 
affiliated agencies? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read them to 
you. 
 
The Bethany Pioneer Village at Middle Lake; Borderline 
Housing Co. at Carnduff; Buena Vista Lodge at Kerrobert; 
Central Haven Special Care Home in Saskatoon; Circle Drive 
Special Care Home in Saskatoon; Cupar & District Nursing 
Home, Cupar; Del Haven Lodge in Saskatoon; Duck Lake & 
District Nursing Home (Goodwill Manor) in Duck Lake; 
Elmwood Residences Inc. in Saskatoon; Extendicare (Canada) 
Inc. in Moose Jaw; Extendicare Elmview in Regina; 
Extendicare Parkside in Regina; Extendicare Sunset in Regina; 
Extendicare Preston in Saskatoon; Fort Qu’Appelle Indian 
Hospital at Fort Qu’Appelle; Foyer d’Youville Home in 
Gravelbourg; Foyer St. Joseph Nursing Home in Ponteix; 
Golden Twilight Lodge in Macklin; Gull Lake & District 
Special Care Home in Gull Lake; Herbert Nursing Home in 
Herbert; Herbert Senior Citizen’s Home in Herbert; Heritage 
Manor in Kindersley; Holy Family Hospital in Prince Albert; 
Humboldt & District Housing Corp. (St. Mary’s Villa) in  

Humboldt; Ina Grafton Gage Home in Moose Jaw; Jubilee 
Lodge in Eston; Jubilee Residences, Porteous Lodge, 
Saskatoon; Jubilee Residences, Stensrud Lodge in Saskatoon; 
Lakeview Pioneer Lodge Inc. in Wakaw; Langham Senior 
Citizen’s Home in Langham; La Ronge Hospital in La Ronge; 
Lumsden & District Heritage Home in Lumsden; Lutheran 
Sunset Home of Saskatoon; Martin Luther Nursing Home in 
Regina; Menno Homes of Saskatchewan, Waldheim; 
Mennonite Nursing Home Inc. in Rosthern; Mont St. Joseph 
Home in Prince Albert; New Hope Pioneer Lodge in Stoughton; 
Oliver Lodge in Saskatoon; Pioneers Haven in Kerrobert; 
Ponteix Housing Co. Ltd. in Ponteix; Providence Place, Moose 
Jaw; Qu’Appelle House, Regina; Radville Marian Health 
Centre in Radville; Regina Lutheran Home in Regina; Regina 
Pioneer Village in Regina; Salvation Army Eventide Home in 
Saskatoon; Salvation Army William Booth Special Care Home 
in Regina; Santa Maria Senior Citizens Home in Regina; and 
Saskatoon Convalescent Home in Saskatoon; Sherbrooke 
Community Centre in Saskatoon; Spruce Manor Special Care 
Home in Dalmeny; St. Ann’s Senior Citizens Village Corp. in 
Saskatoon; St. Anthony’s Hospital in Esterhazy; St. Elizabeth’s 
Hospital in Humboldt; St. Joseph’s Health Centre, Macklin; St. 
Joseph’s Home in Saskatoon; St. Joseph’s Hospital in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse; St. Joseph’s Hospital of Estevan; St. Joseph’s 
Hospital, Gravelbourg; St. Martin’s Hospital, La Loche; St. 
Michael’s Hospital, Cudworth; St. Paul’s Hospital, Saskatoon; 
St. Paul’s Lutheran Home, Melville; St. Peter’s Hospital in 
Melville; Sunnyside Nursing Home in Saskatoon; Swift Current 
Care Centre in Swift Current; Uranium City Municipal Hospital 
in Uranium City; Valley View Centre in Moose Jaw; Villa 
Pascal, North Battleford; Warman Mennonite Special Care 
Home in Warman; and Western Senior Citizens’ Home in 
Leader. 
 
Now if I’ve missed any, I apologize. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the total control of these affiliates so 
important to this government? Could it be that they are a threat 
to the minister? These are responsible organizations, Mr. 
Speaker, operated by responsible people throughout 
Saskatchewan. In fact these are responsible people who the 
minister and this government are here to serve. 
 
What about The Health Districts Amendment Act? Was it not 
designed to strip away the rights of these people? What about 
the rights of religious denominations in communities to 
participate in this province? What about the Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms? 
 
The Health Districts Amendment Act sends many messages. 
The first is the ultimate power of the minister. Not the 
responsibility of the minister to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan, but his power to command and control them. 
 
The second is the power and authority that the minister 
exercises through the district health boards. It is very clear to 
me, and increasingly so to the people of Saskatchewan, that the 
minister completely controls these district health boards. The 
minister controls these boards through legislation and policy. 
He dictates to them how much they get. He restricts how they 
can use that money, and he approves or rejects their health  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2519 

plans. The minister has complete and absolute control over 
these boards. And now the minister is extending that absolute 
power and control over the affiliates through this Draconian 
legislation called The Health Districts Amendment Act. 
 
(1915) 
 
And what can be said of The Health Facility Licensing Act? It 
is very clearly another piece of the puzzle required to determine 
the underlying strategy of health reform. New legislation, never 
before required in this province of Saskatchewan, is now 
deemed essential. Why? Clearly this is a piece of legislation 
designed to save the people of Saskatchewan from themselves. 
Why shouldn’t an 80-year-old widow in rural Saskatchewan be 
able to get her cataracts removed? Perhaps it will improve her 
quality of life. Perhaps it will allow her to enjoy her 
grandchildren, her house, her friends. What is it that this 
government is really building? How does this government get 
away with this? 
 
Well this is how. Step no. 1: negotiate the legislation in 
advance, behind closed doors. Step no. 2: don’t let the people 
of Saskatchewan know what you are doing until the last 
moment. Step no. 3: introduce companion legislation changes 
to give the Saskatchewan Medical Association automatic dues 
check-off. And step no. 4: ram it through the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, take a step back and have a good look at where 
we’ve come from, where we’re at, and where this legislation is 
taking us. The Minister of Health and his government are 
building a completely centrally controlled, single public health 
system  a system that does not serve everyone and does not 
allow the people of Saskatchewan any alternatives; a system 
that would allow people to suffer rather than to be served. 
 
What can we expect to see from this wonderful new health 
system? Well one thing I expect to see is the poor and the lower 
middle class people of Saskatchewan suffer while the upper 
middle class, the rich, and the members of this government, go 
to the United States for their unmet health care needs. 
 
What is the next step from the Minister of Health? What is the 
next step from the Minister of Health? What is he going to do 
when he has absolute control and things continue to get worse 
rather than better? What is he going to do when tier one of our 
health care system is the public system and tier two is when the 
minister goes to the United States for service? 
 
Perhaps the next legislation the Minister of Health will be 
working on will be to control the decisions of individuals. The 
people of Saskatchewan have been told by this government that 
they can see services where they want. The next logical step 
will be an announcement by this government that in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan, government will make 
their decisions for them. Another logical step is for this 
government, through the district health boards, to dictate where 
physicians will reside and practise. 
 
When this government realizes that it cannot control the 
thoughts of the people of Saskatchewan, what is the next 
legislation it will draft? Will it be to restrict the movement of  

individuals? Perhaps it will be travel restrictions and visas will 
be the order of the day. When we reach this point, the social 
restructuring of this government will be complete. Then we will 
know the underlying strategy, the unspoken directive, the 
hidden agenda. 
 
Today I have made reference to the three health Acts before us. 
Mr. Speaker, these are not instruments of creativity but 
instruments of destruction. They are designed with one 
motivation in mind  centralized command and control, the 
exercise of absolute power by the minister and this government. 
They will only drive the people of Saskatchewan to the lowest 
common denominator regarding service, motivation, and 
creativity. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan do not need intense social 
restructuring. Residents of this province need and deserve their 
freedom. The people of Saskatchewan do not need the 
centralized command and control. They need and deserve to 
participate. The people of Saskatchewan do not need 
government ownership. They need the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of all the people of Saskatchewan need a 
responsible Minister of Health and a responsible government. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I think the member is a 
visionary. Many times I heard the member say, we’ll see this, 
we’ll see that, we’ll see many different things  things that are 
in her imagination, her worst fears. I want to assure the member 
and I want to assure the House, Mr. Speaker, that we will only 
see one thing in Saskatchewan and that is a government that is 
resolutely committed to a public administration of health care 
and will lead us forward into the 21st century with that 
commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  One thing we will not see is a return to 
the horse and buggy days that the member would want, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just to make it clear what it is, what Bill 
we are talking about, in case there’s any doubt  and I tell you 
that’s not a hard thing to do, to have some doubts as to what it 
is we’re talking about  we’ve dealt now with three other 
health care Bills; we’re on our fourth. And we’ve listened to the 
members kind of seamlessly move from one to the other. It all 
seems to be the same speech that they had for the same Bills, 
and they move from one to the other. The Bill that we’re 
dealing with is Bill No. 82, The Health Facilities Licensing Act. 
 
Now I just want to refer to the initial news release because it 
states succinctly and briefly what this Bill is about. The Premier 
said “the purpose of The Health Facilities Licensing Act is to 
prevent the development of a two-tier health system in  



2520  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

Saskatchewan.” And I just might say parenthetically, given 
some concerns that have been voiced lately about the NAFTA 
(North American Free Trade Agreement) and how it might 
impact health care in Saskatchewan and the other Canadian 
provinces, we are wise to prevent the development of a two-tier 
health system in Saskatchewan. 
 
The news release goes on to say: 
 

This government rejects the two-tier approach to health 
service delivery that we see in the United States and that is 
beginning to appear in other parts of Canada . . . Across 
Saskatchewan there is a deeply held belief that access to 
health services must be based on need, not the ability to 
pay. This legislation ensures this principle (this principle) 
will be upheld. 

 
Mr. Speaker, from time to time in our history  from time to 
time in our history  there are defining moments: moments 
that define the parties, moments that define the institutions, 
moments that we can look back at and say there, that moment 
defined that party; that characterized their approach. 
 
Now sometimes you can see very dramatic actions  very 
dramatic actions  that leave no doubt for the public and all 
concerned to look at that action and say, see that action, that 
characterizes them; that’s them; that truly represents what they 
say. That’s what they say, that’s what they do, in a very 
dramatic way. Other times you see a beginning step that’s 
followed by other steps, and the first step, you can look back 
and say, see, that defined them. That was the beginning step. 
And all the other steps have been logical extensions of the first 
step. And that was the defining moment. Now I, you know, I 
think other members who have been here longer than I can 
think of some of those defining moments. I wasn’t here but 
maybe there were members that were here in the ‘60s when 
Ross Thatcher kicked in the door of the legislature building. 
Does anyone remember that? 
 
Now that was a dramatic, dramatic defining moment. There was 
no doubt in anyone’s mind that Ross Thatcher opposed 
medicare. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  In a very dramatic way he made that 
clear, that he opposed medicare. With every ounce of fibre in 
his body, all his emotion, he said, I oppose medicare. That’s 
why he kicked in the door of the legislature. He made it clear to 
the Saskatchewan people where he and his party, the Liberal 
Party, stood. 
 
Now sometimes moments are less dramatic. And I think back 
 I think back and I wasn’t a member in this House  but I 
think back to the first budget of Bob Andrew. Remember Bob 
Andrew, the first Finance minister of the Grant Devine 
administration? And his first budget  the first budget after 
about, I don’t know, how many years of balanced budgets by 
both CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party) and Liberal governments  the first budget 
by the Devine PC (Progressive Conservative) administration  

was what? It was a deficit budget. 
 
Bob Andrew had read some books about stimulant deficits, and 
being kind of a whiz-kid that he was, thought that it would be a 
good idea to have a deficit budget because he’d read about it in 
books. 
 
Now looking back at that, every budget after that was also a 
deficit budget. So we can say that first budget defined the 
Devine administration. It characterized the Devine 
administration as spendthrifts. It defined them. So that was a 
defining moment in Saskatchewan history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill before us is likely to become . . . also is 
likely to become a defining moment in Saskatchewan history. 
Now this Bill will not be a defining moment for the NDP, okay. 
This Bill is entirely consistent with what we believe. It’s 
entirely logical in terms of the things that we’ve done in the 
past. It’s based on our beliefs. It’s congruent with our beliefs. 
This Bill by itself does not define the NDP because it’s entirely 
consistent with what the NDP does. It’s not a turn in the road 
for the NDP. It’s not a change in philosophy for the NDP. No, 
it’s entirely consistent with what we’ve done. 
 
Also it’s not very likely to be a defining moment for the 
Progressive Conservatives, okay. This Bill and the vote on this 
Bill is not likely to be a defining moment for the PCs. The PCs 
. . . and I have yet to hear them comment yet on this Bill. I 
haven’t heard the PCs comment on this Bill, but it is my guess 
and I guess that the PCs are likely to oppose the Bill that’s 
before us. 
 
The Bill basically represents the opposite of all that they believe 
in. They believe the opposite of what the Bill purports to do. It 
is the opposite of what all they have said. And if for chance the 
PCs were to vote in favour of this, they’re not fooling anybody, 
folks. They’re not fooling anybody. If they vote for it, it’ll be 
because they’ve made a mistake  and that won’t be the first 
time they’ve made a mistake  or because they hope to fool 
Saskatchewan people, saying, see, we voted for it. We may 
always speak against it, but we voted for it. Well you won’t fool 
people. But I don’t think this Bill will be a defining moment for 
the PCs. 
 
Now it’s ironic that I read an article not too long ago by Dale 
Eisler, and I do read Eisler’s column from time to time. And I 
also read other political commentators who say that the world 
has changed immensely since the mid-‘80s when the Berlin 
Wall came down and that ideologies merged, and that the 
ideology represented by the Soviet Union was lost and that the 
other opposing ideology in the States, of the cold war ideology, 
was lost and that you see parties merge. 
 
And Eisler goes on in this vein once in awhile, almost in a 
wistful way of, how come the NDP is so much like the 
Conservatives; how come the Liberals are so much like the 
NDP; how come they’re so much similar; why are there all 
these similarities? 
 
Now I might add that the media  the media  likes black and 
white because it’s easier for them to report on things that are  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2521 

black and white. When it gets greyish, well then you have to 
think about what they do and you have to think about what it is 
the parties are saying and you have to analyse and interpret 
what’s being said. 
 
But when things are black and white, well it’s easy for you, 
which is one of the reasons that they like to talk about values. 
Because values are a matter of black and white and therefore 
they like to talk about it. You see political commentators 
oftentimes sort of take issues that had values associated with 
them, not to analyse issues but to deal with values themselves. 
 
But I think in this matter, Mr. Speaker, it will be clear  clear 
for Saskatchewan people and even clear for the media, clear for 
the media  that there is a distinct difference between us and 
the right wing in this province in terms of the public 
administration of health care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People will be able to see a distinct difference. They will be 
able to see that there are differing visions of health care and 
how we administer health care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
They will see that there are different philosophies in this case 
 very clear, different philosophies in this case. No matter how 
much nattering they do from their seats, that’s what they will 
see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill, this Bill, this Bill is at the heart of what 
we believe, of what we believe government to be about. This 
Bill is at the heart of how we see government operate. This Bill 
is at the heart of how we see pulling people together to provide 
services that can’t be provided by one, but should be provided 
by the community as a whole. We believe in public 
administration, and this is an excellent example of good public 
administration, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we believe in a 
publicly administered, single-payer funded, health care system 
 always have, always will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Nothing defining for the NDP in this 
particular Bill. And again, there won’t be anything defining 
about the PCs in this particular Bill. Nothing for them. They 
have always distrusted government; they are anti-government. 
They dislike public administration, which I might add 
parenthetically is probably one of the reasons why they do such 
a horrible job when they are in charge of public administration. 
It’s hard to do something correctly and efficiently and 
effectively if you don’t believe in what you’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They in all fairness . . . they favour private solutions to public 
concerns. That is their philosophy. They’ve stated it many 
times. That is what they believe, and I respect them for their 
beliefs. That’s what they believe. I believe what I believe. They 
state their beliefs so there’s nothing that’s going to define the 
PCs as being anything different in terms of this Bill. 
 
They hate the notion of taxpayer-supported public 
administration. They would rather see individuals making their  

own choices about what they want or need, and paying for it. 
They believe this in all things, whether it comes to buying a car 
or whether you need health care. That’s what they believe, Mr. 
Speaker, and I respect them that they have beliefs and that they 
would state that, Mr. Speaker. But this Bill, and I might say it’s 
in their nature to believe these things, this Bill will not define 
the PCs. 
 
The question here tonight is, what of the Liberals. What will 
they do, Mr. Speaker? Do they favour public administration of 
our health care system or do they support actions that would 
impair public administration of our health care system? That is 
the question that Saskatchewan people will want to see an 
answer to, Mr. Speaker. They will look with great interest as to 
what it is that the Liberal Party will do. 
 
Now we know their history. We know their history, starting 
with Thatcher, who kicked in the door of the Legislative 
Building to draw attention to his opposition to medicare  his 
opposition to a publicly funded, publicly administered system 
of medicare. Thatcher wanted to draw attention to his 
opposition to that system and he did that very clearly. That is 
their history. 
 
Now this is a brand-new Liberal Party, so they say. They were 
out of the legislature for some years. That was then. Thatcher 
was then. This is now. Is this the same party? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  The members say yes, it’s the same 
party, Mr. Speaker. But I’m prepared to be . . . or at least I’m 
prepared to look at the current situation and to make my 
analysis on the basis of what they say, but more importantly, on 
the basis of what they do today. 
 
I’m prepared to give them the benefit of the doubt and to say 
that they aren’t necessarily the same party of Thatcher, that they 
can prove here tonight, and they can prove by what they say, 
and by what they do, that they are not the party of Thatcher. I’m 
prepared to give them that benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now it’s hard for them. So far we see their federal Liberal 
friends in Ottawa who say that we are firmly committed to the 
public administration of health care in Canada but we don’t 
seem to have any money for it. Well it seems to me if you have 
public administration, you’ve got to have money for that 
system. But you know, that’s an inconsistency that the federal 
Liberals have. So one has to wonder about their commitment to 
a public administration of health care if they can’t find the 
money to fund that system. That seems to be the problem with 
the federal Liberals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have, we also have in the federal Liberals, and I 
concede this, there are two wings to that party. We had the 
Warren Allmand wing  a wing which goes back to the old 
days of social activism in the Liberals, those who firmly believe 
that we’re committed to a just society. Those are the people that 
believe in a public administration of health care in Canada. 
 
On the other hand, there are many other Liberals who seem to  



2522  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

say something else again. Both of them seem to find a home in 
the Liberal Party. So that’s why it is sometimes difficult for us 
and that’s why it’s sometimes difficult for Canadians and 
sometimes difficult for people in Saskatchewan to get a firm fix 
as it were, as to what it is that the Liberals stand for. 
 
We have on the one hand, we have on the one hand federal 
Liberals saying, we are firmly committed to the notion of public 
administration of health care. On the other hand we had the 
member for Arm River saying, well it wouldn’t be such a bad 
idea if people had to pay for their own health care if they didn’t, 
you know, want to line up for too long or something in terms of 
the public health system. A little private health care would be 
okay. 
 
So there is a bit of confusion here on our part and I think on the 
part of the public as to where it is that the Liberals stand. But 
I’m prepared to give you the benefit of the doubt. I’m prepared 
to give you the opportunity to state clearly what it is that you 
stand for in terms of public administration of health care. I’m 
prepared to give you that opportunity to stand up and vote and 
say that you support this. 
 
But I think you have to also do more than simply vote for it. 
You also have to start talking the talk. You have to speak the 
language. You have to show that you’re committed. You have 
to show that you’re more than simply going through the 
motions on this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we really don’t know where it is that the Liberals 
stand. Are they with the PCs in opposition to the public 
administration of health care or are they with the government in 
support of the public administration of health care? 
 
That is the question that is posed by this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We 
look forward to the answer to the question. 
 
Now when you listen, when you listen to their speeches in this 
regard, as we just heard the member from Humboldt, or if you 
listen to the previous speakers  or if you read their speeches, 
as I have done; listened and read their speeches, Mr. Speaker  
it is not entirely clear. In fact it is very unclear as to where it is 
that the Liberals stand. 
 
They criticize the government generally on health care, as 
they’ve done on a raft of Bills today  every conceivable form 
of criticism that you could have about health care. But do they 
say they oppose the Bill? They nit-pick about some provisions 
of the Bill but do they say they oppose the Bill? No, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Artfully, as the member for Thunder Creek did in his 
intervention  and I think he was the first of their side to get 
up on this Bill  the member for Thunder Creek, he artfully 
started to voice concerns that he had heard from the public. He 
says, the public are raising questions. They’re saying, why can’t 
we have private clinics and private facilities, and why can’t 
people just pay for those things outside of the system we have? 
That’s what people are saying, you know. But he’s not saying 
that that’s what they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, you know. 
 

Do they say that, these are our beliefs? No. No, Mr. Speaker. 
Did he say, did the member for Thunder Creek say, that he 
opposed the Bill? No, Mr. Speaker. They raise fears  
unjustified, I might say  about how this Bill targets, I think, 
Catholic hospitals one mentioned, and other facilities in 
Saskatchewan. But are they moved on the account of these great 
fears that they have for these institutions in Saskatchewan, are 
they moved by these fears to say that we are opposed to the 
Bill? No, Mr. Speaker, they do not. 
 
They talk about how the Bill in their opinion holds back . . . 
And this is the comment that just leapt out at me from the page, 
Mr. Speaker. This was something . . . in their opinion . . . Now 
this is voiced by the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Melville; this is voiced by him. He says this Bill holds back 
what I would call the holiest of all their grails. He said it would 
hold back “capitalism and competition.” 
 
Now that is the firm foundation of the Liberal Party 
capitalism and competition. That is what the Liberal Party 
was founded on in the 19th century, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
the Liberal Party was founded on  to have more effective 
capitalism, to have more effective competition. That is the 
nature of the Liberal Party. 
 
But was he . . . (inaudible) . . . to these great fears about how 
the Bill will hold back capitalism and competition? Was he 
moved to say, I oppose this Bill? No, Mr. Speaker, he was not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is an entirely legitimate question for the 
people of Saskatchewan to ask: where is it that the Liberal Party 
stands on this Bill? Are they in favour of the Bill? Do they 
favour the public administration of health care in Saskatchewan 
or are they opposed to it, Mr. Speaker? That is a very legitimate 
question. 
 
Now I have to give the members credit, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that they have done a very excellent job, a very excellent job, of 
talking to this Bill but never once stating their position or 
making it clear where it is that they stand on this question. But 
this is an important question for Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re still not clear where it is that the Liberals stand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, someone just gave me of a copy of a press release 
that came out, I guess just yesterday, from one Dr. J.W. 
Melenchuk, the vice-president of finance for the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party. Now Dr. Melenchuk, he says, I have become 
politically active because I believe in free enterprise, open 
market systems, an independent medical profession, and, he 
says, the public administration of health care insurance but not 
state controlled. That’s a typical Liberal way to sort of fudge in 
what it is that you believe in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan want to 
know where it is that the Liberal Party stands. They want to 
know, are they in favour of a publicly administered, publicly 
funded system or would they risk it? Would they risk it? And I 
tell you, given sort of what has been said about NAFTA 
Agreement, there is a chance that we could risk it unless we act 
now in the way that we are doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2523 

Now they may talk about it, but at some point they’re going to 
have to come clean on this one, Mr. Speaker. And I think again 
they’re going to have to do more than vote; they’re going to 
have to speak consistently, Mr. Speaker. They can’t speak 
against it and then vote for it. They can’t continue to be the 
model of inconsistency that the member of Thunder Creek was 
when he was speaking to the House today and he bemoaned the 
fact that we have health district boards. He talked wistfully 
about union hospital boards and any one of the 400-plus boards 
that we’ve had in Saskatchewan and the models of efficiency 
they were and how well they worked and how this was the best 
way to administer health care and that he opposed and was 
opposed to these district health care boards. Of course he didn’t 
mention that in the election campaign they campaigned on a 
platform to have even fewer boards than we have now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  No one ever said they had to be 
consistent every day in and out, Mr. Speaker. That’s the nature 
of opposition sometimes. You can just say whatever kind of 
comes to mind, I guess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the public this is a very important issue, a very 
important issue. I was very interested to see in the May 21 
edition of the Regina Leader-Post the results of a phone-in 
survey. Now the Leader-Post in days previous to this published 
a little question at the bottom of the front page. And it said, 
“should there be private health care facilities here for those who 
can afford them?” 
 
Should there be private health care facilities here for those who 
can afford them? Now that sounds like a very reasonable 
question doesn’t it? A very reasonable question. I said to 
myself, boy, the way that question is worded, people will phone 
and, oh yes, well that’s okay. But did they do that? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  No, Mr. Speaker, no. The public wasn’t 
fooled for a minute, Mr. Speaker. They phoned in . . . you had 
one number that you phoned in if you said yes to the question 
and you had another number that you phoned in, I think, that if 
you were opposed to the question or your answer was no to the 
question. And then the Leader-Post tabulates the results and 
they published the results on May 21. 
 
Now what do you suppose the public said? And I have to just 
parenthetically state here that this, Mr. Speaker, was not a 
scientific poll and the Leader-Post did not purport to call it a 
scientific poll. They said this is a survey, not a scientific poll. 
Although 1,276 people called in, they would not call this a 
scientific poll, which raises a question, I suppose that, I mean, 
sort of first-class newspapers in other parts of the country might 
have said this is an important enough issue to in fact 
commission a scientific poll so we have a very clear idea of 
where it is that the public stands on this. 
 
(1945) 
 
But then this is the Leader-Post and this being Hollinger, you 
know, and cut-backs at the paper and not enough money and so 
on, I guess here you’ve got to do things second class and third  

class. 
 
But nevertheless they did do this; they did commission the 
survey. And the question was, “should there be private health 
care facilities here for those who can afford them?” And I 
feared the worst. 
 
But sometimes, I guess I just don’t have enough confidence in 
the people of Saskatchewan, because the people of 
Saskatchewan called back and they said yes, we agree there 
should be private health care facilities  36 per cent said yes; 
64 per cent said no, Mr. Speaker. They said no, no way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  The public will not be fooled on this 
issue. The public wants publicly administered, publicly funded 
health care systems. They do not want to see private health care 
facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s health care system is among the best, if 
not the best, in the world. Let me just say that again, okay? Let 
me just say that again. Let’s see if you can agree with this 
statement: Canada’s health care system is among the best, if not 
the best, in the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Canada’s health care system is far 
superior to the American health care system. Let me repeat that. 
Maybe you can say it as well. Canada’s health care system is far 
superior to the American health care system. Who disagrees 
with that? Who disagrees with that with the exception of the 
PCs of course. 
 
Our health care system now helps define us as a country. Our 
health care system, Mr. Speaker, is a source of pride to 
Canadians. Our esteem as Canadians is in part because we have 
an excellent health care system, and we do it better than the rest 
of the world, Mr. Speaker. That is one of the reasons why other 
countries in the world and organizations say Canada is the best 
country in the world, Mr. Speaker. It’s in part because we have 
the best . . . among the best, if not the best health care systems 
in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Canadians, Canadians will not and Saskatchewan people will 
not look kindly upon those that would sell them out. They will 
not look kindly upon those who would sell them out. They will 
not look kindly upon those who say Canada’s health care is not 
superior to the American health care system, and therefore our 
health care system should approximate the American health 
care system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I really don’t understand why it is that the PCs  and I 
have to believe that their vote on this Bill will be consistent 
with the things that they’ve said in the past  why the PCs 
would want to sell us out. I don’t understand that, Mr. Speaker. 
Now I’m not quite clear where the Liberals stand on this, and I 
would not say that the Liberals are prepared to sell us out when 
it comes to medicare because we have yet to hear from them as 
to where they stand on this. 



2524  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

But the PCs, I don’t understand why they would sell out. Why 
would they give up the best and opt for an inferior system? 
What is the point, Mr. Speaker? Where is it that the Liberals 
stand on this, Mr. Speaker? South of the border they have a 
two-tired health care system that costs more and delivers less. 
So you pay more, and you get less. Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
not my idea . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This evening we 
have four special visitors from the city of Regina, and I’d like to 
ask them as I call them up to stand up for a few minutes. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the 
rest of the members of the Assembly, Jim Chapman. And he’s 
got his three sons: Joey, 7; Scott is 6; and Daniel is 2. And I 
guess Jim’s also known as a hot rod, and he’s inviting every 
member of the Assembly here to come over to Fenders Diner 
for a quick visit. But anyhow, I’d like to ask my colleagues in 
the Assembly to welcome these four special visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 82 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well, Mr. Speaker, south of the border 
in the United States they have a two-tiered health care system, 
two-tiered. Now the members would never say, they would 
never say and it’ll never cross their lips, that they would aspire 
to the American system. They would never say it in those terms. 
They would never be that blunt. They would never be that 
unpolitical or that honest, I suppose, to say it in that way. 
 
They would talk vaguely, vaguely, about the present system not 
perhaps going as well as it should be, which is, I guess, a 
consequence when you don’t put money into the system. 
They’ll talk vaguely about improving it, improving our system 
by allowing private clinics and a two-tiered system. They will 
talk glowingly, glowingly, about the choices that this gives 
Saskatchewan and Canadian people; that’s what they will talk 
about. 
 
Now they’ll never say, we want to go the American way. 
They’ll talk about our vision, our way of improving the 
Canadian system, and they’ll talk about choice for 
Saskatchewan and Canadian people. That’s how they’ll phrase 
it, Mr. Speaker. Any resemblance between their vision of health 
care and what we see south of the border, they’ll say that’s just  

a coincidence, Mr. Speaker. They’re not in favour of the 
American system. They just want to improve our system. Well 
if it ends up looking like the American system, well that’s just a 
coincidence, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think it’s coincidence that 
they find so much to admire south of the border and so much to 
criticize about in Canada, Mr. Speaker. I think they’re closet 
Yankees, some of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am reminded of a phrase by Tommy Douglas, 
former premier of this province, when he was a Member of 
Parliament at the height of the cold war. And I don’t remember 
the specific issue, but Tommy Douglas had this to say about 
Americans and Canadians. He said, in Washington, in the 
United States, they have hawks and they have doves. But here 
in Ottawa and in Canada, we have parrots. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am reminded, I am reminded when I hear that, 
Mr. Speaker, of the position of the Conservatives, and less 
clearly so of the Liberals, on this important matter of public 
administration  our health care system. 
 
I don’t understand those that would change the Canadian health 
care system to make it more like the American system, Mr. 
Speaker. Now the U.S. (United States) model is a great model 
for the rich. In America you can have whatever you can afford. 
Whatever, you know, money you have, you can have what that 
money buys you. That’s the American way. Whether it’s cars or 
health care, if you’ve got the money, you can have it. There’s 
no disputing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to speciality care, it’s great to be 
rich in America, Mr. Speaker. There’s no doubting that. If 
you’re rich in America, then you could have the very best care 
that you can buy. I won’t dispute that, that there are parts of the 
American system, in terms of technology and systems that have 
been built to cater to the needs of the rich, that are far superior 
than anything that we see in Canada. Maybe not in all ways, but 
in some ways far superior to what we see in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t dispute that. 
 
The U.S. model is not a bad system for those with health care 
insurance who are middle class. It’s not a bad system. If you’re 
middle class and you can afford the insurance, you can have 
reasonable health care, Mr. Speaker  although it is very 
expensive, very expensive. I think the Minister of Health 
mentioned it in his opening remarks that something like 15 per 
cent of the gross domestic product in the United States goes for 
the administration of health care as opposed to 9 per cent of the 
gross domestic product in Canada that goes for the 
administration of health care. 
 
And you have to remember that when medicare was first 
formulated  and the American and Canadian systems were 
very similar  we both spent approximately the same amount 
of money or the same percentage of our gross domestic product 
on health care. 
 
But there’s been a vast change, Mr. Speaker. Americans have 
had to spend more. Canadians have been able to curtail their 
costs. They have been able to keep health care, publicly 
administered health care, reasonable and affordable for  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2525 

Canadians, Mr. Speaker. I might say that for the middle class in 
the United States, the health care system is also the leading 
cause of personal bankruptcy. This happens when you can’t 
afford what it is that you need from the system and you’re 
without the coverage, then many people go into bankruptcy. 
 
For the poor, for the poor, and the estimates are, I think, about 
35 million Americans without health care insurance, it is a very 
bad system. There is no denying that, no denying that at all. By 
any measures, it is tin cup medicare. That’s what it is. It is 
nothing less than tin cup medicare. That’s what medicare is for 
the poor in America  some 35 million without insurance, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I have to ask, what is the point? Why substitute a bad 
system for a good system, Mr. Speaker? I mean that’s what the 
struggle was about in the ‘40s, the ‘50s, and the ‘60s  the 
struggle that culminated in hospitalization, the struggle that 
culminated in medicare. That’s what it was about. We had a bad 
system, the system that the Americans have now. We wanted a 
better system. We led the charge for a better system in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. We wanted a better system, and 
we moved to the publicly administered and publicly funded 
system we have now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, we believed fervently then 
that we had to have a better system of health care. We believed 
that health care had to be a right for people, not something that 
you could afford. That’s why we fought so hard. That’s why we 
changed the system, Mr. Speaker. And we were right then as we 
are right now, Mr. Speaker, in terms of our support for public 
administration of health care. We are right to oppose private 
medicine, Mr. Speaker. We are right to oppose profit over 
human need, Mr. Speaker. We are right to oppose those things. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know where I stand on this issue, and I 
don’t think there’s any doubt in this House and for the people 
of Saskatchewan as to where I stand when it comes to the 
public administration of health care. Now the people of 
Saskatchewan want to know where is it that the opposition 
stand. Will they stand up and speak for a publicly administered 
system of health care? What definition will they give to this 
moment in our history, Mr. Speaker? Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Osika:  To speak to the Bill. 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member is not eligible to speak to 
the Bill. He has already spoken previously this week. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday my 
colleague discussed some of our major concerns with The 
Health Facilities Licensing Act, and I strongly agree with what 
has already been said. Today I’d like to add a few more 
comments about this Bill and what it could mean for the people 
of this province. I won’t go into great detail about particular  

sections or subsections because that is something we can do in 
Committee of the Whole. Instead I’d like to talk about the 
overall implications this Bill could have on our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, this Bill deals with the licensing of 
health facilities. More specifically, this Bill expands the 
minister’s power to decide which clinics gets approvals and 
which ones don’t. In other words, we realize that the minister 
can pick and choose which communities will have access to 
certain services and which don’t. He can, at his own whim, 
decide where facilities can be set up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t mean to be cynical and suggest political 
patronage, but I can see that there may be a lot more . . . a lot of 
clinics set up in NDP ridings or a lot of traditional NDP 
supporters getting a monopoly on a certain area. 
 
From what I read in this Bill, although a licence application is 
sent to a district health board and accreditation program 
operator for their review, the final decision lies entirely with the 
minister. Now the members opposite may wonder why I’m so 
suspicious. All they have to do is look back at the 1996 and 
1997 budgets for the health districts  6 of 11 boards receiving 
a bigger share of the health budget pie are 6 of the 7 biggest 
boards in the province. 
 
(2000) 
 
And it’s just not the bigger that influences government 
decision. Of the 19 health districts receiving cuts, 18 are rural 
health districts. So, Mr. Speaker, we do have a two-tiered health 
care system in place now. And this government expects people 
in rural Saskatchewan to believe that they are not being 
punished for where they live. Eighteen out of 19 districts 
receiving cuts are rural Mr. Speaker. This shows exactly what 
kind of commitment that the NDP government has to rural 
residents  absolutely none. 
 
But rural people are not only being penalized for living outside 
of major centres. It can also be said that unless they live in an 
NDP riding, their chances for continued funding are poor. 
 
If we look at what is happening in the 15 Liberal or Tory 
constituencies, we see that only 3 may actually receive a 
funding increase. And I emphasize may, Mr. Speaker. The fact 
is this government is either playing favourites with the NDP 
ridings or with urban residents. It’s hard to tell which, 
especially because 28 out of the 29 urban ridings voted NDP in 
the last election. 
 
Now I’m not saying that the NDP is not playing smart politics. I 
guess it makes sense to know where your bread is buttered and 
to keep these people happy. But health care shouldn’t be about 
smart politics, Mr. Speaker. Health care should be about taking 
care of people throughout the entire province and making sure 
that people have a sense of security and well-being. Sadly this 
is something that the NDP government doesn’t believe. 
 
As we all know, the NDP governments of the past were very 
different. These were the governments that put health care 
above financial gain. Now I’m not saying that the left-wing  



2526  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

policies of the NDP past are the answer. I think we all recognize 
a need for fiscal responsibility, particularly after the Tories went 
on a health care spending spree in the 1980s. What I am saying 
is this government’s health care policies are bordering on 
hypocritical. 
 
They continue to hold Tommy Douglas up as an example and 
talk about health care as being at the grass roots level of their 
party. Well these grass roots are obviously not that deep, given 
the destruction they have caused in our entire health care 
infrastructure and particularly the rural and northern areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, look what they have done across the province. The 
Swift Current Care Centre is losing 70 beds. This means seniors 
are being kicked out of their homes and believe me, Mr. 
Speaker, they are scared. They are losing security, security that 
they should have been able to expect from the NDP. The 
members opposite have, or I should say had, a lot of support 
from old-time NDP supporters who are now in the latter part of 
their life. 
 
They were looking forward to having a solid health care system 
to see them through the rest of their lives. Instead this 
government gives them no assurances and no compassion. 
Health care is on shaky ground and the government is making 
no apologies. And the members opposite want people to believe 
that health care is in their very roots. I don’t think so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, looking at the East Central Health District, the 
government has forced them to consider closing 30 beds and 
cutting 29 full-time positions at the Yorkton regional health 
centre. Isn’t this a responsible government? Not only does 
health care suffer; the number of jobs are also being cut. It’s 
hard to believe the Minister of Economic Development sits 
back and watches as jobs are being wiped off the Saskatchewan 
map. Of course, maybe he can be completely dispassionate 
about it as well. After all, for him the jobs are only numbers. 
 
Does he even think about the individuals who are losing their 
jobs? These are people with families to feed and mortgages to 
pay. It’s a sad moment when the government loses touch with 
the people and unfortunately that’s exactly what has happened 
with the government in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Souris Valley Regional Care Centre has seen 
the closure of 20 long-term care beds. The mental health centre 
will be cutting another two beds and 15 full-time positions will 
disappear. In Rose Valley, 10 long-term beds, 2 respite beds, 
and 9 acute care beds have fallen victim to the government axe. 
 
Gabriel Springs may lose 18 acute care beds and the North 
Central Health Board will not only see 30 long-term beds shut, 
they will also have to cope with the loss of 27 jobs. Mr. 
Speaker, these examples are everywhere and it is scary, 
particularly to seniors who have the most need for this type of 
care. 
 
In an article published in the Leader-Post in January of this 
year, SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) was already predicting that long-term care will  

be the next hot spot in health reform. 
 
At that time the SAHO chairman said: 
 

Most health districts are pretty strung out right now in 
maintaining the services they’ve got. They haven’t had the 
money they needed to break in some new ideas. 
 

He further went on to say: 
 

The initial wave of health reform concentrated on small 
rural hospitals, with a total of 53 being converted to 
community health centres, but the same hasn’t occurred 
with respect to long-term care. The infrastructure we’ve 
got has too many small, high-cost facilities. This can’t 
continue, but simply closing the facilities without putting 
alternatives in place isn’t an option either. 

 
Mr. Speaker, do the members opposite realize how confusing 
their destructive health care reform is to the people in this 
province? People can understand that money is tight, but what 
they can’t understand is how this government can put money 
ahead of their well-being. 
 
A SAHO chairman admitted in the same article: 
 

As nursing homes take on heavier care patients, their costs 
will go up. And as funding tightens, beds will have to 
close. As health districts make decisions to do that, it’s 
going to create a lot of fuss. 

 
Is this what the government wants? Is this what the government 
envisions as health care, to watch health boards flounder under 
unmanageable cuts to funding? Does the government truly 
believe that if it pushes all the responsibilities and decision 
making on to health boards that they can continue to pretend 
that health care is still a staple of the NDP goals? 
 
The nurses’ union seem to think so. In an article published last 
month, the president of SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), 
Judy Junor, said: 
 

Most health districts are poised to cut and slash services to 
cope with reduced budgets. Even those districts which 
received an increase are going to close beds, and in some 
cases, entire agencies. We think that another 30 hospitals 
will close and we know that some long-term care facilities 
will be closed. 
 
Safe care is being jeopardized every day by too few nurses, 
no nurses on call to cover emergencies, and nurses not 
being replaced if they are ill. Combine that with more cuts 
and we have got a health system in crisis. 

 
We, Mr. Speaker, have got a health care system in crisis. The 
members opposite can accuse us of spreading doom and gloom, 
but the fact is we’re just spreading the truth, a truth created by 
the NDP. 
 
And as this article shows, it is not just the opposition parties 
who see the devastation that this government is causing when it  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2527 

comes to health care. In fact I think the members opposite may 
be the only ones who can’t see what is happening to health care. 
They are so blinded by political rhetoric and the feel-good, 
imagined philosophies of their party that they cannot see 
clearly. If they would just open their eyes, if they would look 
around at the devastation in their communities, and our 
communities, then maybe they would start to understand exactly 
why people are scared and exactly why people are feeling 
isolated and alienated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can pretend that they’re 
doing the right thing. They can pretend that the cuts are worth it 
because they are saving so much money. 
 
Well I invite them to listen to the words of someone who works 
on the front line. Judy Junor says again, and I quote: 
 

The stress of working in an unhealthy and unsafe work 
environment has taken its toll on nursing staff. The costs of 
health reform on the workforce is ultimately costing the 
health districts money through sick leave. The front-line 
workers are the most vulnerable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite won’t listen to us for 
political reasons, will they please listen to the health care 
professionals for the right reasons? Will they at least listen to 
what these people are trying to tell them? Instead of going 
ahead with their slash-and-burn method of cutting, will they at 
least consider a gentler, more effective, more compassionate 
way to improve our health care system? 
 
Mr. Speaker, before we let The Health Care Facilities Licensing 
Act go through, we have to try and make the members opposite 
look at their record over the past five years, because this Bill 
will give them even freer rein in deciding who will be forced to 
suffer under the budget knife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in February when this government read the 
throne speech, we were warned that this Bill would be on the 
government agenda. The Premier admitted that this Act would 
permit our promise to better manage the development of private 
sector health facilities to prevent the development of a two-tier 
health system. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as we continue to point out throughout the 
session, it’s too late to look at a two-tiered health system. 
Because of the funding cuts and the unfair treatment, we do 
have it between rural and urban and northern. With a clear 
preference over urban as opposed to rural, they have already 
created the two-level system of health care in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago my colleague from Arm River 
criticized the Health department’s new needs-based funding. He 
said that the government is using the formula as an excuse for 
savage cuts to rural health care. 
 
The new needs-formula base is supposed to allow health care 
funding to move with the person to where they receive care. 
Well if this is true, and more people are coming to Regina for 
care, why has the Regina Health District also received a $4.5 
million funding cut? Why then have 96 full-time positions been  

cut? Why have we seen 64 acute care and 22 long-term care 
beds cut? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m quite convinced that this government is a 
master of doublespeak. The members opposite are so busy 
justifying their vicious cuts to health care that they have long 
since lost sight of the truth. The truth is, is that they’re not 
committed to quality health care and they are not committed to 
answering the needs of the Saskatchewan people. They are a 
fiscally driven political machine that tries to hide behind a 
compassionate façade. 
 
But the façade won’t fool people for long. They will see that 
this government’s health care promises completely lack 
substance and completely lack compassion. They will see that 
this government is bound and determined to rip apart health 
care. What people want, Mr. Speaker, and what people need, is 
irrelevant to the members opposite. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, not to this party. We all know the 
government can pass whatever legislation they want. Sheer 
numbers make their decision easy. Well that’s too bad. I would 
think that the implications on Saskatchewan people should be 
the only valid reason for legislation to pass. 
 
If the government pushes The Health Facilities Licensing Act 
through, and I’m sure they will, health care in Saskatchewan is 
moving to a different level. Whether that level is positive for a 
health care system will remain to be seen. 
 
My deepest worry though is that this government is taking even 
greater control of health care. If you want the responsibility of 
delivering health care, then fund it accordingly and back up 
your words. If past experience show that this is what is yet to 
come, the people in Saskatchewan are in trouble. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of debate on Bill 
No. 82. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 97 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 97  An Act 
to amend The Department of Agriculture Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few words on 
this Bill and some general comments. Since I’ve become an 
elected representative of the people of Arm River and an MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) in this Assembly, I’ve 
become very sceptical of this government and when they’re 
trying to do something, in particular when they’re trying to pass 
some legislation. In particular the 100-some-odd Bills that 
we’ve seen go before us in this session. 
 
This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is no different. In this 
legislation the government once again is trying to govern by  



2528  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

regulation, Mr. Speaker, basically hiding behind the regulations 
and trying to convince people that the legislation isn’t all that 
bad, but trust us, just trust us, Mr. Speaker, as we bring forth 
the regulations at some later time. 
 
I think having said that, Mr. Speaker, that about sums up what 
this government, what this session, is all about, hiding behind 
regulations, trying to sneak things past people for their own 
end. And this particular piece of legislation, as I said before, 
Mr. Speaker, is no different. 
 
We talk about giving more powers to the minister, to the 
Executive Council, which is basically the cabinet, and that’s not 
acceptable to the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. And 
hopefully that when we move into the Committee of the Whole 
that we certainly will be pointing out the errors in their ways in 
this particular Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(2015) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, to my left is Terry Scott, the assistant deputy 
minister; to his left, Doug Matthies, general manager of Crop 
Insurance. And behind is Jack Zepp, the assistant administrative 
services branch director. Beside Jack is Ross Johnson, the 
budget officer, administrative services branch. And to my right, 
Norm Ballagh, general manager of ACS (Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome to 
the minister and his officials tonight. 
 
Mr. Chair, before we get into some dialogue, I just have a few 
quotes I’d like to read in light of some of the comments made 
by the member opposite in a recent health debate in this House: 
 

Clean air, a big prairie sky, a leisurely pace of life, an 
unspoiled northern wilderness, a spirit of cooperation and 
small town friendliness, being close to nature. A farmer’s 
life is a good life even when prices aren’t the best. Life in a 
smaller community is a good life even if it lacks some of 
the distractions of the big city. 
 
There is value in the pride and vigour and self-sufficiency 
that I have seen again and again in the people of our towns 
and small communities. We don’t talk about it enough in 
Saskatchewan and we don’t value it enough. We should, 
because our way of life is the envy of many people. 

But make no mistake, there are people who would limit 
this option; who would encourage the growth of a few 
large cities at the expense of our smaller communities; who 
would, on a wholesale basis, close grain elevators and 
abandon branch lines; who would sap the economic 
strength of rural Saskatchewan in the name of slide-rule 
efficiency. 
 
In my opinion this is a short-sighted view. I think the 
people who have this short-sighted vision of the future in 
Saskatchewan may be sincere but they simply don’t grasp 
the value of life in a province like ours. 
 

Mr. Chair, that was a quote from a former premier of this 
province and leader of an NDP Party not unlike the one we 
have across the floor  Premier Allan Blakeney. 
 

I say to the farming community, have faith, because you 
are going to elect a premier that will stand up for 
Saskatchewan and a political party that puts the interests of 
Saskatchewan first. We are fed up with a premier who 
sings the alleluia chorus to Mr. Mulroney. 
 
Our farmers, our communities, our towns and villages are 
here to stay. (I’ll repeat that, Mr. Chairman. Our farmers, 
our communities, our towns and villages are here to stay.) 
We are committed to establishing a set of policies on 
income, debt, and land transfer which will make sure that 
the family farm and the rural way of life are not only 
maintained but prosper and grow in the 21st century. 
 

Mr. Chairman, that’s a quote from the present Premier of this 
province, back in 1990, before coming into power. 
 

The social well-being of rural areas is being ignored. We 
must stop this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the stress on the 
farm family is at an all time high. And it is especially hard, 
I say, on the women. 
 

This was a quote from the former . . . or from the present 
Minister of Agriculture, in December. 
 
With that, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the Minister of 
Agriculture a couple of questions. And I think tonight we will 
start off in a debate that’s had a fair bit of reaction in this 
province and during this session, and that is the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) debate. And having heard all these 
comments from former premiers of the NDP Party, a 
commitment from the present Minister of Agriculture on his 
views of rural Saskatchewan and agriculture, something seems 
to have gotten lost in the translation from 1975 until this 
government took power in 1995. 
 
My first question to the minister, Mr. Chairman, is relating back 
to the GRIP decision in 1992 to introduce retroactive legislation 
to cancel the contracts with the Saskatchewan farmers who have 
signed them in good faith. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if 
you’d like to tell us tonight, what input you had into that 
discussion and what was said around the cabinet table as you 
and your Premier tried to stick up for rural Saskatchewan and 
the farmers in it. 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2529 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chairman, I think the member 
knows that I wasn’t at the cabinet table in 1992. And even if I 
was, wouldn’t have the liberty of repeating discussions of the 
cabinet table because discussions or decisions are made in a 
democratic way in this province by this government. 
 
But I can tell him the input that I had. This is like any other 
member of the legislature. At that time I chaired the agricultural 
caucus committee, and we worked with the minister as a 
sounding board to see what could be done to improve a 
program. And let me tell you, that was the problem  trying to 
improve a program that couldn’t be improved although we did 
improve it in many ways. The new program took out the moral 
hazards that the old program had seen. 
 
And I know the member has to just kick one more time at 
GRIP, and I’m willing to play this game with you. But I think I 
have a question for you. Do you not agree that the decision to 
get out of the GRIP program when we did was the right 
decision, because Alberta and Manitoba followed suit shortly 
thereafter. Many of their farmers did anyway. I think maybe the 
member should answer that question before he asks another. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I don’t think the farmers of this province view 
this as a game, Mr. Minister, and I’m sorry that you think it is a 
game, because as late as this morning, I’m still receiving GRIP 
statements from concerned farmers throughout the province. So 
these people don’t think it’s a game. 
 
Also you talk about what has happened in Alberta and 
Manitoba. I continually hear your leader, your Premier, talking 
about the Saskatchewan way, and we’ll do it our way in 
Saskatchewan. Do you have a conflict with your Premier in that 
regard, if you think we just follow Manitoba or Alberta. I 
realize you weren’t at the cabinet table at that point in time, for 
whatever the reasons were; however I would like to ask you if 
you were in agreement with the decision to introduce 
retroactive legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Then moving on into 1996 when the decision 
was made to send out the GRIP statements . . . and I’m glad to 
see that the minister and the members of the third party find this 
an amusing discussion because I can assure you that the farmers 
of the province do not find it amusing. 
 
Were you in agreement with the decisions made to send out the 
GRIP statements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Do you mean the GRIP wind-up 
statements? 
 
Mr. McLane:  That’s correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Were you in agreement with the former 
minister of Agriculture then that they should break his promise, 
a commitment to the farmers in this House, that you should go 
ahead and break that commitment that the former minister of  

Agriculture, your predecessor, made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chair, I can tell the hon. member 
that his perception of what the former minister said was wrong, 
and there was no commitment. And if he’d read the whole 
paragraph and everything that was said, he would understand. I 
hope he might be able to understand that. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I think it’s you, Mr. Minister, who chose not 
to understand what the minister said at that time in order that 
you might fulfil your commitments to the budget process. 
 
Can you tell me then, Mr. Minister, what the legal fees have 
been to date in order to fight the group that is taking legal 
action, or has taken legal action against you on the decision 
your government made in 1992? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  There’s two cases. One’s a pre-trial 
conference, the other’s examination for discovery. We won’t 
know what the costs of the legal fees are because we have to go 
to the legal process. 
 
And normal procedures is that the percentage of costs that are 
incurred up to this stage are a small percentage of what the cost 
. . . or a lesser percentage of what the total cost of the case 
might be. So I’m sorry, we won’t be able to supply you with 
those numbers until the cases are complete. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. McLane:  The question was simply, Mr. Minister: what 
was the cost to date of the legal fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We don’t have the cost to date of the 
legal fees. 
 
Mr. McLane:  I guess I would wonder why you wouldn’t 
have those costs, Mr. Minister. They would have to be 
documented somewhere, at some point in time. And since that 
saga is ongoing, I would think you would be keeping an 
up-to-date log on the cost of that and weighing that against 
what’s happened with the program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  What I can tell the member, Mr. 
Chairman, is that in the fiscal year ‘95-96 the GRIP challenge 
expense was $3,626. If you wish, we can get you an up-to-date 
figure. We won’t be able to get it tonight, but we can get you 
that in a few days so you’d know the number if you wish. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, if we could have that tabled, I’d 
appreciate that. 
 
Can you tell me how much money is left owing in arrears from 
the GRIP wind-up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Total number of customers who still 
have outstanding accounts, 3,345. And total outstanding 
amount of dollars is 5,756,400. 
 
Mr. McLane:  What percentage of that total money that was 
owing is left? What percentage is left owing? 



2530  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Very near 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Would the minister agree that there appears to 
be a fairly serious problem here then, if at this point in time 
there’s still 50 per cent of the money outstanding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well you can speculate if you like. I 
think the money came in fairly good until seeding began. And 
you’re a farmer. I’m a farmer. You know what it’s like at 
seeding time. You have your priorities. And I think once the 
input costs . . . we believe once the input costs are paid off, then 
the money will start to come back in again. It may not come in, 
as you know, on the farm. If you don’t have it, you’ll wait till 
the crop comes off. So we’re not going to be in a panic 
situation. We’re not going to bug the farmers. All I say is that 
we all know that except for you trying to tell someone that they 
may not have to pay this off, we all know that it has to be paid 
off, and we just ask them to make arrangements. And I think 
many of them are doing that. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Now there was a fair bit of money left in the 
GRIP program. Would you like to tell the House and the people 
of the province what happened to that money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just while we’re getting that, I also will 
let the member know that 70 per cent of the people who had 
bills have paid, so that’s a fairly substantial number. 
 
Of the total $782 million, 33 per cent or 261 was the producers’ 
share . . . 261 million, rather. The federal government, forty-one 
and two-thirds per cent or 326 million. The provincial 
government, 25 per cent or 195 million. And what I’m doing is 
reading from the GRIP final settlement brochure that all farmers 
got; I’m sure you received this. 
 
Then if you go over to the third panel, the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s share, we targeted 67 per cent to agricultural 
programs; 72 million for the new safety net programs over 3 
years; 18 million for the development and diversification 
initiatives through agri-food innovation; and 40 million start-up 
funding for the crop sector program. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Could you tell us about the other 33 per cent? 
What did the government do with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  There was 65 million that went into 
general revenue. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well of that 65 million, some of that money 
quite likely went to fund the CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement) project then, would that be correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No. As far as it directly is concerned, no, 
I believe that wouldn’t go directly. It is used in general revenue, 
as the member knows, for many other programs. 
 
And I just want to remind the member that . . . remind the 
member, and maybe ask him . . . he was quite concerned about 
where this provincial government put its money. I would 
remind him that the federal government only put 46 per cent of 
their money  the federal Liberal government  only put 46 

per cent of their money back into ag programs and the rest went 
into general revenue. 
 
And I’d like the member to table the correspondence with the 
federal minister complaining about that, if he wouldn’t mind, 
please. 
 
Mr. McLane:  If the other 33 per cent of the money went 
back into general revenues, then it could be quite likely that 
some of that money did go to fund the CCTA. Would you 
agree? 
 
Secondly then, what discussions took place with your 
department, with you or with your predecessor  who I guess 
is in the House today  in the wind-down of that program with 
the federal government? Was there discussions along the lines 
that  if you leave your money in, we’ll leave our money in  
those kind of discussions. Did that take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well yes, the discussions are wide and 
varied when you’re winding down a program and talking about 
where the surplus might go. And we were encouraging the 
federal government to put as much as possible back into the 
program. 
 
Now they looked at their budgets, we looked at our budgets, 
and we tried to focus our dollars  the few dollars that were 
there  onto value added production in Saskatchewan and crop 
sector programs, because we think those are very important 
areas. 
 
We also believe that if . . . that the money that went back into 
the treasury was money that, as every department of 
government  as opposed to previous administrations; as 
opposed to the federal Liberal government of . . . with an 
unbalanced budget  every department had to bear their share 
of reduction in order that we might maintain a balanced budget 
and keep our promise to the people of the province. 
 
Now if you’re saying that money should have all gone into 
agriculture somewhere else, that’s a great argument to make. 
But the question I ask you is, had we taken that 65 million and 
put it into . . . directly back into ag programs as we did the first 
67 per cent, where would you suggest that we take the money 
from? Health? Education? I’d like your opinion on where that 
65 should have come. Out of other places in the Department of 
Agriculture? Could you answer that for me, please? 
 
Mr. McLane:  So, Mr. Minister, did discussion take place 
with the federal government either through you or through your 
officials, that it would be awful hard for the federal government 
to make a commitment to Saskatchewan when our own 
provincial government wouldn’t. If you would have left your 
money in there, would the provincial government not done . . . 
or the federal government not done the same? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the reality is, Mr. Member, that we 
put a much larger proportion in than the federal government. 
Now maybe I could ask you to table your party’s 
correspondence to the federal party, to your federal Liberal 
friends, asking that they leave a larger portion in. You know I 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2531 

think what’s good for the goose is good for the gander. I mean 
you’re criticizing us even when we put more percentage in than 
they did. So could you table your party’s correspondence to 
them asking if they could leave more in? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Could you answer the question? If the 
province would have left their money in, most likely the federal 
government would have as well. Awful hard for a federal 
government not to leave their money in if the province wouldn’t 
leave their money in. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I’m really pleased and flattered that 
you think that  although, you know, we’re getting closer all 
the time  I am pleased that you think that our government has 
that much control over the federal government. Now we’ve 
taken a different approach . . . not different approach, but 
enhanced our approach lately, where we believe that we are 
trying to cooperate with the federal government in many, many 
areas. And I think you’re drawing a little bit of a long bow 
when you try to put the blame on the provincial government for 
the federal government putting in a much lesser share than we 
did. 
 
Now the question that I would ask you is, if your theory is true, 
then why didn’t they put in the same proportion as we did? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes I could, Mr. Minister, go through the list 
of the amount of monies in the areas that the federal 
government puts in. I’ve done that several times in the House. 
Maybe sometime you should follow that through and have a 
look at it. Could you tell us how many farmers have signed up 
for crop insurance to date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, the number of sign-ups this year, 
for 1996, is 38,853. 
 
Mr. McLane:  What percentage of the farmers? How many 
farmers are there in the province and what percentage of that is 
the total farmers? 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That’s about 65 per cent of the farmers. 
 
Mr. McLane:  In regards to ACS and the phasing-out, as I 
understand it, over the next four years, can you relate to us, Mr. 
Minister, what your plan is in that regard as to what’s going to 
happen with the customers of ACS; how they’re going to be 
looked after, how they’re going to be phased out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, the corporation is doing a number 
of things that’s not much different than what we’ve done 
before. You know we’re continuing to try to be fiscally 
responsible and tie up or wind up or wind down delinquent 
accounts. We’re handling on a case-by-case basis, based on the 
equity that the . . . for the most part the equity that the producer 
has. And if a producer’s equity is very, very low, then if he 
wants to settle his case, if he will come to ACS and try to make 
arrangements. 
 
There are situations where some lending institutions will 

probably be approaching farmers with ACS loans and making 
them an offer to buy out those loans. But at this point in time, 
and until we see the first couple of years or so go by to see how 
the wind-down is taking place, we won’t be making a final 
decision as to what exactly happens to the rest of those loans at 
the end of four years. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Just for clarification, Mr. Minister, in four 
years time ACS will be totally phased out, will not be in 
operation any more. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well yes, we’ve targeted four years, and 
as I said, the final decision . . . because we don’t know how the 
wind-down is going to play out. It could be . . . if all the farmers 
decided, well this is a short-term program now and we want to 
go to the bank, they may approach the banks and say hey, why 
don’t you come with me and make ACS an offer to buy out my 
portfolio. The banks will be doing the same things, like I said, 
to farmers. 
 
So it could be under four years or it could be greater than four 
years, depending on how the thing plays out. But we’re winding 
it down. And I don’t have a crystal ball and if you have any 
concrete suggestions as to how it should be wound down, we’d 
certainly be willing to listen to them. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well by the sound of it, Mr. Minister, 
somebody better have some concrete suggestions because 
you’re talking about phasing out this corporation. You’re 
talking about the livelihood of a great number of farmers and 
yet now you’re saying it could be less, it could be more. 
 
Are you going to have some incentives for these farmers to get 
out of ACS? Are you going to be forgiving their loans? What 
happens at the end of four years if there’s still every farmer is in 
the program? Then what are you going to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the fact of the matter is, after four 
years if there are still loans that are outstanding, ACS will 
continue to administer those loans and/or explore other options, 
as I’ve been talking about. Now that’s why you can’t say, okay 
here’s exactly what we’re going to do at the end of the day. You 
don’t know how many loans are coming in. By that time maybe 
we’ll have all our delinquent loans cleaned up. And the loan 
payback will then be no cost to the taxpayer because we’ll be 
getting the money back in. 
 
I mean if you want to do if’s and and’s and pots and pans, we 
can do it all night. But the fact of the matter is we’ve chosen a 
four-year target and the lenders has some options. The 
producers have some options. And when we come closer to that 
target . . . and it won’t make any difference to the producers 
who have the loans. 
 
They have a loan with ACS like they have a loan with any other 
institution. And if one of the banks that you had a loan with in 
your operation phased themselves out for whatever reason, then 
they would have to explore some options with what to do with 
the portfolios that they have. This is no different than that. So 
we are in a wind-down period and the decisions . . . the options 
are being explored. When we know how many producers are  



2532  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

staying in, getting out, or changing institutions . . . so it’s not 
anything concrete. 
 
At the same time, there’s nothing that’s going to hurt the 
farmers because if they have a loan, they have a loan. They got 
to pay it back whether they chose to flip it to another institution, 
pay it to them or they pay it to us. I don’t see how it’s going to 
affect them. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, that’s the exact question that I ask. What 
are the options? What are the options that farmers have that 
have loans with ACS? Tell us what the options are. What can a 
farmer do to discontinue his loan, get it transferred, whatever. 
Are you going to step in and ask the lending institution to 
subsidize these farmers? Many of them are high risk, as you 
would agree. Tell us what the options are; that’s what we need 
to know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think I’ll try to explain it a little 
better. Sometimes I don’t explain things real well, but the 
farmer has a number of options. He can go to . . . he can leave it 
in ACS right the way it is; that’s an option, okay. And our job 
in ACS, the corporation’s job, rather, is to collect the loan on 
behalf of the taxpayers, that was put out to help the farmer 
when he took it. So he can leave it in. 
 
Or he can go to a financial institution and say look, this thing’s 
winding down. You know I have maybe some other loans with 
you, maybe I can consolidate, or else you can buy this one out. 
Can you give me a better interest rate or whatever, I mean. Or 
the institutions, I think, will be approaching some farmers and 
saying, you have other loans with us. We’re willing to buy out 
your ACS loan. Now if our loans are current, then they will be 
. . . the value will be the current balance outstanding. 
 
If the loans are delinquent, the farmer might want to go to . . . 
might go to an institution and say, I have a delinquent loan with 
ACS. You know, will you work with me to make them an offer 
on that loan because my equity is only so much on my loan and 
I can’t pay it back. 
 
If the institution and the farmer comes and makes an offer on 
that loan, we’ll be willing to look at it. So those are just some of 
the options, and there may be more. But just off the top here, 
those are three or four, I think, fairly solid options. 
 
Mr. McLane:  As you wind down and get closer to that 
four-year target, are you going to be going to some of the 
farmers and as one of the options saying, 10 cents on the dollar, 
or 50 cents on the dollar, 90 cents on the dollar, in order to give 
them an incentive to get out of ACS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  There are no plans to alter the way that 
the ACS currently administers the loans. We expect people to 
pay the loans when they’re due. If they can’t for some reason, 
and go into arrears, then we expect them to come in to ACS and 
make arrangements to clean up those arrears over a period of 
time. Every case right now is handled on a case-by-case basis. If 
somebody has got themselves in where they are insolvent or 
debt/equity ratio is way out of line with what they owe, we are 
very flexible and try to negotiate any settlements on that loan.  

But it’s business as usual and there’s no anticipation now of 
having any incentive programs. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Are you planning, as you move through this 
wind-down leading up to the next . . . or to the four years from 
now, of keeping your interest rate competitive with the private 
lending institutions or will that be a way of deterring the 
farmers from keeping their loans with ACS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  For the most part, the loans are . . . the 
interest rate on a loan is set for the course of the loan. And if we 
refinanced one of our own loans, then it would be at current 
interest rates. And right now, for the most part, the interest rate 
is the cost of funds plus 1 per cent. 
 
Mr. McLane:  So ACS is still letting loans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, there’s no new lending  only 
refinancing. Like I say, if somebody comes in and they’re in a 
position where we both know that they can’t pay the debt that’s 
there, we can work out a deal with them for refinancing. That’s 
the only time. It would be same money, only refinanced  but 
no new lending. 
 
Mr. McLane:  At what date did ACS discontinue lending 
money on new loans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Budget day, except for any loans that 
were already in the system and not finalized. 
 
Mr. McLane:  And a short scenario, Mr. Minister. In four 
years time, still 10 people left and owing money to ACS. What 
would the plan be at that point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  As I said previously, they would be 
administered out one way or another. And I mean we can do a 
lot of what if’s, but the fact of the matter is, unless you have a 
crystal ball  I don’t . . . and what we’re doing is we’re 
monitoring situations, exploring options with farmers, and so 
far there has been no problems with anything. But it’s too soon 
to know. I mean at the end of the day what if everybody was in? 
You said that sooner What if nobody was in? I mean we’re 
going to be monitoring it and working with the farmers to 
explore their options. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Wouldn’t you have thought, Mr. Minister, 
that when you came with the plan to close out this lending 
institution, that you’d have looked at all the scenarios and 
decided what would happen in four years time? You’re saying 
in four years time you want to be out of this. Now you’re 
saying, well it could be three, it could be two, it could be five. 
Maybe it’s going to be 25. 
 
To me that would be pretty uneconomical to hang around after 
four years time administering a few loans and having a 
corporation in place. I would have thought that you’d have had 
a plan in place regardless of whatever the scenarios were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I don’t think that’s quite accurate. 
Maybe you can tell me, Mr. Member, how many loans there 
will be after four years. Can you tell me that? And if you could 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2533 

tell me that, then we might be able to say, okay, if there’s that 
many loans then here’s what we’re going to do. 
 
We’ve got a number of options. If there were 10 loans it would 
take maybe a quarter of a person-year to administer those 10 
over a period of a year. That’s not uneconomical. It’s no 
different than it is now, and the percentages of administration 
would vary with the number of loans that are there. So we’ve 
got the whole Department of Agriculture. We’ve got . . . there’s 
a number of options. Now maybe if you can tell me exactly how 
many loans there are going to be at the end of four years, I’ll 
work with you, and we can make a plan to decide what to do 
with them. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. McLane:  It seems to me, Mr. Minister, that’s just 
another example of this government and lack of commitment to 
rural Saskatchewan and to agriculture, a grab to balance the 
books irregardless of who it hurts, in particular the farmers and 
in particular rural Saskatchewan. It happened in health. It 
happened in agriculture. You’re trying to do it in education. 
We’re seeing it all over the province, in particular rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And you make a move such as this to close down the major 
lending institution for the rural people, the farmers of this 
province, without a substantial plan in order to ensure that all 
the needs are looked after. It’s just another example of a lack of 
commitment, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Is the member saying that we should 
have . . . that he disagrees with closing down ACS? Maybe the 
member could answer that question for me. I wasn’t quite clear 
on your position  not surprisingly so. But could you just tell 
me, are you in favour of us winding down ACS, or are you 
opposed to it? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, it seems like you and your 
government are unclear in a lot of positions, and maybe you 
should listen to the people in the province, in particular rural 
Saskatchewan and the farmers to hear what they’re saying to 
you. And you would be clear on the position and understand 
what you should be doing in this province. 
 
We listened to a member opposite early ramble on about health 
care in this province and what a great thing it is. Take a trip out 
in rural Saskatchewan. You’re a member of rural 
Saskatchewan. You’re an MLA from a rural constituency. I 
probably get as many calls in my office from constituents in 
your constituency complaining about what your government is 
doing to rural Saskatchewan . . . Why don’t you and your 
cabinet get out and listen to what’s going on in this province, 
and then you’d have a better understanding of what rural people 
are asking for and what they want for their survival. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well all I can say to the hon. member is, 
let’s assume that I don’t know what’s going on and that you do 
know what’s going on. Do you think ACS should be wound 
down, or do you think ACS should continue lending? If you . . . 
in close touch with the people, you should have that answer. 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to give the 
minister a direct answer. From this side of the House, Mr. 
Minister, if you can provide the service some place else, shut 
her down. But that does present some pretty serious problems 
for some people that we’d like to talk to you just a little bit 
about. 
 
We understand, Minister, after visiting with some of the folks 
down at the stock growers meeting the other day  as you 
recall we were there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And we’ll 
allow your colleagues to get into this debate after they find out 
what we were doing when we were over there. 
 
But as you will recall, there was discussions about several 
things about the livestock industry, and we were visiting about 
some of the problems that this change-over may present. One of 
them being of course that some of the ranchers understand now 
that when ACS is being wound down the livestock feeder 
industry will basically then be turned over to the Farm Credit 
Corporation to handle the loan portion, but the paperwork then 
will go to Heartland Livestock. Now is that the way this process 
is going to work, or have they got a misunderstanding of how 
this process might work? We’re not sure just exactly how 
you’re planning to do this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m not exactly sure what you’re 
referring to because ACS doesn’t finance feeders for the cattle. 
ACS has some financing involved in the capital structures of 
some feedlots. Now in all honesty, I’m not exactly sure. Maybe 
you just want to run it by us again and perhaps we missed what 
you were getting at. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well you may not get what I’m getting at 
because I may not know exactly what I’m trying to get at 
because there seems to be confusion in the whole industry as to 
how this process is going to work. Because seriously, we do 
want to get some straight answers for the cattlemen so they’ll 
know how this change is going to affect them. 
 
Their understanding is that those people that are presently 
borrowing money from ACS for livestock-related operations 
. . . and I was under the understanding that they also meant 
breeding cattle as well as feeder cattle, but maybe not, maybe 
it’s just livestock and equipment. But that whole part of the 
ACS loan program  not being related to the land but separate 
to livestock  was going to be turned over to the Farm Credit 
Corporation. 
 
The land portion would also be turned over . . . the loan part 
would be turned over to the Farm Credit Corporation too. But 
the livestock end of it then would be administered by Heartland, 
which is a company in Saskatchewan that already handles a lot 
of feeder loans and that sort of thing and has some experience 
with that. 
 
Now that’s what the people think is going to happen; what we’d 
really like to know is what is for sure going to happen, if you 
could explain that to us. When you make this transition of 
taking the ACS loans away from this entity, you’re going to 
dissolve it and it won’t be there, so then the people that have 
got loans will have to deal with somebody else. Or are you  



2534  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

going to just forgive all the loans? Obviously not. I don’t think 
so. 
 
So on people that owe for land, Farm Credit Corporation will 
handle the land, and at the same time they would handle the 
livestock portions of loans or equipment, but then they would 
turn that part of it over to this Heartland company to handle 
because they supposedly have some experience in that area. 
 
So have I sort of explained what they think is going on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, we understand what you’re saying 
now, Mr. Member. But there are no plans to turn any of that 
over to FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) right at this moment. 
And there’s no plans to turn the administration over to the 
corporation that you talked about. 
 
Now what I will volunteer here is that if you have a group of 
producers or cattlemen’s or cattle feeders’ association that want 
to come in and meet with us to clear this up, I’m very willing to 
have my officials and myself, if possible, to meet with them. 
But as of now there’s no plans to do any of what you say. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Certainly, Minister, we’re going to offer to 
take you up on that offer for the people that are interested. 
Obviously there are some people that will want to do exactly 
that, and I think they’d appreciate the chance to talk to you. 
 
But just to take this a step further, you are then talking about 
dissolving the ACS  agriculture credit service. How do you 
envision that you’re going to do that then, I guess is my 
question? Are you going to phase it out then over 30 years until 
everybody’s paid off all their loans? Or are you going to turn 
the accounts over to other institutions and draw a line in the 
sand and say, some date like August 1, it’s over and from now 
on somebody else will be handling your account and finished? 
Is that the way it is or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well as I explained earlier, that we don’t 
know exactly how many loans are going to be left. If, and this is 
why . . . I mean we could make a decision now saying, okay, at 
the end of four years we’re going to do it method X. But I don’t 
think that would be a wise thing to do right now. Because first 
of all, if the situation arose where that method X didn’t work in 
four years time, guess who would be criticizing us as the 
government  because I know we’ll still be here in four years 
 so guess who will be still criticizing the government  
because you’ll probably have your seat as well over there  
about not keeping their promise. 
 
So common sense just says we have a number of options. There 
will be institutions going to farmers and saying okay, you’ve 
got the rest of your loans with us; why don’t we take over your 
ACS loan as well? Farmers will be going to institutions and 
saying the same thing probably. But at the end of the day, we 
don’t know the number, we don’t know the loans that’ll be 
viable. I mean the status of loan, we won’t know. 
 
So as I said to the member from Thunder Creek, you can make 
a decision now, but I don’t have a crystal ball. And I think 
sometimes it’s better to watch a thing play out and not make  

any snap decisions rather than saying yes, we’re going to do this 
now, and then it doesn’t work out. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. Well you may not have 
done much for a lot of other folks, but you’ve managed to clear 
the air for me a bit, and I appreciate that. 
 
And having gathered that understanding now, most farmers of 
course then are probably going to be visited by some institution, 
because if you’d really want to get this wound down, you will 
encourage those institutions to go out and see them. 
 
So is there any breach of confidentiality by turning over this 
information to institutions and sending it to the farmer or 
sending the institutions to the farmer? Or do you go to the 
farmer and say, is it okay with you if we suggest certain people? 
Or are you going to start by saying to the farmers, first you go 
and try to make another deal because we’d rather not have the 
account any more? 
 
And quite honestly, a lot of the farmers I’ve talked to would 
rather not deal with ACS any more anyway. So I don’t think 
you’re going to hurt many of their feeling by getting out of the 
business. But they just want to, I guess, have a comfort level to 
know that they have some security in life to understand how the 
process is going to work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well first of all, I hope you’re not 
criticizing the administration at ACS. Because I think you’re 
right; many farmers don’t want to deal with ACS any more. But 
if I were to throw a stone, I think there was a couple of 
programs that came out in the mid-‘80s that got farmers into 
substantial debt that they wished they wouldn’t have taken. And 
I’ll leave it there because I think the administration of ACS is 
doing a very good job. 
 
Now as far as confidentiality is concerned, no, we can’t go to 
an institution and say, okay you’ve got a loan for so much 
money. It’s up to the institution to approach the farmer. You see 
institutions know when you . . . If you’ve ever had a loan . . . 
maybe you haven’t. I know your pockets are pretty full of 
money. But if you ever had a loan, you would know the 
institution makes you write down what other loans you have. So 
all the lenders that deal with farmers know if they have an ACS 
loan. And they can simply go there and say, okay you have this 
ACS loan; we want to take it over for you. Or the farmer can 
approach the institution. But we won’t be in the business of 
giving out information, private information. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. No, I don’t want to get 
political on this thing. And you’re probably right about things 
that happened in the ‘80s; some of them weren’t all that great. 
And some people are . . . 
 
But my point was that for the most part I think most people who 
have loans with ACS, FCC, and two or three banks, probably 
are better off realistically if they can consolidate their loans 
with one institution or two rather than to have a whole string of 
them. And for the most part, the ACS loans I think are the 
smaller ones for most farmers now, as they themselves are  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2535 

trying to get out from under the load of debt. And then 
realistically it’s probably better for their advantage to 
consolidate. And obviously then if you have no more work left 
for your people in ACS, there’s not much you can do about 
justifying keeping the process there. So obviously I think it’s a 
program that is self-destructing because it’s no longer really 
necessary in society under today’s conditions. 
 
So having given you that . . . and I’ll go even a step further and 
say as far as I know your officials do a fine enough job. I have 
had complaints, and I’m sure you have had. And what person 
who is involved with the agricultural industry hasn’t heard 
complaints just about any financial institution that deals with 
agriculture over the last 15 years? I mean it just goes with the 
territory. We’ve been through some really tough times. And so 
we won’t gain anything though by bashing the financial 
institutions or the systems. 
 
But what we can do is to gain some advantage here, I think, by 
having those people that are still connected with the process 
understand that they are not going to be violated or pressured or 
put in a position of perhaps having their loans called in any 
quicker or those kind of things. So there’s a little bit of a sense 
of fear out there because I think of the same misunderstandings 
that I’ve had, and those are the things I want to dwell on just for 
a minute to try to get straightened out. 
 
The question was asked though, will you be profiting by 
winding down ACS, in that would you be offering the portfolio 
for sale? And perhaps the highest bidder of the financial 
institutions would then be allowed to take over all of the 
accounts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  As far as profiting on the scenario that 
you put forward, we have no plans right now to do that, but it is 
an option. But as far as profiting is concerned, I’m not sure if 
we were to sell the entire portfolio of ACS to an institution that 
they would want to pay us more than it’s worth; therefore we’d 
profit on the wind-down. I think what we would get paid for is 
what they would consider the value of the portfolios in ACS, so 
I can’t see the taxpayers profiting, but I don’t think we’re going 
to lose. 
 
I mean I think we’ll get the value out of ACS. The value we’ll 
get is what the value it is. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. The mention that we 
made about feeder associations and feeder financing and things 
like that, I think I need to get a little clarification on as well. 
There are a lot of feeder associations in the province that work 
mostly as cooperatives. I guess they had options to go other 
ways. But basically that has become, I think, a big part of the 
funding vehicle to keep a feeding industry in our province. 
 
Now are those accounts handled through the Department of 
Agriculture in a general fund way, or does ACS handle that 
account, or who handles that within your departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Those are guarantees administered by  

the Department of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  So the loan guarantee is supported by the 
Department of Agriculture in general; it’s not one specific 
branch of the department or another? So in other words, it’s not 
ACS so this won’t affect them? 
 
Okay. That’s good. Because that was one of the other questions 
a fellow asked me and I really didn’t know the answer, and so 
I’ll pass that on to that individual and those that want to know. 
 
We had, I guess, in the past some programs involving livestock 
cash advances. ACS was involved in that, were they not? And if 
so, have they been all cleared up or are they part of this 
winding-down process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We administer the . . . ACS administers 
livestock cash advance program. It’s a five-year program and 
the last one comes due December of 1999. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  So will you be winding them down or 
passing them on in the same way that you’re doing all of the 
others that you alluded to just a few minutes ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  It would be the very same manner. If 
they want to transfer them to another institution or leave them 
in, it’s the same as any other ACS loan. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. Back to the feeder 
associations just for a minute. Do you anticipate or have you 
made any changes to the way the feeder association programs 
have worked or are going to work in the near future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, we just made a recent change that 
. . . or will be making a recent change, I guess, that the actual 
guarantee will be made as a percentage of the amount of the 
loan and not a set guarantee figure. That takes the pressure off 
the $50 million cap that we have in that program. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Maybe just you could explain a little bit more 
what you mean by the percentage of the loans. Does that mean 
now that as a member of the Lone Creek Feeder Association I 
have no individual cap of 50,000 and that I could go out and 
borrow a million dollars worth to fund cattle? And then if so, 
using a million dollar figure, what percentage would I qualify 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, I just want to give you an example 
of how this works. The cattle association  the feeder 
association  let’s say there’s a million dollars. The feeder 
association is responsible for the first 5 per cent of that, or 
what, $50,000. The government then guarantees the next 25 per 
cent, okay. So then beyond the 25 per cent, of course, it’s 
between the bank and the people who own the cattle. 
 
The change that was made, the old method was that the 25 per 
cent guarantee was on the total outstanding . . . or it was the 
total amount of the loan, the whole million dollars, 25 per cent 
of a million dollars. This way, as that loan comes down  let’s 
say it’s paid down to half a million dollars  the old method 
we’d still be guaranteeing 25 per cent of a million. 



2536  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

But to ease the pressure on the total amount of money that we 
have, we’re saying now that 25 per cent guarantee will be on 
the outstanding balance of the loan. So that’s the difference. It 
used to be the full . . . and that way we can spread the money 
around a little bit more. The old way, that gave a little bit more 
security to those people who were in, as opposed to those 
people who had . . . or had a high outstanding balance as 
opposed to those people who had a low outstanding balance. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  I see no problem with that, Minister; in fact I 
see the advantage to your department not having so many 
dollars committed. The only question then that arises from that, 
do the banking institutions accept this as enough security so as 
to not increase their percentage of interest rate? 
 
Most banks are lending with the strength of the government 
guarantee  even though it’s not 100 per cent guaranteed  
with the strength of that they’re lending for, I think it is a 
quarter to a half over prime. Now have the banks continued to 
go along with that as being secure enough to maintain those 
kind of loans and those percentages? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  As you will know, some of the financial 
institutions have voiced some criticism of the change but the 
reality is that we’ve seen up to date, I don’t think any changes, 
and we would hope that there would be no changes. Because if 
you remember, the first 30 per cent is guaranteed, you know, 5 
by the producers and 25 by the government. That’s not a bad 
percentage guarantee on a loan. 
 
So I think that I would expect and I would hope  and the 
banking institutions in Saskatchewan these days are doing quite 
well in ag loans  and I would hope that they would continue 
the current method. Because what we’re trying to promote in 
this province is partnerships between the producers, the 
governments, and the banks, in this case. Well we say, you 
know, let us stretch our dollar as far as we can, because if we 
were to reduce the guarantee from the full amount of a loan to 
the outstanding amount of a loan, that would free up more 
money for maybe another guarantee, where the bank could 
make another loan. 
 
So I mean this is a kind of partnership. I hope it’s not 
something that’s going to make a difference with institutions. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. I don’t think that 
there’s any reason why it should, and I’m agreeing with you. 
Probably when you really look at it, that’s enough security for 
the banks to be able to maintain the present loan rates. They of 
course are going to argue otherwise because obviously they’re 
going to take all they can get. I mean that’s just good business. 
 
I guess the other side of good business is that, as the Minister of 
Agriculture, you would negotiate on behalf of all producers 
with the banking institutions as a general group, and explain to 
them that the risk really isn’t all that high, and that they ought 
to be good corporate citizens and continue to carry on. 
 
I guess the key that would make your argument then would be a 
consideration of . . . And I wonder if you could tell us what the 
kind of losses are that people have suffered. 

Now in terms of losses, have the banks lost any money on these 
feeder associations? And if so, how much has it been and how 
serious is it? Has the government had to make a lot of 
payments? And if so, what were they and how significant are 
they in terms of percentage of the total loans that have been out 
and that sort of thing? And I’m hoping that you can develop an 
argument to take to the banks from developing your answer to 
these questions. 
 
And of course feeder associations themselves are the first ones 
on the hook, even though it’s for that 5 per cent, but they do put 
up guarantees for one another, for their neighbours, by putting 
in some money at the front. And so how much have they lost 
and how does that figure into the equation of percentages of 
amounts of money compared to the total that has been lent out 
and that sort of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  As far as claims that have been made  
payments that have been made, rather, under the guarantee  
there’s been one payment of $45,000. So in terms of payment, 
our total portfolio is about $42 million and so the percentage in 
that case would be minuscule. It would be 1 per cent . . . No. 
My math isn’t right on top of the game right now but a very 
small, small percentage. 
 
But there also have been two more claims submitted from two 
different institutions, one for 712,000 and one for 200,000. So 
that’s another 912,000. From 42 million out, that would be two 
and a half per cent, something . . . two and a half, two and 
three-quarters per cent. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  I guess the obvious question is, do you 
consider this to be a reasonable investment for the return that 
you’ve gotten in terms of supporting the feeder industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Sorry. I was trying to figure out what our 
loan loss provision was, but because it’s a guarantee there is no 
loan loss provision. But those percentages are very low. 
 
And as far as a direct answer, I think the answer is yes, it’s very 
worthwhile. You will from time to time have to pay out some 
guarantees, but the important thing to remember is that this year 
we had 145 associations, with 5,000 to 5,700 members in those 
associations, and as I said, $42 million out. 
 
I think, I believe, the program is working very well. I believe 
it’s a good investment in our livestock industry. And I think you 
probably agree, because I’ve talked to a number of producers 
who are in the associations and they really appreciate this 
guarantee because otherwise many may not be in the business. 
And we’re trying to get the cattle numbers always higher in this 
province, and I think this program has been one that’s benefited 
producers in order to keep the numbers where they are. 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Minister. I want to say that I 
most certainly do agree that it is a worthwhile project and I 
think every cent you spend is more than worthwhile. 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2537 

But it’s important that we get you on the record saying those 
things because you’re the one, of course, who’s the Minister of 
Agriculture and people do want this program very desperately 
to remain. Because you’re right  the industry would have 
failed without it. I expect, most probably, 90 per cent of the 
feeder cattle in Saskatchewan would not be any longer here 
because those feeders would have went broke in the last few 
years. 
 
So I guess the thing is though, that we’re going to have to be 
prepared to argue the point of why it is good to have and why 
it’s worthwhile. So the question then becomes, what do you 
project your exposure to losses to be in the near future? And 
maybe you want to go into an extended period. That’s up to 
you. And what would the banks consider to be a reasonable loss 
to the exposure that they have before they would get nervous 
about this program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We won’t know. All I can do is hope 
that there are few to no claims in the future. And like I say, you 
can’t predict what’s happening, even though in the downturn in 
the cattle industry we haven’t seen any increase in claims. As 
far as the banks, what they would like to see as a return 
guarantee or provision, I don’t know. I can’t speak for them. I 
don’t know what they would want. 
 
But as far as this program’s concerned it’s quite a hypothetical 
question and I answer this question knowing that it’s a 
hypothetical question and giving what will be . . . (inaudible) 
. . . answer. But if you took 10 per cent for a loss provision on a 
$42 million portfolio, you’re looking at about $4 million. And I 
don’t think that’s uncommon as a loan loss provision in some 
other portfolios. 
 
So I mean it’s hypothetical and we believe that even though 
there’s a downturn in the cattle industry, that as we start to 
climb out of this we will have a very vibrant, strong industry 
and this . . . the loan loss provisions and the guarantees 
hopefully won’t have to kick in. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. I certainly hope not, 
too. But of course, like you say, we are in a downturn and of 
course this fall could be about the timing when some of this 
could be hitting rather significantly home. 
 
But in terms of the fact that you say it’s hypothetical from the 
banks’ point of view . . . and my experience with banks is 
somewhat limited but I think that they do deal with hypothetical 
things the same as insurance companies do. 
 
They do projections on what they can afford to invest, at what 
kind of risk. And I think if you go to the banks and ask them, 
they’ll have a number for you. And they’ll tell you how much 
they’re prepared to risk for this kind of a loan, and how much 
they can afford to risk at a quarter per cent over prime as the 
interest rate; or a half per cent over prime as an interest rate. 
They’ll know that based on the volume which you now have of 
course, which is $42 million. 
 
So my suggestion to you  and I’m not trying to tell you how 
to run your business  but I would suggest you, go and ask  

them because that will give you the tool to work with to argue 
your point that they should stick with the low interest rates. 
Because I really believe you’re going to find out that the banks 
can make a better profit, even with this kind of risk, than what 
their loans rates are already projecting. 
 
In other words, I’m suggesting that they could probably even 
cut that a little and still be turning over a reasonable enough 
profit for their risk. And obviously that’s what banks are doing; 
they’re selling you risk. They’re putting up the capital and 
risking it, and you’re paying them for that. And it’s just like 
buying insurance, and it works that way, and I know you 
understand that. 
 
So I’m hoping that we can help you to make a good enough 
argument to keep this program going this fall when the crunch 
really starts to come in. Because feeder prices now have been 
dropping but the grain price has been rising; and of course a lot 
of the feeders that are still trailing into the market were bought 
last fall at significantly higher prices maybe than what should 
have been, in comparison with the profit potential, in 
relationship to the grain costs that are going into those 
livestocks right now. 
 
So we’re probably going to see in the fall, some significant 
pressure on the industry. And with Alberta  and of course you 
know about the subsidies that are going on there — and with 
Alberta doing those, the subsidy program, in an attempt for the 
government there to win the next election. And I’ll throw that in 
so you don’t have to. And it’s obvious, I think, from across the 
border that that’s what’s going on. 
 
Unfortunately, you know, whether we like that or not it’s going 
to affect our industry here, and the repercussions land square on 
us. Whether it’s for their good or not, we suffer. 
 
And so I know the livestock people at the stock growers say 
they don’t want to get into this, and I know you agree with that, 
and I do too. But there will come a limit to how much they can 
sustain and tolerate in terms of losses as compared to the 
Alberta producers, at which time then we have to make a 
decision, I guess, in this province. Do we subsidize our industry 
if Alberta doesn’t back off or do we lose our industry? And 
we’re talking about the feeder industry, of course. And the 
cow-calf operations depend on the feeder industry, so 
everybody’s affected. 
 
And I don’t want to suggest that grain prices should go down 
because certainly grain producers have suffered long enough 
too, and they deserve to make some money for a change. It’s 
unfortunate that we happen to live in a world where cycles seem 
to come against one another  grain up, cattle down; cattle up, 
grain down. Why does it have to be that way? I don’t know. 
Maybe the consumer has to be taught they should pay for a fair 
market price for what they eat. 
 
I know the members opposite will have some different opinions 
on what makes this happen, but the reality is it does happen. 
Sometimes it’s not fair. We have to learn how to live with it. I 
guess that’s the point we have to make. 
 



2538  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

So at what point are you prepared to do something to save the 
industry, or are you prepared to allow the feeder industry to go 
out on its own and go broke? Or are you prepared perhaps, to 
pick up with a few of the people from stock growers, maybe the 
cattlemen’s association, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), maybe Wheat Pool, a few of those folks 
that are involved, pick a few of those up and take a drive over 
to Alberta, meet with the Minister of Agriculture over there, 
maybe even the Premier and have a chat with him and tell him 
we understand politics and we understand your need to win the 
election. But do you understand what you’re doing to our 
province and to our industry? 
 
You know sometimes it is as basic and fundamental as going 
over to your neighbour and talking to him when you’re having a 
problem. I found that out just the other day myself with a 
neighbour, and I’m so happy that I walked across the field, over 
across the line, over to his tractor and had a chat with him, 
because we were of some misunderstandings that were cleared 
up within five minutes, and we were sort of eyeballing one 
another across the line there for a few days. And we found out 
that we both agreed with one another, and both went away quite 
happy. 
 
Maybe if you talk to those folks over in Alberta, you might be 
able to convince them that as soon as this election is over it 
might be time to get the heck out of this program and get back 
on this level playing-field that we all talk about and know we 
have to have. And maybe we can talk them into making some 
kind of commitment to downsize that program. And I wonder if 
you’ve got any plans to do that, or if you are planning on a 
subsidy program, or if you’re just planning on forgetting it and 
letting those folks go broke. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well it’s funny. Some things work out 
quite funny because we’ve maybe got ourselves in a jackpot. 
But we just finished talking about the feeder loan guarantee 
program which assisted 57,000 producers to be in the business. 
We did that with a outstanding balance — 57,000 members and 
145 associations — we did that with an outstanding balance of 
$42 million of guarantee, which is fairly high risk for the 
taxpayers. Well I shouldn’t say fairly high, which is a risk for 
taxpayers. 
 
We did that because we thought the industry was fairly stable in 
this province. But at the same time now when the bottom drops 
out, we are not only at risk for $42 million, but then we have to 
decide, as you say, whether we shore up the industry in another 
way. And that is a very, very tough and important question. I 
think that . . . I believe that we’re through . . . cattle producers 
tell me we’re through most of the high buys. The grain price is 
still up here, but when we get through the high buys, you know, 
they say they can . . . won’t be much profit but they’ll make 
ends meet for the most part. 
 
I agree with you 100 per cent on the Alberta problem. In fact 
I’ve been led to believe that the Alberta livestock producers 
didn’t want this program. They didn’t want the FISP (farm 
income support program) program but the minister decided to 
go ahead with it anyway. 
 

Now as to what we’ve done  I agree with you 100 per cent  
I met with the representatives from the cattle feeders association 
about three, four weeks ago. I talked to the stock growers the 
other night in Swift Current at the banquet that we were both at, 
and said this: if we want us to do an ad hoc program right now 
to compete with Alberta, I don’t think we’re going to do that. 
For one thing I believe that even though the pressure is on, I 
believe once we go through this cycle  and you and I both 
know and all cattle producers know that there’s cycles in the 
industry  once we get through this cycle our industry will be 
stronger if we don’t subsidize them. 
 
But then the question becomes, well how far do you let it go? 
That’s your point, how far do you let it go before you do 
something? 
 
Well I don’t know how far to let it go. But ad hoc programing 
for assistance doesn’t work because all that would happen is 
that, if we matched Alberta then B.C. (British Columbia) would 
maybe ante up it, and then Alberta would ante a little higher, 
then Ontario would ante and Quebec. I mean we’d be back into 
the same predicament that we were — draining our subsidies 
and really not helping the industry that much — a few years 
ago. 
 
So what I’ve done is talk to the producers in this province and a 
few other folks that are involved in the cattle industry one way 
or another. And I said, if you want to do something, let’s all get 
together and lobby the federal Minister of Agriculture and say, 
look this program that Alberta is doing is wrong. It goes against 
all the understandings that we’ve had, the direction that this 
country’s been going as far as winding down subsidies and 
trying to build a stronger industry. 
 
So I’m encouraging the cattle feeders association to get a hold 
of their counterparts in other provinces, lobby the federal 
minister and the Alberta government and say, this is wrong. I 
like to call the Alberta government the Europeans of Canada 
because, you know, while they talk dropping subsidies, they 
continue to increase them on an ad hoc basis. 
 
So I think the lobby has to be . . . and that’s what I’m doing. 
I’ve made representation to the federal minister. We’re going to 
be in a federal Ag ministers’’ meeting in July in Victoria and 
I’m going to again bring the issue up. 
 
It was raised in the last Ag ministers’ meeting in February, and 
Alberta is basically the only province who thinks this is okay. 
We are concerned because we think it’s not GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) green. We think there’s going 
to be some problems with the Americans in this thing. But 
unfortunately, for whatever reason . . . and I think probably you 
hit the nail on the head; it was political reasons, because it 
doesn’t seem to make sense to me, if the majority of beef 
producers in Alberta don’t want the program and yet they get a 
program, there might be a little bit of politics running through 
the veins there. 
 
So I think a unified lobby effort, not only from provincial 
government to federal government but from producer to 
producer groups to federal government, is one way that we can  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2539 

attack this problem. Because I’ll tell you, if we don’t, another 
. . . like B.C. is really upset because they’re really afraid it’s 
going to drain their cattle industry. If they all of a sudden say, 
well we’re going to ante up something, guess what Ontario’s 
going to do, you know. And the problem that we have in 
Saskatchewan is we don’t have near as much money as B.C. 
and Alberta and Ontario. We don’t have as much money. 
 
And so in the old ante . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I seem to 
be getting some assistance from my friends. So what we have to 
try to do is get the lobby working, get the lobby working to get 
rid of that program. Because in an ante-up game, we in 
Saskatchewan lose every time because we don’t have the 
industrial base or the broader economic base that the other 
provinces do. Even though our population is growing every 
year, we still don’t have enough there to support that. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s 
enough in what you said that I agree with that I think I’ll leave 
the political retorts for another day because this is something 
that’s more important than partisan politics. And I’m glad to 
hear you say that you are starting a lobbying process. 
 
The only thing that I didn’t hear that I would encourage you to 
reconsider, I didn’t hear you say anything about going directly 
to Alberta and to the Minister of Agriculture there and saying to 
him on his turf: sir, this is what’s happening to our industry; 
this is what you’re doing to it. Have you considered your 
neighbours and do you agree with the free trade concept 
between provinces? 
 
And I want to just remind you that, a couple of years ago, Ken 
Crandall, the man who runs the livestock operation, the sales 
yards, over in Maple Creek, he approached me and he said, 
we’ve got a problem. Interprovincial trade is supposed to be 
opening up and we’ve got this problem with brand inspection. 
When we send cattle to Alberta, we check them once here and 
Alberta accepts it. When we bring them back, they inspect them 
and then we have to re-inspect them. We unload the cattle, we 
load them back up, we wrestle them around, we charge twice. 
 
He said Alberta producers obviously won’t bring their cattle to 
Maple Creek to sell them because they get into this hassle. It 
costs more money; the cattle are basically run around more, and 
lose more weight and that sort of thing. So he said, what can we 
do about it? 
 
I wrote to the Minister of Agriculture, and he said, I’m totally in 
favour of interprovincial barriers being brought down. And I’m 
totally in favour of making the industry, the livestock industry, 
work better, and I’m totally in favour of everything, you know, 
that makes interprovincial trade work better. It sounded to me 
from that letter that he’s got an open mind on these issues. So I 
suggest to you that there’s nothing wrong with you going to him 
and taking a shot at it and try it. 
 
And also in that context, so that we can cover another subject a 
little bit before we get done here, at that point we were talking 
about this brand inspection. And it is my understanding now  

that for the past six months or so there has been an 
experimental program going on which, incidentally, you might 
want to take some credit for. And I understand . . . If my 
understanding is right, you can take credit. 
 
I do understand though that we do now accept the one-brand 
concept, one brand inspection concept, and that cattle can come 
into Saskatchewan now with one brand inspector checking them 
between Alberta and Saskatchewan and that that supposedly is 
good enough. It’s a trial basis, I understand. And I’d like you to 
tell me if my understanding in these areas is correct, and if that 
trial program is on. If so, is it working well enough that you 
think you can continue with it, or are there any glitches that you 
see in the future with that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just to start with your last question first. 
Yes, it is a trial program that’s been going about a year. I could 
take credit for it, but I think the credit has to go to the 
department working with the industry to make sure that the . . . 
And that’s one of the things that we’re trying to do and one of 
the commitments we’ve made. We’re going to try to reduce the 
regulatory aspects of some of these things to get rid of the 
complications and the irritants, we call them, the irritants in the 
regulations. 
 
So I really am pleased that the department does work with 
industry. And if we have not . . . I’m not sure if we’ve already 
renewed it to the end of 1996. But if we haven’t, it’s in the 
process. So it seems to be working very well. 
 
With regards to your first question about going over to visit Mr. 
Paszkowski, I could do that. And the only reason I didn’t say I 
could do it is because, depending on when you quit asking 
questions and this House ends, I’ll be seeing Mr. Paszkowski 
on July 1, 2, 3, 4 at the Ag ministers’’ conference. So it’s just a 
matter of I’ll probably see him there before I have time to go 
see him at his home, so I hope you understand that. And it 
won’t change my commitment of trying to get this thing 
changed, believe me. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  All right, Minister, we will take that as a 
commitment that you are going to bring this specific problem to 
that specific minister at your first opportunity July 1, 2, and as 
far as I’m concerned we can leave it at that. 
 
And to make sure that you do have time to get away, I’m going 
to limit myself to two more questions on behalf of the cattle 
industry and allow some other people to do some things if they 
want to. So you see how well your argument has struck home; 
I’m going to get right to the end of this so that you can get on 
over there and defend our industry. 
 
I want you to know, for the record, that I am personally a 
member of a feeder association. But in saying that  for the 
record, so that people know about it  I have not used my 
membership since I got involved in politics because I thought 
there might be a conflict there. And yet I’ve maintained my 
membership because, like the Minister of Labour who, as he put 
it, rode off into the sunset of his political career, I may someday 
do the same and want to go back into the cattle business. 



2540  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

And the program is very beneficial. It is very helpful. I have 
used it and I will use it in the future if I go back into cattle. So I 
hope that you understand that it is important to the industry, 
important to the people that are involved in the industry. And as 
a producer, I’ve used it and I can vouch for the fact that it 
seemed like a very low risk for government in order to maintain 
a very viable industry that is very important to Saskatchewan. 
Without a feeding industry, there is no need to have, really, a 
cow-calf operation in the province, unless you’re going to 
depend on somebody else somewhere else in the world to buy 
all of your calves. 
 
And it just goes against the grain of your thinking and mine of 
late, and I’m glad that we are agreeing on most things finally at 
last. But the diversification necessary in our province to build 
our province can certainly develop more here. Feeding our own 
cattle our own grain, rather than shipping both to Ontario or 
some place in the States and letting them take the profit from 
putting the two together, just never did make any sense to me. 
And I’m sure you agree with the fact that we’ll do much better 
if we do that at home and ship the finished product somewhere, 
whether it be boxed beef to California, you know, or steaks to 
the restaurant in downtown Regina. 
 
I have one last question, Minister, about Heartland that was 
brought up at that particular meeting. Heartland Livestock, as 
you know, is a subsidiary of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. So 
that there be no mistake that we’re trying to slip anything in on 
you or the Wheat Pool. 
 
But apparently there is some belief and some perception that 
Heartland is getting an unfair share of the business related to 
the feeder industry. And the business that they get of course, is 
the fact that through their own program . . . Saskatchewan 
Wheat Pool, as you’ll remember, had a feeder financed program 
some years back. The feeder financed program of course meant 
that you had to buy the cattle from the Wheat Pool and you also 
had to sell them to the Wheat Pool. And I don’t think there was 
anything wrong with that; it was totally out front. 
 
But some people are of the impression and the perception, right 
or wrong, and maybe you can correct this for us, that Heartland 
has cornered that part of the market in Saskatchewan and it 
almost guarantees Heartland and Saskatchewan Wheat Pool the 
business of buying and selling just about all of the feeder cattle 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what percentage of the feeder cattle industry does 
Heartland have guaranteed? Is it an unfair amount? Are the 
private operators being discriminated against? Do they have a 
legitimate complaint when they come to me and say, member, 
go to the legislature and find out why Heartland is getting all of 
the business and we can’t seem to get any any more? Because 
the private operators out there are under the impression that 
somehow Heartland has contracted, or has under contract, a 
guarantee to handle these cattle both coming and going in the 
feed lots. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I don’t know if we can get that number 
for you. We don’t have it here and I don’t know if Heartland 
would give it out. But it’s a little bit . . . I don’t know really  

what you mean by . . . I understand what you mean by unfair, 
but I guess from the Wheat Pool’s perspective it’s pretty darn 
good business if they’ve got the market cornered off. 
 
And we can’t dictate to them what kind of programs they have 
for their producers. We can’t say to somebody who wants to 
guarantee, well you can’t get this guarantee because you’re 
going to deal with Heartland and they also have another little 
program that’ll support you. That’s just the way private 
enterprise works. 
 
So I will attempt to get the number. I don’t know if I can but I’ll 
make that commitment to you. 
 
And I just don’t know how to answer the question because we 
can’t tell the Pool how to run their business. And if they’ve got 
programs that are put in place, as I say, to make sure that 
they’re getting the lion’s share of the business  and I believe 
it is substantial; I think you probably know, but I don’t know 
what the number is  then I don’t think we as government are 
in a position to tell them, well they can’t top up these programs. 
 
So I’ll try to get the number. And if you have any further 
questions when we do get it, then I’ll be willing to answer 
them. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. Well I guess my final 
questioning will be: has the Department of Agriculture made 
any changes that provide Heartland Livestock with the 
opportunity to capture a larger share of the feeder business, 
buying and selling? 
 
And then of course I have to lead to the possibility that if 
Heartland is in fact cornering the market here, do they suddenly 
find themselves in a position of becoming a monopoly? And if 
so, is that an acceptable thing to have for the industry? Even 
though it may be good business for them, is it good for them to 
have a monopoly? 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you know where I’m going, why not I let 
you just go ahead and answer the thing. But so that I can save 
some time while you’re thinking about the answer, I would 
thank your officials for the help that they’re giving you tonight. 
And I want to thank you for your answers. 
 
I did promise to quit so I’m going to trust you to give us a fair 
answer and say goodnight and allow the rest of the people to get 
on with their questions. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  In discussing with my officials, we have 
done nothing knowingly that would give them an advantage. 
But at the same time, if there’s some people who think that 
something . . . any changes that were made does, we’re not in 
the business of favouring one group over another. And I’d ask 
you to bring that forward because . . . but knowingly, no. We’ve 
made no changes knowingly that would give Heartland an 
advantage. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here this evening. 
 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2541 

I’d like to start off with something dealing with the youth of our 
province. You may see in the back here this is 4-H, but I have 
received a number of petitions, cards written in to me, and 
perhaps the minister has received the same sort of thing, of 4-H 
members who are concerned about decreasing funding for their 
programs through the extensions department. 
 
And I just wonder if the minister could explain what’s going on 
and does the department continue to support 4-H in its 
traditional fashion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I just want to . . . oh, the member’s left. I 
want to make one correction that my assistant deputy pointed 
out to me. When we were talking about the feeder-breeder loan 
program, I believe I said 57,000 people  it’s 5,700 people. I 
didn’t realize I said that. I guess I said it twice. So I just want to 
make that clear for the record. 
 
With regard to 4-H, we have in the whole process of budget had 
to make some very, very tough decisions in order to do our part, 
as other departments around the government have had to do 
their part, in order that we can maintain the tax level or slightly 
reduce it in some areas and yet maintain as many services as we 
can. And yet maintain sort of a quality of life in rural 
Saskatchewan, and in this particular case, the children. 
 
And in the whole budgetary process everything is on the table 
and 4-H was one of the programs that was on the table. But we 
decided that it was too important to let go. We could have, in 
the whole scheme of things, maybe saved one or two office 
closures of ACS or Crop Insurance or some of the other. But we 
didn’t, and we maintained the 4-H program because we felt that 
the closures that we did do, the areas were still well represented 
and the farmers weren’t disadvantaged because of those 
closures. 
 
The towns would argue we had taken away jobs, which gets 
into another whole argument about how we maintain services, 
keep taxes down, provide . . . downsize government and yet not 
lose any jobs. And it’s really difficult; it’s quite a balancing act. 
 
But we’re in the process right now — we made the decision to 
maintain the funding at $271,000 — we’re in the process of 
signing a new five-year agreement for the 4-H program. I’ve got 
many of the cards, as you did. But we made this decision. I 
think it’s the right decision because I think in talking with the 
4-H leaders that they understand the constraints of government, 
and they are out there actively fund-raising and talking to 
business people in order to access the necessary funds. But 
we’re in there for a new five-year agreement. I don’t think it’s 
been signed yet, but the process is going well, I understand, to 
maintain that funding. 
 
(2200) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister, because it 
is a very important program. And it’s not just rural children 
we’re talking about. Most people think of 4-H as your local 
cattle, 4-H, or horses or pigs or grain. But it’s much more 
broader than that. It gives leadership training. It’s both for rural 
and urban children. I think it’s a very important part of the  

social fabric of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m glad to hear that you’re going to carry on with the program, 
that you’re going to continue funding it. Hopefully that funding 
will be at the level that has been historical for 4-H. So I think 
that the people who sent me the cards . . . And I’d like to read 
out their names: Trina Thompson from Carnduff; Monica 
Whiting from Carnduff; Rebecca Simpson from Carnduff; 
Krystal Tully from Carnduff; Amanda Fowler from Carnduff; 
Laura Bayliss from Carnduff; Melissa Woloshyn from 
Storthoaks; Mona Sykes from Carnduff; Camilla Balogh from 
Corning; and David Balogh from Corning. 
 
And I hear some of the other people suggesting that they 
received a lot more. Well in our area, they knew who the 
minister was, and they felt they would send them directly to him 
rather than through their representative because I would bring it 
up in this manner anyways. But I will send these over to you, 
Mr. Minister, so that you can have a copy of those. 
 
Discussion carried on earlier this evening about the GRIP 
program, and there was some mention of the GRIP cases in 
Alberta and Manitoba. I wonder if your department has tracked 
the court cases in Manitoba and if you can relate to us what 
those conclusions were. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  First of all I thank you for sending over 
the cards from the 4-H people. I appreciate that because I’ve got 
many, many cards, and I’ve personally answered them, and I 
just let them know that there is a commitment to 4-H, so I’ll do 
the same with these . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What’s that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Probably. Yes, we got lots. I’ve 
got tonnes of them, and I agree that they’ve good cause. 
 
Anyway with regard to GRIP, Manitoba . . . I’m not exactly 
sure, we’re not exactly sure, what’s happened in Alberta. But in 
Manitoba they had one court case that we’re aware of 
concerning the lentil program when they changed it, and I 
believe that the government lost that case. 
 
In Alberta . . . we do have people who know this but not right 
here, so we can get an answer to that to give you an overview of 
what we know happened in Alberta if you like. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The court case 
in Manitoba, how would it compare to the events that occurred 
in Saskatchewan in relationship to the changes to the contracts 
and the GRIP program in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I don’t mean to be evasive but . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . no I will be . . . yes, because the 
Saskatchewan cases are still before the court. And I don’t know 
that I should be getting into judging how a Manitoba case might 
affect a Saskatchewan case. I think that, as all cases that come 
before courts set precedent for the next case, I think the judge 
will look . . . if there’s any similarities, I’m sure he will 
consider what happened in Manitoba. But I couldn’t talk about 
what the similarities might be because I would be sort of 
prejudging what the outcome might be in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think  



2542  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

there is very well likely a great number of similarities between 
the two cases where contracts were changed by the 
governments . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Broken. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Broken, yes, that’s what we’ve said 
since the day it happened  broken. And I think what the only 
difference between the two cases has been the fact that the 
farmers in Manitoba had their act together. They went to court 
immediately. They had the financial wherewithal to do so and 
challenged the government and won. 
 
The court cases in Saskatchewan, because the farmers were less 
affluent because of the prices of grain, did not have the 
wherewithal to force the court challenge through at a quick 
pace. One might even say it’s proceeding at a glacial pace. But I 
think those court challenges have an opportunity for success. 
 
If that is the case, Mr. Minister, and if the court challenges by 
the farmers are successful, what provisions does the department 
have in place if the judge, as happened in Manitoba, said that 
the original contracts were valid, and therefore any payments 
due by the farmers had to be paid; any pay-outs by the 
government were due and had to be paid out. In all likelihood 
that would mean a substantial pay-out by the government to 
farmers who were in GRIP when the contracts were broken. 
 
What contingency plans does the government have in place, 
does your department have in place, if that should occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just before I answer that question, I will 
send across, one for the third party, one for opposition and one 
for independent member . . . I’ve got three copies of the global 
questions for the opposition and the third party and the 
independent member. 
 
With regards to your question, first of all we don’t expect to 
lose the case. And as far as, you know, saying anything more, I 
think that the courts will decide. And until . . . I mean we’re not 
even into the main case yet and we feel that we have a very 
strong case, so I don’t want to start speculating on, you know, 
monies that we might have to spend or might not have to spend. 
So I think I’ll just leave that alone for now. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, whenever you enter 
into a court case both parties expect to win. But as in any 
contest, when you and I face off in an election, only one of us 
will end up as an MLA. So there is always a winner and a loser. 
 
When you’re in a court case there’s always the opportunity that 
you will lose. The other party would not enter into that court 
challenge if they felt that they were going to lose. Why, after 
all, spend all that time, effort, and monetary costs that would be 
involved in that, to proceed with a court case that is a foregone 
conclusion that you’re going to lose. Obviously the farmers 
don’t believe that is the case. 
 
Therefore there is some percentage of chance that you will lose 
the case. Now in your opinion that percentage may be very 
minuscule but that opportunity is still there. So hopefully you  

have some sort of contingency plan in mind, or are you 
operating on the Liberal philosophy from Ottawa that if we 
don’t talk about the possibility of Quebec separation it will 
never happen so we don’t ever have to plan for it. I think you 
have to be aware that those possibilities exist and that you have 
to have some form of contingency in mind when you enter into 
it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I understand what the hon. member is 
saying, but maybe you can answer one question for me. What 
will the judgement be? How do I know if . . . let’s say the 
government does lose. How do we guess what the judge might 
say? He might say, full compensation. He might say, partial 
compensation. He might say yes, you lost but no compensation 
because of a circumstance or whatever. So I mean we can 
guess, but until we know what the judgement is, it’s pretty hard 
to know the dollar amount or how we might get that money and 
what we do with it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, obviously you’re 
not going to divulge any information that you might have on 
this, on any potential contingency plans that you might have. I 
would simply suggest then that you do develop some form of 
plan so that when the event occurs that you’re prepared for it. 
 
I’d like to move on to another issue. I received a number of 
phone calls from organic farmers who have some difficulty 
marketing their crops. They find markets in other provinces. 
They find markets within this province. They find markets 
sometimes overseas or across the border. If they go through the 
Canadian Wheat Board they get the same price as a farmer who 
does not deal in organic crops. 
 
What kind of assistance, what kind of programing, is in place? 
What kind of support, either directly or indirectly, does your 
department provide for them? What kind of representations do 
you or your department make to the federal government to 
allow these farmers to be able to market their crops? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, that’s a problem that’s been 
ongoing for a number of years. I know when I first got into 
politics 10 years ago, there was some concern about . . . the 
same concern, although things have changed since then. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board has become much more flexible 
because the organic farmer, like basically any other farmer, 
even though he has to sell through the board, has a buy-back 
price at the . . . basis Minneapolis, on a daily spot basis, and 
then he can ship his grain to whatever destination. 
 
The problem, I think, that you have identified is that . . . is the 
fee charged for that. Correct me if I’m wrong. But I’ve talked to 
the Canadian Wheat Board about this and I know they are 
actively discussing, I believe they’re actively discussing, this 
problem with some of the organic growers. 
 
I don’t know what the answer is but I know they have made 
some changes. And because of the climate surrounding the 
board, I don’t know if they’re very open to suggestion right 
now as to how to satisfy their farmer customers. So I don’t 
know what the outcome will be, but I’m assured they’re talking. 



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2543 

(2215) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Some of our 
native brethren would also say that they have been talking with 
the federal government on treaty land entitlements, but it’s 
taken them a hundred years to get any movement. I’m hoping it 
won’t take quite that long for the organic farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you know what kind of cross-border shipments 
there would be in organic materials coming up from the U.S. 
into Canada and displacing the Canadian market, either be it in 
the raw cereals or in processed organic materials for sale within 
Canada? 
 
It’s been pointed out to me that, because of the fees being 
charged by the Canadian Wheat Board, that in some 
circumstances it’s less expensive for the organic retailers to buy 
U.S. products rather than dealing with the Canadian products. 
 
Do you have any idea how much cross-border shipments there 
would be coming up into Saskatchewan or into Canada that are 
displacing our own producers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We don’t have that number because I 
think we have to go to the federal government to find what the 
shipments are into Canada of organic product and to find the 
breakdown per province. And I will endeavour to have the 
department do that for you. 
 
Just on the point you made, if that is true . . . we’ll have a look 
into it, and if that is true, then I think the board has to probably 
make some changes because we want to give our producers an 
advantage here. Although I know one thing  there is a 
tremendous amount . . . part of the problem would be is that the 
processors aren’t here; they’re outside. And so all of our . . . I 
shouldn’t say all. The large majority of our organic product is 
shipped out to be processed somewhere else. And it would be 
nice to have a processor here so that we could process and fill 
the demand. 
 
As far as the point you make, I don’t know the answer to that 
question, on both questions, on the number of bushels that are 
coming in. And I don’t know the exact nature of the problem 
that you identified about the board making it easier for people 
to buy grain in the U.S. and process it here. But I will 
endeavour to get that answer to you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s not simply just 
grains. But if you use organic bread, it may be less expensive in 
Toronto or Montreal to purchase organic flour from the U.S. 
than it is to ship the grains, buy them, ship them to Ontario or 
Quebec and process them there because of the fees dealing 
through the Canadian Wheat Board — than it is simply to buy 
the flour from a U.S. producer. Because then you are not 
dealing . . . you’re not concerned about the Wheat Board import 
or export circumstances in eastern Canada because they do not 
operate under the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And this creates difficulty for our producers here. It’s the fact 
that the Canadian Wheat Board is not the Canadian Wheat 
Board; it’s simply a prairie wheat board, and there are other  

entities across the country that deal with the production of 
cereals or the cereals are not regulated in some of the other 
jurisdictions. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, this leads into another area  a question 
that has been quite prominent across the Prairies for the last 
year or so, and that’s the dual marketing system. A number of 
producers have indeed challenged the Canadian Wheat Board in 
an attempt to move the process along while the Canadian Wheat 
Board does seem to be prepared to facilitate some change. And 
that seems to be most reluctant to do, but is prepared, it looks 
like, to make some small changes. 
 
It’s only because some producers have been prepared to be push 
them, one would say, to the wall on some issues and indeed are 
facing court circumstances because of that. Although it’s 
interesting to note that some of those that have been charged 
and been brought before the court system, some of those 
charges have been stayed whereas some of the other producers 
have been found not guilty of the charges against them. 
 
I believe, Mr. Minister, that I . . . most of the producers in the 
province, most of the people in the province, are aware of what 
your stand is on this issue, aware that where your government 
stands on this issue, that you believe that there should be no 
dual-marketing system, that all grain should be marketed 
through the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And yet it seems that there are a large number of farmers who 
disagree with you on that position, who believe that they are the 
producer of the grain. They are the owner of the grain, and they 
should be allowed to market their grain in the manner they see 
fit, to take their chances to either make it or break it as the case 
may be with their own finances. 
 
Obviously if someone wishes to market outside of the Canadian 
Wheat Board, they would be marketing outside of any pooling 
system that the Canadian Wheat Board has. If the markets 
changed to an extent that the price they’ve received is less than 
what the Pool price is, they lose that money. Conversely if they 
market better than the Canadian Wheat Board does and pick up 
a premium market some place, then they would pocket that 
difference themselves to their own benefit. 
 
There are a large number of people across this province who 
believe that they should have that opportunity. It’s been 
suggested by a significant number of people that the people 
who are most in favour of this or all of the people that are in 
favour of a dual-marketing system live along the U.S. border. 
But I think when you take a look at those people that have been 
at the U.S. border participating in some of the protests, in some 
of the movement of grain across the border, it’s not simply 
people who live within 20, 30 miles of the border. 
 
It’s people who live across the Prairies, not just in 
Saskatchewan but also in Manitoba and Alberta, across the 
entire length and breadth of the Prairies, who are interested in 
having an opportunity to market the products for themselves. 
 
I believe that the farmers of Saskatchewan in particular and the  



2544  Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 1996 

Prairies in general should have an opportunity to have an 
expression as to whether or not they wish to have a 
dual-marketing system, whether they wish to have the 
opportunity to sell either to the Canadian Wheat Board or to 
some other entity. 
 
The farmers of Saskatchewan have never had that opportunity, 
to make the expression as to whether or not they wished to have 
a choice. They had that choice prior to the Second World War 
 I believe, 1942  where they could market either through 
the Canadian Wheat Board or through some other grain 
company, whomever they wanted to deal with. 
 
That was changed during the Second World War because grain 
prices were escalating and the Canadian government did not 
wish to pay those escalating prices. By forcing farmers to deal 
with the Canadian Wheat Board, they could control the prices at 
that time, claiming that it was an essential war material and 
therefore the prices were fixed. 
 
But when that happened, the farmers were not given that 
choice. While some farmers would like to have the Canadian 
Wheat Board gone totally, other farmers would simply like to 
see the Canadian Wheat Board change somewhat, and a 
significant number of farmers, I believe, Mr. Minister, are in the 
middle there some place, somewhere between wide open and no 
change. 
 
One of the things that a lot of farmers tell me about the 
Canadian Wheat Board that they have a great deal of concern 
about is the fact that they never get to see, at any point in time, 
the books of the Canadian Wheat Board. Have they done a good 
job in selling grain? Nobody gets to know because they don’t 
get to see. Nobody gets to see how much money has gone for 
administration. Nobody gets to see what the salary levels are. 
You see for the commissioners but not below that. People 
believe that they should have the opportunity to give an 
expression as to whether or not they would like to continue 
under a monopoly system of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
That option was given to the farmers in Alberta by their 
provincial government. Now I know that there are a number of 
people in this House, perhaps you yourself, Mr. Minister, I 
believe, have said that the question was slanted. Well whenever 
any question in a referendum is put forward, the side that 
opposes whatever change is being presented always feel the 
question has been slanted in opposition to them. 
 
You can ask the question, do you favour a dual-marketing 
system? I don’t believe that you would support that question, 
Mr. Minister, as simply that. I believe you would want to put in 
there, would you support a dual-marketing system if it meant 
the end of the Canadian Wheat Board. That’s the question you 
would like to have put forward. No one has yet proven, Mr. 
Minister, whether or not a dual-marketing system would mean 
the end of the Canadian Wheat Board. It would mean the end of 
the Canadian Wheat Board as we know it today. That’s 
certainly true. As a monopoly entity, the Canadian Wheat Board 
would end if a dual-marketing system was allowed. 
 
But prior to the Second World War, the Canadian Wheat Board  

existed in a larger marketing environment where they were not 
the only entity buying grain from Canadian farmers. Farmers 
would like to have that opportunity again. They have been 
asking us . . . and we have brought forward a Bill actually in 
this House, Mr. Minister, to allow the farmers to have a 
plebiscite, to have a vote on whether or not they would like to 
see a dual-marketing system opened up, whether or not they 
would like to have the opportunity to market through some 
other mechanism than the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
An Hon. Member:  We’re not going to agree with you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well the member from Rosetown says 
he’s not going to agree with us. Well that is his choice; that’s 
his opportunity. But should he deny every other producer in 
Saskatchewan that choice, that opportunity, simply because he 
doesn’t believe it? I believe that all producers in this province 
wish to have a choice. A number of them will say no, I don’t 
want a change. A number of other ones will say yes, I do. 
 
I know that some of the members opposite have said that the 
elections for the Wheat Board Advisory Committee was the 
plebiscite, and that’s the only plebiscite that is needed. Well 
when you look at the number of farmers who vote in that Wheat 
Board Advisory Committee, it’s something like 20 per cent, and 
that was a high, Mr. Minister. Normally it’s even less than that. 
 
Also the minister over there says that a number of people 
supporting the dual marketing system ran and lost. I will agree 
with you, Madam Minister, that they did indeed run and lost. 
But why did only 20 per cent of the producers vote? Because 
the advisory committee to the Canadian Wheat Board is totally 
impotent. It does nothing, it accomplishes nothing, it has no 
power. 
 
It has no ability to influence the direction that the Canadian 
Wheat Board is going. It is, as its name implies, simply an 
advisory committee. They can advise but the commissioners 
and the Canadian Wheat Board do not have to follow the advice 
given to them by the Wheat Board Advisory Committee. The 
Wheat Board has obviously been following that advice though, 
because the people that have been elected have been true 
supporters of the Canadian Wheat Board and believe that no 
other marketing system has any value, that no other marketing 
system should exist in Canada. 
 
But it was interesting to note, Mr. Minister, that while an 
opportunity was given for another marketing system to be in 
place  the continental barley marketing system, while it lasted 
for that very, very short period of time, approximately three 
weeks or more  that the farmers who participated in that 
system made significant economic gains and received a 
significantly better economic return for the sale of their 
commodity than those farmers who continued to market 
through the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And indeed when I talk to farmers today who have broken the 
law, as the federal minister believes it exists, as the current 
Minister of Agriculture here believes it exists, and taken their 
commodity across the border, they have realized a very much 
greater significant return on their product than those people  



June 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2545 

who have sold through the current system. 
 
The other farmers who are not breaking the law in that sense, 
but believe that they should have the opportunities that are 
available across the border, are those that are promoting the 
idea of bringing forward a vote on the dual-marketing system. 
 
(2230) 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what we’re calling on you to do is to allow 
the producers of Saskatchewan  those people with permit 
books that sell the commodities that the Canadian Wheat Board 
deals with, that being wheat, durum, and barley  to have a 
vote on a dual-marketing system. Obviously if it’s held within 
the province of Saskatchewan today you, Mr. Minister, would 
have the opportunity to set out the question. 
 
Now I’m sure that when you would propose the question that 
there would be some contention as to the wording of it, just like 
you feel the contention . . . you believe there is some contention 
to the question as it was presented in Alberta. So, Mr. Minister, 
this is your opportunity to put the question forward to the 
farmers, to the producers of Saskatchewan. 
 
You seem to be most reluctant to even do that. And I have to 
question why, Mr. Minister, when you are so sure, so sure that 
you would win that vote, that you would not take the 
opportunity to settle this question once and for all. Why would 
you not take the opportunity to allow the farmers to have that 
vote on your question? You could set the rules, you could set 
the question. But yet, Mr. Minister, for some reason you seem 
to be most reluctant to even consider that, to even consider the 
possibility that a vote by the producers should even be allowed. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Minister, that I believe the reason you 
are most reluctant to allow this vote to carry on is that you are 
afraid that you would lose. It’s not quite the sure thing that you 
seem to think the GRIP court case would be, that you don’t 
have to give any consideration to what might happen if you 
lose, because if you got to choose the time of the vote, if you 
got to choose the question, you would win. This time, Mr. 
Minister, you seem to be most reluctant to take that chance, to 
give the farmers that opportunity to express their voice. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I do believe we have passed the hour of 10:30 
now. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:35 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

EVENING SITTING 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 82  An Act respecting Health Facilities 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2517 
  Van Mulligen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2519 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2525 
 Bill No. 97  An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2527 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................2524 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Agriculture and Food  Vote 1 
  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................2528 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................2533 
  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................2540 
 
 


