













































March 14, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 277 

 March 14, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have 

petitions regarding the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look through the list of petitioners; I see they’re 

from all over southern Saskatchewan; Kelvington, Moose Jaw 

 in your own riding, Mr. Speaker. Several from the ridings of 

some of the constituencies of the members opposite, in Regina 

Albert South and Regina Elphinstone. I’m sure their 

constituents would appreciate seeing petitions from them also. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Esterhazy; they’re from Whitewood; they’re from 

Melville; from Grayson; they’re from Crooked Lake, 

Saskatchewan; they’re from Broadview; Cowessess; Grayson 

Lake; they’re from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

mainly from Regina and numerous communities in the South. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from North Battleford, but also include people from  

Regina; places like Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

petitions from areas of Saskatchewan regarding the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) rescind the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement and especially its 

mandatory union hiring hall formula; (2) prohibit the 

expansion of this Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement or other like agreements to other Saskatchewan 

Crown corporations or other government departments and 

construction projects; and (3) prohibit the expansion of this 

agreement or other like agreements to other 

government-funded construction projects with local health 

districts, school boards, municipal councils, or other joint 

venture partners with the Saskatchewan government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed primarily from people in the 

Lake Alma area. And I’d like to submit it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, and from Moose Jaw, from Montmartre, from all over 

southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding an important health institution in the province, the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Moose Jaw, 

Briercrest, Buffalo Pound, Chaplin, and Regina Beach, and 

some from Regina as well. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Mortlach, Central Butte, Regina, but predominantly from  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 278 

Moose Jaw. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on behalf of 

many concerned citizens from this great province of ours who 

have a grave concern about the closure of the Plains Health 

Centre. It reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names are from my home constituency of Melville, Moose 

Jaw, Saltcoats, Radville, Redvers, Kennedy, Broadview, 

Yorkton, and virtually throughout all of Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

present petitions today on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Manor, Carlyle, Estevan, 

Carievale, Gainsborough areas of my constituency, along with 

Star City, Saskatoon, Tisdale, areas in the north-east, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d like to present them today. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 

petitions from the community of Eatonia, and I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 

present petitions on behalf of people who are concerned about 

the condition of Highway No. 1, and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No 1; and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from federal infrastructure programs 

towards double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 

allocating these funds towards capital construction  

projections in the province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I present these on behalf of people from my constituency 

in the south-west corner of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

immediately repeal the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on 

day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Indian and Metis Affairs: 

(1) what percentage of the department’s past budgets have 

been spent on administration and staff; (2) how many grant 

allocations are being awarded to Indian organizations and 

what are the grant amounts; (3) how many grant 

allocations are being awarded to Metis organizations and 

what are the grant amounts; (4) of the grant amounts 

allocated, how many are awarded north of the 54th parallel 

to Indian organizations as well as south of the 54th 

parallel; (5) of the grant amounts allocated, how many are 

awarded north of the 54th parallel to Metis organizations 

as well as south of the 54th parallel? 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Monday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

Is a reduction in the provincial sales tax being considered; 

if so, when will it be implemented; will the proposed 

reduction be brought in the next budget; by how much will 

the PST be reduced; will a reduction be instituted equally 

throughout the province or will provisions be made for 

special competitive situations on border communities? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the Crown Investments Corporation: (1) the 

names of all corporation or corporations under CIC’s direct 

or indirect control on which Mr. Don Ching serves as a  



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

director; (2) the amounts of remuneration he receives as a 

result of these directorships; and (3) the dates on which the 

appointment or appointments were made. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

wish to introduce to you and through you to the members, a 

group of 11 adults that are seated in your gallery. These are 

students who are enrolled in the English as a second language 

program at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology) in the city of Regina. They’re accompanied 

here today by their teacher, Ron Mang. 

 

In what is I think the universal language of welcome, I would 

ask the members to join me in a hearty round of applause to 

recognize their presence here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature some councillors from the RM of 108, Bone Creek, 

in my own RM in the south-west corner. And I see my sisters 

up there as well. And I’d like everyone to welcome them here 

today. They’re in town for the SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) convention and trying to 

convince the government not to amalgamate. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I will remind members that it is out of order 

to engage in any form of debate when introducing guests and 

I’ll ask that everyone cooperate with us. So I’ll recognize the 

hon. member for Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this Assembly, 35 grade 12 students that are seated in our east 

gallery this afternoon. They’re students from Greenall School in 

Balgonie, Saskatchewan, and they’re accompanied by teachers 

Richard Boxall and Carol Mayes. It’s been my privilege to be 

able to speak to them and to have them ask questions of me 

during recent meetings at the school. And I’m looking forward 

to meeting with them in room 218 and to be able to visit and 

ask questions following a tour. 

 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming the group from 

Greenall School, Balgonie, Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and to the members of the Assembly, in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Manley McLachlan. Mr. McLachlan is the 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association and I’d like to welcome him here and ask members 

to join me. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It is my pleasure today to introduce a group of students from my 

riding — 19 grade 8 students from the Herchmer School who 

are in attendance in your gallery, if they just want to stand up 

and be recognized. They’re here today with their teacher, Aaron 

Anderson, and teacher’s associate, Wanda Warner. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize 

the councillors as well from the rural municipality of Bone 

Creek which the member from . . . yes, Wood River  I keep 

thinking Shaunavon. But I’d like to welcome them as well, as I 

pay taxes in that RM (rural municipality) as well as my friend 

from Shaunavon. So I would like to welcome them here as well 

today and wish them the best in their deliberations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to add to the member from Regina Wascana Plains 

my welcome to Richard Boxall, in particular, and the students 

from Balgonie — I consider Richard amongst my many friends 

— and also introduce to all members of the House, Jonathan 

Denis who is in the east gallery. Jonathan has joined me for the 

remainder of the session as my sessional assistant. He’s been 

very, very interested in government, in governing, and in 

politics from a very early age, and I hope that when he seeks 

wise counsel from each and every one of you, which I’ve 

encouraged him to do, that you will add to his good experience 

in this Assembly. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

beginning to think I was blending into the woodwork back here. 

If I could, I know there’s been a number of SARM people down 

who are at the SARM convention introduced, and they’ve all 

been wonderful people but I would like to introduce  and no 

intent at all in making others feel badly  six of the very, very 

best people. 

 

From the RM of Beaver River, we have Ken Schamber, a 

councillor  if he’d stand, please  and also right beside him 

is Deb Johnson, the administrator there. 

 

I’ll go down to the other end now  from the RM of Loon 

Lake is Alan Simpson; beside him is Ted Warner; the 

administrator from Loon Lake is Darren Elder; and also on a 

training session from Wilkie, I believe, is Trent Elder, joining 

us here today. 

 

So if everyone would join with me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would like to 

join with our colleagues in welcoming Manley McLachlan, who 

is up in the top row in the Speaker’s gallery. We’re happy to 

have him here today and we hope that his visit will be 

productive in the legislature and those areas of concern that he 

has. 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 280 

While I’m standing, I too would like to add my welcome to my 

good friends and neighbours from south-west Saskatchewan. I 

think all of the other members have piqued our interest in 

exactly who these folks are, so I think I’ll ask them to stand up 

as I quote some of their names off so that we’ll know exactly 

which ones they are. And they are, of course, the council 

members and their wives from the RM of Bone Creek; as I said, 

my friends and neighbours from just across the line from where 

I live. 

 

And we have Brian Kiss and his wife Gwenn. If you’ll just 

stand up, the folks will know who you are, Brian. There they 

are. And we have also David Krause  I don’t know if they’re 

sitting in order up there. David is one of the councillors over 

there. We have Arlene and Mel Larson; we have Morris 

Bredahl; and we also have Ron Fuller. 

 

Welcome to the Assembly, folks, and we hope that your 

deliberations at the SARM convention will be productive. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to introduce 

a politician at a different level. I am referring to our former 

colleague, the member from Kelvington-Wadena from 1991 to 

’95, Mr. Ken Kluz. He’s seated behind the bar today, Mr. 

Speaker. I welcome him here and I hope he’s enjoying it as 

much today as he did when he sat in this House and acquitted 

himself very honourably. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and to members opposite, two young 

people seated in the gallery opposite, two young people from 

the Canora-Pelly constituency  Kimberly Bansley and Ray 

Berezitzsy. Kimberly is a student here at the U of R (University 

of Regina) and is taking advantage of the documents in the 

library and is doing some research here. Welcome to you both. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in panning 

the gallery I noticed a good friend just walked in; I think she’s 

come here with her daughter. A very close friend of mine I met 

in Saskatoon, Darwin McKenzie, is at SARM. Welcome Cathy 

McKenzie to the Assembly; she’s actually a very good pianist, a 

good musician. And we trust they’ll enjoy their time here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Students Against Drinking and Driving 10th Anniversary 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the 

province is working on tougher laws on drinking and driving in 

Saskatchewan, there are hundreds of students also doing their 

part in educating the public on this important issue. It is the 

10th anniversary of the organization, Students Against Drinking  

and Driving, known as SADD. 

 

Over 180 Saskatchewan schools have registered SADD 

chapters, and the Tisdale Unit Composite School has been a 

member for eight years. The school’s chapter has been very 

active in trying to educate the public about drinking and 

driving. They have hosted speakers on the subject and held 

many presentations as well as volunteering the designated 

driver program at community functions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a special year for Saskatchewan chapters 

who are going to attend the national SADD conference in 

Saskatoon, March 21 to 23. The students who attend this 

conference will be learning valuable skills. I applaud the efforts 

of the Tisdale Unit Composite School, along with other 

chapters in Saskatchewan, for promoting safe and responsible 

driving. While the province is working to do its part to address 

this problem, we also welcome and congratulate the students 

involved in Students Against Drinking and Driving for their 

efforts over the past 10 years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tragic Shooting in Scotland 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

express my condolences to the grieving families in Dunblane, 

Scotland. Yesterday 16 children in a kindergarten class there 

were the fatal targets in a shooting spree. A dozen more 

children are recovering from their injuries. 

 

As a mother and a grandmother, I cannot even begin to 

comprehend the horror they are going through. It is such a 

tremendous tragedy, but especially when the most vulnerable 

and helpless members of our society become the targets of 

senseless violence. The unimaginable sorrow these Scottish 

families are going through should make us all appreciate every 

moment we do get to share with our loved ones. 

 

I ask all the members of this Assembly to join me in expressing 

our condolences to the community of Dunblane, Scotland. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, on the same topic, violence of 

any kind is shocking. Violence against children is unthinkable. 

Violence, by its very definition, has no logic, no sense, and no 

justification. 

 

And yet as it happens  happens as it did yesterday in 

Scotland, a land which is better known for its food, its dress, its 

dance, its drink, its history, its poetry, its contribution to Canada 

 it can happen anywhere. 

 

What the senseless act did was destroyed 16 children and it tells 

us sadly nothing except that we are an imperfect species. All we 

can do, Mr. Speaker, is join the world in expressing our shock, 

our sympathy to those family members in Dunblane, and hope 

with them that this kind of insanity will not happen again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

Passing of Dr. Geoffrey Buck 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

past weekend I was saddened to learn of the passing of a 

prominent teacher of youngsters and a teacher of many 

Saskatchewan teachers. Dr. Geoffrey Buck passed on at the age 

of 94. 

 

Not only was Dr. Buck a valued member of Saskatchewan’s 

education community, but he was a founding member of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. On the beautiful fall day of 

October 31, 1931 a group of teachers met in my home town of 

Invermay to form the Rural Teachers’ Alliance. A young man 

from Melville, Geoffrey Buck, joined the executive and became 

a firm supporter of that organization. Due to the efforts of 

many, including Dr. Buck, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation was founded in 1933. 

 

A man of many skills, Dr. Buck was also a member of the 

Natural History Society. 

 

I would like to express my condolences to friends and family 

members of Dr. Geoffrey Buck, and I would ask the House to 

do the same. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Banner Year for Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I suppose it is fair to 

say that MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) spend a 

lot of time looking for positive indicators so that we can 

announce them as signs that things are going well. It’s one of 

the duties of politicians to emphasize optimism, unlike the 

media, who seem to deal in doom and gloom. 

 

So it was with a great deal of interest and appreciation that I 

read a recent article in that oracle of social democratic 

philosophy, the Star-Phoenix. The article said, with no 

prompting from me or anyone else in government, that 

Saskatoon is going to have a “banner year.” If Conrad Black 

says it’s so, then it must be so. 

 

Specifically, the article says that during this year, as Saskatoon 

celebrates its 90th birthday, it will pass the 200,000 mark in 

population. The children are coming home and bringing other 

provinces’ children with them. And to employ these people, our 

economy is booming — booming, Mr. Speaker, with high 

paying, high tech jobs at Innovation Place and elsewhere. 

 

The biotechnology industry is growing exponentially. Building 

permits are up by 20 per cent, industrial building by 41 per cent, 

and housing starts are the best in Saskatchewan. There are many 

new ventures among the 5,319 businesses in the city of bridges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have always been a booster for Saskatoon. I 

thank the Star-Phoenix and the Saskatoon Economic 

Development Authority for making my job easier. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Saskatchewan’s Maintenance Enforcement Program 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, this month marks the 10th 

anniversary of Saskatchewan’s maintenance enforcement 

program. This program has worked to benefit Saskatchewan 

people. For the past 10 years, over 19,000 applications for 

enforcement have been received. More than $122 million has 

been collected on behalf of Saskatchewan families. And the 

default rate for maintenance payments has dropped from 85 per 

cent to 25 per cent. While this success should be noted, there 

are worthwhile improvements on the way that will make this 

program even more efficient. 

 

A new, automated voice response phone system will allow 

clients to receive up-to-date information on their payments and 

the program 24 hours a day. 

 

And while the majority of parents who have the financial 

capacity to pay are paying as ordered or agreed, something 

needs to be done about those who are still ignoring their 

responsibilities. This program has a successful track record. 

New measures are needed to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan continue to get the service that will benefit 

children and families. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Regina Lions Junior Band 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday I had 

the great pleasure of listening to the music of the Regina Lions 

Band as they began the celebration of their 50th anniversary. 

 

It was 50 years ago that Mrs. Marion Mossing approached the 

Regina Lions Club for sponsorship of a community band that 

she had started. A half century has passed and what started out 

as a dream has become a reality. Over that time, many young 

students have received valuable education and experience 

through the field of music. 

 

The Regina Lions Band organization is well known in North 

America and has acted as excellent ambassadors for the city of 

Regina and for Saskatchewan. Besides holding the special 

concert last Saturday, many more events are planned to mark 

the 50th anniversary. A reunion is going to be held in July. 

 

The Lions Band also entertains the public in the Buffalo Days 

parade each year in Regina and this year, because of the 

reunion, they hope to have a 500-piece marching band in the 

parade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all of the members of 

the Regina Lions Band organization who have contributed so 

much to the community and the province. 

 

Thanks should also go to SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) and SaskPower for their support and to Bob Mossing 

and Luther Appel for their hard work and dedication. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 282 

Deputy Speaker’s 50th Birthday 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure if I’m 

in order or not. Perhaps this statement would be more 

appropriate under condolence motions. Nonetheless, I’ll press 

on. 

 

Last night a few people in the Deputy Speaker’s constituency 

had a quiet little party for him because Saturday will be his 50th 

birthday. I think that we would be remiss in this house if we left 

this significant occasion without comment. I think, as well, now 

that he is approaching 50, it is best to comment before rather 

than after  just to be on the safe side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all have birthdays and they generally don’t 

need much public acknowledgement, but halfway to the century 

mark is significant enough to mention. I want to first say that 

when I referred to my old seat mate in my throne speech debate, 

I actually meant former seat mate. I meant no offence to my 

elder, nor will I listen to any of my colleagues when they 

suggest that we put rockers on the Speaker’s chair for when 

he’s in it. Comments like that are simply insensitive, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Even more insensitive is the crack by the member from Watrous 

who said that if the Deputy Speaker is still doing today what he 

did when he was 20, he sure wasn’t doing very much when he 

was 20. I think the member should withdraw that remark while 

there is still time. 

 

And while also there is still time, I know all members will join 

with me in wishing the Deputy Speaker at least another 50 

more. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Health Care 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today’s edition of the Leader-Post points to more bed closures, 

staff lay-offs in our health care system, and I’d like to table this 

document now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This may not be of great concern to this government, but it is to 

the more than 300 people who recently attended a town hall 

meeting in Yorkton to say, enough is enough. 

 

The need for further downsizing is based once again on dollars, 

not need. Mr. Speaker, the East Central Health District is 

battling a monthly deficit of $300,000 because the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government refuses to defend rural health 

care and fund it accordingly. 

 

Will the Minister of Health stand in this House today and give 

his assurance to the people that rely on the services provided by 

the Yorkton Regional Hospital and the Foam Lake Health 

Centre that he, as provincial Health minister, will guarantee that 

the almighty dollar will not override the health care needs of 

Saskatchewan residents? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that this 

member asks this question about health care funding, because 

there was a motion in this House yesterday to call into question 

the fact that the federal government is cutting health care 

spending in our country by 35 per cent up to 1998. 

 

And if that member was concerned at all about health care, 

health care spending, and the East Central Health District, that 

member would be joining with the members over here in saying 

to the federal government that medicare needs to be a priority of 

Canada and that we want to keep it that way. But that member 

did not support that motion, Mr. Speaker, and I say if that 

member had any sincerity at all, he wouldn’t be an apologist for 

the federal Liberals that are actually gutting the health care 

system in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If in fact the 

federal government is to blame for everything, why don’t you 

resign your seat and do away with that portfolio today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a recent edition of Yorkton This Week quotes Dr. 

Jim Millar, who made the following statement to the East 

Central District Board about the growing deficit, and I quote: 

 

We’re averaging . . . $300,000 a month. If we continue, 

our deficit by the end of the year will be . . . $3.6 million. 

 

Board member Ben Weber is quoted as saying: 

 

Three-hundred thousand a month! That’s pretty scary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the health care system that this government has 

produced is pretty scary. Will the minister tell this House now 

how he intends to address the deficit situation facing health 

districts without cutting services or eliminating more front-line 

health care workers, and I’d like to table it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’ll tell the member, Mr. Speaker, what 

we’re not going to do. We’re not going to apply 73 per cent of 

any reductions we do to education and social services as the 

Liberals are doing. 

 

Since 1991, Mr. Speaker, this government has not cut health 

care spending. We have increased health care spending in the 

province of Saskatchewan, with no thanks to that member over 

there, Mr. Speaker. That member can get up and he can 

complain all he wants about health care spending and he can 

say we should spend more — when we are spending more — 

Mr. Speaker, but that member is an apologist for the Liberals in 

Ottawa who are cutting health care spending by 35 per cent to 

1998, Mr. Speaker. And that member has the audacity to stand 

up in this House and lecture us about our health care spending. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish the 

minister wouldn’t tell us what he’s not going to do and get on 

and tell us what he is going to do. Mr. Speaker, the February 18 

edition of the Swift Current Sun contains an article  and I’ll 

table that one now  which serves as another glaring example 

of what is happening throughout Saskatchewan. This district 

also faces a huge deficit and fails to receive proper funding for 

a regional hospital. 

 

This article quotes Swift Current District Health Board’s CEO 

(chief executive officer) Dan Miller, as stating: 

 

Although Swift Current Regional Hospital serves a wide 

area in the Southwest, it appears from the province’s 

perspective to be a regional hospital in name only (in name 

only). 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lack of funds means a loss of nurses and beds, 

and as a result a lack of proper health services to the people. 

Will the minister table today documents that will show which of 

our health districts are running deficits so the people of 

Saskatchewan can know what to expect from that government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’ll say one thing, Mr. Speaker. When 

it comes to talking about deficits, there’s no deficit of gall when 

it comes to that member. Because that member has the gall to 

stand up in this House and talk to us about health care spending 

when the party with which he is associated with is cutting 

health care spending by 35 per cent up until 1998. And I see, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Canadian health care association says in a 

recent communiqué, the federal government appears to be 

imposing even further feelings of insecurity on Canadians. 

 

Now that member wants to talk about why people feel insecure 

about the health care system. It isn’t because of what we’re 

doing, Mr. Speaker, because we have increased spending on 

health care in this province. It’s because of what that member’s 

party is doing, Mr. Speaker. That’s why there are feelings of 

insecurity. 

 

I have a letter here from the Canadian cooperative association, 

and they make the same point to the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker, and so do millions of other Canadians right across the 

country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

government has created fear and anxiety throughout the 

province because they refuse to fund a safe and reliable health 

care system. 

 

This government has tightened the purse strings on health 

districts to the extent that many are forced to make cuts  

forced to make cuts, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, each and 

every time they are forced to do so, the people who depend on 

our health care system are left with a far lower quality of health 

care than they deserve or expect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government cannot continue chipping away 

the health care system that is already a mere shadow of what it 

used to be. Will the minister stand in the House today and make 

a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan that the days of 

reducing the level of health care in this province are over? Just 

make the commitment. Stop the politics for a few minutes there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 

member’s huffing and puffing today has more to do with the 

member’s desire to lead a political party  any political party 

 than it has to do with concern about the health care system. 

 

And I want to say this to the member, Mr. Speaker, that in the 

last provincial election he and his party ran around this province 

saying that we should cut spending. Now they were talking 

about a 5 per cent or a 10 per cent cut to spending. The reality is 

60 per cent of the spending in the province is on health care and 

education. And they wanted to cut it in the election. They say 

one thing in the election, a different thing today, and they 

certainly say something different than their Liberal counterparts 

are doing in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, municipal leaders from across 

the province remain sceptical about this government’s claims 

that there is not a top-down plan that will force them to 

amalgamate. An article in today’s edition of the Regina 

Leader-Post quotes the Premier as stating the municipal 

funding levels in the upcoming budget will, and I quote, “have 

some impact” on the way local politicians approach the issue. 

 

Is the Premier indicating that his government will simply 

tighten the purse-strings of local government so tight they are 

left with no option except amalgamation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the position of the 

government remains the same, and that is that we are trying to 

prepare the province for the 21st century, involving as part of 

this preparation, making sure that the infrastructure for rural 

Saskatchewan is as strong and as good as it possibly can be, as 

we can afford it. 

 

We are seeking a partnership arrangement and a partnership 

agreement, if at all possible, with all of the partners in local 

governments, as we are in economic development, as we are in 

health care, and the various other areas of initiatives. And we 

intend to pursue that. We intend to continue that policy. We 

intend to continue saying to our fellow partners in governments, 

join us in this venture. I’ve given up on the opposition party 

coming along to the 21st century, but I have not with respect to 

the local governments of this province, who have served us 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 284 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, health care serves as a perfect 

example of how this government will squeeze the purse-strings 

to achieve the end result they’re looking for. By controlling the 

spending of district boards, this government has closed 

hospitals, eliminated services and programs; all of which has 

resulted in chaos in our health care system. Municipal leaders 

need to know if this government is now directing them down 

the same path. 

 

Will the Premier indicate in this House today what level of 

funding cuts can municipal leaders expect in the upcoming 

budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the budget will be tabled 

and presented to the legislature on or about March 28. I think 

the date actually is March 28. I think obviously in tradition of 

the legislature and the tradition of our parliamentary system 

must be honoured. On that, the funding arrangements for 

municipalities and for all of the activities of government will be 

announced. 

 

I would say, however, that the budget making this year has been 

made more difficult, not only by the challenge that we face for 

the province in looking to the future and building for the future, 

but it’s been made all the more difficult by the actions of the 

federal Liberal Party, of which this member is also a part 

thereof, which federal Liberal government has dramatically cut 

back on transfer payments and dramatically cut back on 

equalization payments to the province of Saskatchewan, 

penalizing us. 

 

And I’m not even taking into account, Mr. Speaker, the Crow 

benefit being destroyed, the offload with respect to aboriginal 

people and off reserves and the like. All of this has been made 

all the more difficult by the federal Liberal Party, a member of 

which is asking this question. 

 

So I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that this will all be 

announced in due course and the people in Saskatchewan will 

be partners with us in building for the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the minister responsible for CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan). Mr. Minister, when your 

government first introduced your union preference Crown 

tendering policy, you said it would be reviewed after a year and 

any necessary adjustments would be made at that time. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, it’s now been over a year since that policy 

was introduced. We are heading into another construction 

season and the contractors want to know what you plan to do to 

fix this policy which is opposed by the vast majority of 

construction contractors in the province. 

 

Mr. Minister, has your review now been completed? And when  

will you be announcing the results of your review? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

minister of CIC, I appreciate the opportunity to answer the 

question. The member is right. There has been an internal 

review going on over the past winter, as you indicate. I’d like 

the member to know that the review has indicated that we will 

continue to meet with our partners. Obviously, there’s two 

different points of view on a number of issues. We hope in the 

next little while to continue to work with the partners to come 

to some very reasonable conclusion. I’m sure the member 

opposite is interested in helping in this process, as he usually is, 

and we look forward to his advice on the issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

High-risk Offender Identification 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

question to the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, earlier this 

week our caucus brought forward a proposal to adopt 

Manitoba’s notification process when dangerous sex offenders 

are being released. In today’s newspaper, we hear that 

Winnipeg police have notified Saskatoon police that a man 

from Manitoba, who is a high risk to re-offend, who refused 

treatment, has moved to Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan police are frustrated because there 

is little they can do to protect people from dangerous sex 

offenders because your government has not made the necessary 

changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: we do not want Saskatchewan 

turning into a safe haven for sex offenders. You stated that you 

are currently reviewing the situation. How long do 

Saskatchewan people have to wait for these changes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for that 

question. As I stated before, we are watching this situation very 

carefully. We are very concerned about children and families in 

Saskatchewan and we have in fact a committee that has been 

working on this that includes officials from our department, 

from the local police. 

 

I personally have reviewed the Manitoba protocol and there are 

very many positive things in that particular document and their 

report. We are moving with all of the appropriate people to 

provide a Saskatchewan answer to this and we will be coming 

forward with this I think by . . . within the next three or four 

months. 

 

McDowell Report 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 

afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, your consumer 

protection legislation calls for a 10-day cooling-off period. 

During that time a consumer can change their mind about a 

product or service they bought if it turns out to be something 

other than what they expected. Mr. Premier, after the fit you 

threw yesterday, I think you need a cooling-off period, but also 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan need a cooling-off period. 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

Taxpayers have been sold a bill of goods about the McDowell 

report. It was supposed to be a pay decrease. Because of your 

government’s delays it’s now a pay increase. Taxpayers deserve 

a second look at this, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you allow for that cooling-off period, will you 

allow for the Provincial Auditor or even Stirling McDowell to 

look at this again, determine what amount is an unintended 

overpayment, and will you commit your MLAs to give the 

money back? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a member 

of the Board of Internal Economy perhaps I can shed some light 

on this discussion. Now I understand the member’s desperate 

drive for credibility given the state of his five-member party 

there. But on the other hand I’m not sure that the way to build 

credibility is to admit that you’ve gone into a situation where 

you voted without understanding what you were voting for and 

then declined to acknowledge your vote after that. 

 

McDowell, who is very well recognized, indicated clearly that 

the full implementation of McDowell is a 2 per cent cut in pay. 

Now that results in, depending on the length of the government 

prior to the next election, at least a 6 to $8,000 decrease for 

every single member in the House. So I suggest you quit 

playing games and earn your credibility the honest way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the member . . . 

what the minister is actually saying is that they knew fully well 

what the delay in the implementation would mean. They knew 

that if they delayed the implementation of the McDowell report, 

it would result in an overpayment, it would result in more 

money going to MLAs. 

 

Mr. Premier, farmers participated in a program just like that that 

resulted in an overpayment. Your government said to them it 

would be unfair for farmers, other farmers, unfair to other 

farmers not to ask them to repay that overpayment. This is the 

same thing, Mr. Premier. The delay in the implementation of 

the McDowell report has resulted in an overpayment. This is 

unfair to Saskatchewan taxpayers and all MLAs should be 

required to pay it back. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government has reversed decisions on a 

regular basis  GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

overpayments, VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues  and 

you say that that’s good government. Why is it then impossible 

to reverse this MLA overpayment and . . . because it is so unfair 

to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well I certainly wouldn’t want to deny 

the member opposite his ability to act on his conscience. I’m 

going to table, Mr. Speaker, some cheque blanks and you can 

fill it out for the amount that you feel you’ve been overpaid. 

And I’ll just give those to the Clerk of the legislature right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I trust, Mr. Speaker, that the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order, order. I’ll ask the members of 

the Assembly to . . . Order. I’ll ask the members of the 

Assembly to come to order and allow the minister to provide 

her response. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  I’ll repeat again to the member 

opposite: if you have difficulty understanding your math, I 

suggest you review your figures which you were provided with, 

which you voted on, and you can fill out your cheques for the 

amount you feel you were overpaid. 

 

And I will just emphasize that over the term of government the 

total amount saved on MLAs’ salaries will be in the range of 

350 to 400,000, so quit misleading people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Repayment of Government Funds 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

heard in the last couple of days, and even leading up to now, 

about shortages of money and people that have to pay money 

back, even some suggestions that the hard-working MLAs that 

serve this House and the people of Saskatchewan may, in fact, 

may have to pay some of the monies back. And if that’s 

necessary, so be it. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Justice 

today. Since the election, we’ve heard one cabinet minister after 

another tell Saskatchewan residents that the sky is falling. It’s 

clear that every dollar counts and there’s no question about it. 

 

My question regards $125,000 that the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan admitted it to take illegally 

from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Will the minister confirm 

whether or not that money has now been fully repaid by the 

Conservative Party, and if so, what rate was used to calculate 

the interest the Conservative Party paid on the amount? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would think you’d have to ask the 

legislature, the Clerk of the legislature. I don’t know and I don’t 

have that information. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, once again I hate to refer back to 

the financial stress, and it’s clear to the people of Saskatchewan 

that the government must make sure that it does its best to 

recover every dollar stolen by former Tory MLAs, especially 

when the government says it doesn’t have enough money to 

keep its promises. 

 

My question again to the Justice minister is whether or not the 

government is considering civil lawsuits to try to recover all or 

a portion of the $1 million that was defrauded by former 

Progressive Conservative MLAs and cabinet ministers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I fully agree with the hon. 

member, and I really appreciate that we’ve finally found a point  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 286 

on which the Liberals and the people on this side can work 

together. Thank you. 

 

Sale of Cameco Shares 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister in charge of CIC announced today the sale of nine and 

a half million Cameco shares for a total return of $717 million. 

 

Yesterday at a Regina Chamber of Commerce breakfast, the 

Finance minister had to assure business people in attendance 

that all revenues from the debt-reduction tax will be used to pay 

down the debt. 

 

Will the Minister of Finance make this same commitment where 

the revenue from this sale is concerned? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to answer the 

question on behalf of the government and I want to answer it in 

this way. The member opposite asks assurance of us. Already 

what we have said, to reassure the House again, that the 

proceeds of this sale will be applied to debt. I hereby give this 

assurance to the House one more time, and I answer on behalf 

of the government to doing that. 

 

But I think his question really is misdirected. I think what he 

and I should do is join hands and ask of his leader what the 

Liberal Party thinks about the proceeds. Because I notice that 

four days after you issued a press release urging that we apply 

all the proceeds of Cameco to long-term debt, four days later in 

the Leader-Post, your leader says that he would apply this to a 2 

per cent reduction in the sales tax. 

 

So which is it, Mr. Member? Are you with us or are you with 

the Leader of the Liberal Party? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Regardless what the 

Premier thinks in this regard, anything would be of benefit to 

get in terms of tax relief. The word of this government is simply 

not good enough. This is the point, Mr. Speaker — the word of 

the government simply isn’t good enough. 

 

They’ve made a habit of cancelling agreements and breaking 

promises with the people of Saskatchewan. The current GRIP 

controversy and promise to return 10 per cent of VLT revenues 

back into our communities serve as a perfect example. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a private members’ Bill introduced yesterday by 

the official opposition would guarantee the people of this 

province that all net proceeds from sales such as the one we’re 

discussing today are directed to the province’s long-term debt. 

 

Will the Minister of Finance or the Premier and this government 

support this Bill which will provide the Saskatchewan residents 

with the added security they need and deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I regret to inform the 

hon. member that he’s at least a dollar short and at least a day 

late, because this Legislative Assembly has already passed 

balanced budget legislation a year ago. And we are obligated by 

law to apply the proceeds to debt already. So I am glad to see 

that he is onside. 

 

But when he says that we have broken our word and he’s got to 

keep an eye on us, no, don’t worry about us. You and I are in 

agreement. We have to keep an eye on your Liberal leader who 

wants to spend the money. And we have to keep an eye on  

you and I have to keep an eye on — your federal Liberal 

Finance minister who urged us to sell and also to spend on 

day-to-day operations. 

 

I think that something is not quite right here between you and 

your Liberal leader and between you and the federal Liberal 

counterparts, and everything is right between you and I. So why 

don’t you come on and join on this side’s position with respect 

to liquidation of the debt, as we have said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 19  An Act to revoke the 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading 

of a Bill to revoke the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the 

Management of Forest Resources 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to move first reading of a Bill respecting the Management of 

Forest Resources be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 21  An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 

1995 and to enact a related amendment 

/Loi modifiant la Loi d’interprétation de 

1995 et édictant une modification corrélative 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 and to enact a related 

amendment be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and 

Safety Act, 1985 and to make Related Amendments to 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I move a Bill to amend 

The Radiation Health and Safety Act, 1985 and to make Related 

Amendments to The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 

be now introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 23  An Act to amend The Archives Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Archives Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of 

Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

the Prescription of Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 25  An Act to amend 

The Legal Profession Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990 be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 26  An Act to amend the Statute Law 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend the Statute Law be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill No. 27  An Act respecting Architects 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill 

respecting Architects be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  If I could have the assistance of a 

page for tabling the answers to question no. 6. Just open, 

accessible, honest government. You ask; we answer. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Once again, Mr. Speaker, in keeping 

with an open, accessible government, we’re tabling the answer. 

You ask; we answer. That’s the system. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer is tabled. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

hon. members of the House. As you will know, sir, it’s the 

tradition of this Assembly that we take time out fairly early at 

the beginning of each session to pay tribute to former members 

who have passed away. Today we shall be remembering six 

such members, all of whom sacrificed their time and energy to 

the service of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of sadness that I rise today to 

note the passing of a former member of this Assembly, Mr. 

Percy Alvin Brown. Mr. Brown died in Victoria on March 2, 

1994. He leaves his wife, Ola, and his daughter, Diane, as well 

as five grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Brown’s only son, Kent, passed away unfortunately just a 

few days ago as well. I sincerely wish to pass along my personal 

condolences and those of the Assembly to Mrs. Brown. 

 

Percy was born at Lebret on July 12, 1912, and received his 

education in Melville. In his youth he proved his prowess in the 

boxing ring, Mr. Speaker, and held the welterweight title for all 

of western Canada. 

 

In the late 1930s he married Ola Atkey, and they were happily 

married for 57 years. He was elected to Melville town council 

in 1951 and returned by acclamation in 1952. That no one 

chose to contest his election is proof of his huge local 

popularity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be able to stand in the House today 

to commemorate the memory of Mr. Brown. Men or people of 

his calibre are seldom found anywhere, and certainly this is a 

characteristic which we seek in people who pursue and follow 

the interest and devotion to public life. 

 

Those who knew Percy remember him as an honest, gentle, and 

funny man whose reputation as a tiger in the boxing ring was 

belied by his rather humble nature. Boxing was a lifelong 

passion shared by both Percy and, as some members may know, 

former premier of this province, the Hon. Tommy Douglas. In 

fact Tommy once visited the Laird Gymnasium here in Regina 

where Percy was involved with the young boxers of the time. 

Afterwards, one of the youngsters proudly said, Tommy showed 

me how to fight. And believe me, at least in one way, we know 

that Tommy was a fighter. 

 

Percy was a renowned storyteller who often spoke of his days  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 288 

as boxer and gandy-dancer, which as some of the members of 

the Assembly may be aware of, is a railroad section hand who 

pounded gravel between the railway ties. This occupation 

developed his back and arm muscles which aided him of course 

in the boxing ring. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Percy Brown was an accomplished raconteur. He 

was a hero to every young boxer  certainly every young boxer 

in Melville  and he was a champion in every sense of the 

word. The people who dealt with him as provincial secretary of 

the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) knew him 

for his patience and his dedication. He was soft spoken and 

seldom raised his voice. Both political friends and opponents 

knew him as a friend, and none forgot his tenacity and 

endurance in the ring or out of the ring. 

 

At the time that he was sitting, there were two other CCF 

members with the surname Brown. And Percy, true to his 

humorous nature, often referred to the trio as the Brown boys. 

Of these three, Percy, who cut a rather dashing figure of a man, 

often said: I’m not the most patient, I’m not the best looking, 

but I am one of the Brown boys. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of Percy’s day were forward thinking 

and hard working and certainly very dedicated, and certainly 

prepared to pursue goals in the face of all kinds of obstacles and 

pressures. It was they who laid the groundwork for the social 

programs pioneered in this province and later copied around the 

country and some parts of the world. It is because of men like 

Percy Brown that, by United Nations standards, Saskatchewan 

today is the best place in the world in which to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our condolences go out to Mrs. Brown and her 

family, especially upon hearing the news that Kent has recently 

passed away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would therefore like to move, seconded by the 

Leader of the Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Percy Alvin Brown, who died in Victoria on March 2, 

1994, was a member of the Legislative Assembly 

representing the constituency of Melville from 1952 until 

1956. Mr. Brown was born at Lebret on July 19, 1912 and 

received his education in Melville. In his youth, he 

excelled at boxing, having held the welterweight title for 

western Canada. He married Ola Atkey in the late 1930s, a 

marriage that was to last 57 years. 

 

In his private life, Mr. Brown was a business person. He 

operated the photo studio in Melville with his brother in 

the late 1940s. In 1952, he was elected to serve as member 

of this Legislative Assembly for Melville. He ran again in 

the 1956 general election but was not re-elected. After 

leaving provincial politics, Mr. Brown moved with his  

wife to Pullman, Washington where he pursued his 

business interests. They returned to Canada in 1974, 

choosing Victoria as the site of their retirement. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too, on behalf of the 

official opposition, would like to express our sincere sympathy 

and condolences to the member Mr. Brown. 

 

Leaders of our communities that have preceded us have set the 

stage and the challenges that face us now today. And as the 

Premier has said, Mr. Speaker, those are the people that have 

prepared a life and been the pioneers of the type of environment 

that we can enjoy in this great province of ours today. 

 

And I’m proud to be able to speak on behalf of the official 

opposition for this former member of the Melville constituency. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I again rise to pay tribute this time to the passing of another 

former distinguished member of this Assembly, the late Mr. 

Alexander Cameron of Regina. 

 

Mr. Cameron was born at Avonhurst on June 30, 1907. He 

leaves to mourn his daughters, Marie and Roselaine, and sons, 

Stuart and Grant, as well as many grandchildren. Mr. Cameron 

was predeceased by his wife, Miriam, in 1989. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Alex Cameron was educated at Campion College, 

which was then affiliated with the University of Ottawa, and 

after completing his studies there, he attended Normal School at 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

The late Alex Cameron taught in several communities in 

south-west Saskatchewan and was an ongoing organizing 

member of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. After 

serving for many years as the principal of the high school in the 

village of Richmound, in 1941 Alex Cameron ended his 

teaching career and began a new career as an automobile and 

implement dealer. 

 

He began his time in public service by first serving as the mayor 

of Richmound for many years. He was the founding manager of 

the district credit union and served as an active proponent of the 

Swift Current health region. He was also active in community 

service and was a fourth degree Knight of Columbus. 

 

Alex Cameron was first elected to this Assembly in 1948 and 

he had a proud and a very distinguished career as a politician 

and public servant. He proudly held the post of MLA for the 

constituency of Maple Creek from 1948 to 1971 when he was 

defeated. 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I entered the legislature in 1967 

for the first time, and at that time it was my pleasure to serve in 

this House as a rookie member with the late Alex Cameron. 

 

I can attest to the sterling qualities of this individual. His 

oratorical skills were a legend. I would say, indeed, are a 

legend. Colleagues from all sides of the House would be drawn 

to hear him speak. In fact in those days before television, there 

were several speakers who could attract all the members, 

doesn’t matter where they were  on a coffee break or 

attending to constituency business  if the word got out that 

Alex Cameron was entering the debate. Whether you were on 

the government side or on the opposition side, you came to the 

House to listen. 

 

This was not only oratory in the sense of the skill of delivering 

a speech, but it was oratory in the sense of substance of debate 

and merit of debate. There were the barbs, gentle — and 

sometimes a little bit pointed — to individuals, but never on a 

personal basis. Always there was an argument from principle. 

 

It’s not surprising that his skills and experience led him to serve 

in cabinet in the various posts of minister of Natural Resources 

and minister responsible for Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance, SaskTel, Sask Minerals, and the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company. And he was capable and able in the 

various positions that he held. I can still see him in my mind’s 

eye how he was seated over in the front bench, actually where 

my colleague is now, the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the late Alex Cameron is a person 

from whom you could learn in another way. I learned very early 

that while we held our differences here very passionately, even 

back then  in fact I would argue perhaps then even more so 

than today  on big issues you could always meet outside the 

legislature and bury those differences and over coffee discuss 

individual constituency problems, or the problems of political 

life and come to agreements to the betterment of the running of 

this Assembly, the organization of this Assembly, and most 

importantly, to the betterment of the management of public 

affairs for people in the province of Saskatchewan. I very often 

look back on those days with a lot of regret and a great deal of 

fondness. 

 

It’s not, Mr. Speaker, therefore to be much of a surprise to 

know that in the footsteps of the late Alex Cameron we saw 

Stuart Cameron, his son, now Mr. Justice Cameron of the Court 

of Appeal of Saskatchewan, take his place in this Assembly. 

 

And here too was a fine person. Slightly different  in some 

ways I would almost say markedly different than his dad, in as 

much as Stuart was softer spoken, less prone to the oratorical 

flare of Alex  but similar to this extent: gentle and always 

focused on the substance of the debate, the issues of the debate. 

 

Again, a good relationship could be maintained with Stuart, 

something which obviously his late father had a great influence 

on him and the contribution that he made to the legislature and 

now to the people of Saskatchewan on the Court of Appeal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, no matter what his political  

persuasion, Alex Cameron was a gentleman in every sense of 

the word. He could always separate himself from politics and 

relate to people in a very special and personal way. 

 

I think I reflect the feelings of many members of this Assembly 

when we learned of his death  sadness, sorrow, regret, and 

yet a celebration in his life and that he shared it with all of us in 

the province of Saskatchewan in this great country called 

Canada. 

 

(1445) 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Alexander C. Cameron, who died in Regina on January 

16, 1996, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 

1948 until 1971, representing the constituency of Maple 

Creek. Mr. Cameron was born on June 30, 1907 at 

Avonhurst where he received his early schooling. He 

continued his studies at Campion College and graduated 

from the University of Ottawa. Later he attended the 

Normal School and the University of Saskatchewan where 

he received his teaching certificate. His career as a teacher 

encompassed periods in several communities in south-west 

Saskatchewan, notably Morse and Fox Valley, before 

assuming the principalship of the Richmound High School. 

 

On February 17, 1935 he married Miriam Stodalka. In 

1941, Mr. Cameron left the teaching profession to pursue 

his business interests as an automobile and implement 

dealer. 

 

Mr. Cameron’s interest in his community is illustrated by 

the many organizations in which he served and held posts. 

He was an organizing member of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation and an overseer of the 

Village-Trustee Larger School Unit in 1946. He had an 

active role organizing credit unions in the mid-1940s and 

was a proponent of the Swift Current health region. He 

was a fourth degree Knight of Columbus. 

 

A long tenure as mayor of Richmound marked the 

beginning of Mr. Cameron’s service in the elected office 

here. This was followed by an even longer tenure as a 

member of this Assembly. He was first elected in 1948 and 

re-elected in the five succeeding general elections. Mr. 

Cameron was responsible for several cabinet portfolios, 

including Mineral Resources, SaskTel, Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company, and Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance. His political career also included the presidency 

of the provincial Liberal Party. 

 

In recording its own sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 290 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add 

to the Premier’s comments in this House today as we pay 

tribute to Alex Cameron, a former Liberal member who served 

in this legislature for 23 years as the member for Maple Creek. 

 

For a quarter of a century and beyond, Mr. Cameron was a 

stronghold in the Liberal Party. First elected in 1948, he was an 

integral part of the Liberal Party and the Liberal caucus during 

some of the most colourful years in Saskatchewan politics. 

 

Before entering politics, Mr. Cameron was dedicated to 

improving the minds of young people throughout 

Saskatchewan. He was a teacher in Morse and Fox Valley and 

spent many years as principal in Richmound. Mr. Cameron’s 

dedication to education also led him to become an active 

member of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 

When he was first elected, Alex Cameron probably had no idea 

how long and prosperous his career as a politician would be. 

Under the Thatcher government, he served as minister of 

Mineral Resources, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 

SaskTel, Sask Minerals, and the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company. He is also renowned as the opposition Finance critic 

during the years of the Tommy Douglas government. 

 

Mr. Cameron was dedicated to the Liberal cause. A former 

party president, he is remembered for his strong principles and 

great oration. Former Liberal leader Davey Steuart remembers 

him as, and I quote, “the man who kept the Liberal Party alive 

in the 1950s.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a great honour to recognize such a 

distinguished and respected man in the House today. On behalf 

of our party and our caucus, I express my gratitude and 

appreciation to the life and work of a great politician and a great 

man. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to pay 

respects to a gentleman who has done a lot for the people in my 

constituency through the years. 

 

Alex Cameron had a much smaller constituency than we have 

now, and of course it was called Maple Creek constituency at 

that time and for many years after. But not to confuse folks, it is 

of course now called Cypress Hills. And even though his 

portion of the constituency was somewhat smaller, the reality is 

that the challenge was just as great for him back in those days 

when transportation and technology wasn’t quite so great. 

 

People who knew Alex knew him as a very modest man, both in 

the way that he represented himself and the way that he lived. 

His house still stands today in Richmound, Saskatchewan as a 

reminder of how humble an individual he was. I was too young 

to be able to vote for Alex, but I supported his nephew Bill 

Stodalka as my local MLA when he ran some years later. 

Alex Cameron represented the south-west for 23 years in the 

legislature. But he represented the concerns of the area he came 

from all of his life and wherever he went. He was a teacher, an 

overseer of the Village-Trustees Larger School Unit, and played 

an active role in organizing credit unions and health regions. 

Alex was a good man and deserved to be re-elected the five 

times that he was elected. 

 

I want to thank Alex for the contribution he made to improve 

life for those in the south-west of Saskatchewan and to express 

our deepest sympathies to his friends and to the family. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join 

with other members of this House as we pay tribute to the 

former member, Alex Cameron, who passed away on January 

19, 1996 at the age of 88. And I too extend my most sincere 

sympathy to his friends and family. 

 

Alex Cameron, as has been stated, was born on June 30, 1907 

in Avonhurst, Saskatchewan where he completed his early 

studies. Mr. Cameron continued his schooling at Campion 

College in Regina and later attended the University of Ottawa. 

He later received a certificate in teaching from our University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Following his formal education, Alex Cameron taught in 

Morse, Saskatchewan and in Fox Valley. And he was later 

appointed principal of Richmound High School. And in 1941 

was when he left teaching to work as an automobile and 

implement dealer. 

 

Mr. Cameron was also an active organizing member of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation as well as the overseer of 

the Village-Trustee Larger School Unit. In addition to his 

numerous contributions to education throughout our province, 

he played a very active role in organizing credit unions in the 

mid-1940s and he was also a fourth degree Knight of 

Columbus. 

 

Mr. Cameron’s political life began as a mayor of Richmound. 

And subsequently he was elected as a member for Maple Creek 

in 1948, and as others have noted, has the incredible 

accomplishment of having been re-elected five times. During 

the Douglas government Mr. Cameron served as the opposition 

Finance critic. He was later appointed, as was most eloquently 

pointed out by the Premier, to cabinet posts including Mineral 

Resources, SaskTel, STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company), and SGI. Mr. Cameron was a candidate for the 

leadership of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party in 1959 and he 

later became president of the Saskatchewan Liberal 

Association. 

 

There are several people in the Liberal Party who have spoken 

to me about Mr. Cameron. I was unfortunately out of the 

country at the time of his death, and his funeral honouring and 

celebrating his life. But the people who have spoken to me, Mr. 

Speaker, have stated that this gentleman was considered, and I 

quote: “the Liberal of all time.” And yet he represented what 

was considered at the time an arch-conservative region of the 

province. 

 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

He was also called, and I quote a former member of this 

Legislative Assembly: “the truest of the true Liberals who 

exuded deep principles and unquestionable integrity.” Alex 

Cameron will be remembered not only for his public service but 

for the love and the compassion that he showed to his families 

and the respect that he showed to all the people he met. 

 

He will be sorrowfully missed by his four children, Grant, 

Stuart, Marie, and Roselaine, and their adorable and adored 

grandchildren. He was predeceased by his wife Miriam in 1989. 

And it’s an honour for me to rise today and join with the 

colleagues in this Assembly to honour this honourable man. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Once 

more it is with great sadness that I must rise to inform this 

Assembly of the death of another former member of this House, 

the late Mr. Lionel Philias Coderre. Mourning Mr. Coderre are 

his wife of 49 years, Pauline; his children, Claudia, Richard, 

and Barbara, as well as his grandchildren, brothers and sister 

and many nieces and nephews. I wish to convey the sympathies 

of this Assembly to all those who knew and loved Mr. Lionel 

Coderre. I am sure that he is sorely missed. 

 

Lionel Coderre was a man devoted to public service and he 

demonstrated his total commitment to his country, province, 

and community in many, many ways. He was born 

appropriately in Coderre, Saskatchewan on April 15, 1915. He 

completed his schooling in Coderre and College Mathieu in 

Gravelbourg. After completing his schooling, Lionel Coderre 

began the first of his many successful business ventures, first by 

selling Rawleigh products and then by working as a nurse in the 

Provincial Hospital in Weyburn. 

 

In 1939, like so many young men who were to follow, Lionel 

Coderre enlisted in the army with the South Saskatchewan 

Regiment. While in the army, his many talents were recognized 

and he attained the rank of major. During World War II, he took 

part in the Dieppe Raid, was twice mentioned in dispatches, and 

was wounded then in Holland in 1945. It was while 

convalescing from his wounds that he met and later married his 

wife Pauline. 

 

After recovering, Lionel Coderre again entered the business 

world, this time as the owner-operator of the local power plant. 

He later turned a small radio shop into a thriving Marshall 

Wells hardware store. 

 

In 1956, Lionel Coderre turned his attention and his talents to 

politics. That year he was elected to the Saskatchewan 

legislature as the MLA for Gravelbourg. And after 1964, when 

the late former premier, Ross Thatcher, assumed office, Lionel 

Coderre held the portfolios of minister of Labour, minister of 

cooperatives, and later minister of Public Works in the 

government of Ross Thatcher. 

 

He lost his seat in 1971. And, Mr. Speaker, as it so happens it 

was also my pleasure to have served for a time with the late 

Lionel Coderre, entering, as I explained to the members in the 

remarks I made respecting the late Mr. Alex Cameron, in 1967.  

It was quite an experience watching these very talented and 

worldly people like Lionel Coderre, on the front benches. 

 

When you consider his accomplishments and the risks and the 

sacrifices which he made, say just during the war years, you 

could see that questions that a rookie like myself or others 

might direct to him are pretty small potatoes by comparison. A 

person who was committed and took the risk of laying down his 

life for his country could easily handle any of the issues of the 

day. 

 

And Lionel Coderre had a certain sense of balance about him. 

There was also a certain quickness to his temper. I recall on 

many occasions when  on a few occasions I should say, not 

on many occasions  when you could get to him with an 

argument or a particular position taken, and Lionel Coderre 

would explode. I mean this in the best sense of the word. You 

didn’t see papers flying, but he had a rise in his voice, a change 

of complexion in his face, kind of a speeded-up delivery. And 

we felt always, in opposition, that if we worked Lionel Coderre 

the right way we could perhaps needle him into saying 

something or doing something that would prove embarrassing 

to the government. No such luck. 

 

He was always able to carry out his duties with aplomb. It was 

not an easy period in governments in 1964 to 1971, marked by 

very serious debates about deterrent fees in medicare, the trade 

union legislation  a variety of matters which came before the 

House. And Lionel’s job at one point, as minister of Labour, 

was very difficult, especially as it came immediately after the 

election of the Thatcher government after 20 years of Tommy 

Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd. 

 

And you can imagine the change in philosophy and direction 

that he was asked to guide through this House with respect to 

legislation. It made for interesting times for him. And he 

conducted it always in a sense of principle and ideas and kept it 

away from personalities and focused his attention to try and 

improve public life the way that I would like to think all of us 

are also dedicated. 

 

Well when he lost his seat in 1971 with the election of the 

Blakeney government, Lionel Coderre went into retirement and 

enjoyed a very active retirement, continuing his involvement in 

politics, I think until about 1980. He also spent many hours 

with his ham radio  ham radio operator  computers, 

something which I can’t figure out even today, Mr. Speaker, 

and meeting with his many, many friends. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that he will be missed by all who knew 

him. He was a great public servant. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, by leave of 

the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 292 

Lionel Philias Coderre, who died on August 3, 1995 in 

Regina, was a member of this Legislative Assembly for the 

constituency of Gravelbourg from 1956 until 1971. Mr. 

Coderre was born on April 15, 1915 in the town that bore 

his family’s name. He began his schooling in Coderre and 

completed it at College Mathieu in Gravelbourg. He then 

embarked on the first of his many business endeavours, 

selling household products. A period working as a nurse in 

the provincial hospital in Weyburn followed. 

 

In 1939 Mr. Coderre answered the call of his country and 

enlisted in the South Saskatchewan Regiment. He was a 

participant in the ill-fated Canadian raid on Dieppe and 

was twice mentioned in dispatches. His distinguished 

record saw him attain the rank of major and command of 

his own company. Mr. Coderre’s active service came to an 

end in 1945 when he was wounded in Holland. It was 

during his convalescence that he met and married Pauline 

Graf. 

 

Mr. Coderre returned to his community and his business 

pursuits. Initially he bought and operated the local power 

plant for 10 years. His interest in radios then came to the 

fore with a thriving radio shop. Not content to simply sell 

and repair small appliances and do wiring in the 

community, Lionel Coderre used his ham radio equipment 

to keep the Franciscan Fathers  if you’ll believe this, Mr. 

Speaker  in Peru in touch with their family and friends at 

the St. Michael’s Retreat House and right around the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Lionel Coderre entered provincial politics in 1956 by 

winning the Gravelbourg constituency. He successfully 

retained that constituency in three subsequent general 

elections. Mr. Coderre held the ministerial portfolios of 

Labour and of Co-operation and Co-operative 

Development from 1964 until 1970. At that time, he 

assumed responsibility for Public Works. 

 

Mr. Coderre’s keen interest in political affairs continued 

until after he left office, lessening only in the mid-1980s 

when he stepped aside for a new generation to take the 

reins. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an 

honour to have an opportunity to speak on behalf of my 

colleagues here today, with a great deal of respect for a 

gentleman who unfortunately I did never have the opportunity 

to meet in this life. A person who, I am told by a number of 

people that are in my constituency, was a rather distinguished 

gentleman in every respect. 

 

Major Lionel Coderre, as the Premier so mentioned, had a very  

distinguished war record. He also applied himself with a great 

deal of dedication to all of his endeavours in terms of business, 

and some of those being a hardware dealer, electrician, a 

number of other small enterprises in the town of Coderre. And 

again served with dedication in various ministries, as the 

Premier mentioned earlier. 

 

Also a great family man, I’m told. He is recalled also with a, 

with a good deal of fondness by Mr. Alex Mitchell who is in 

my constituency. And again always stated how dedicated a 

gentleman that Mr. Coderre was. 

 

So if I might again just express our most sincere sympathy on 

behalf of my colleagues here today. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join 

with all members of this Assembly in honouring the memory of 

Lionel Coderre who died on August 3, 1995. Of all the former 

members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker — I have had the 

pleasure of meeting several — Mr. Coderre was among the 

most interesting. Mr. Coderre, as you know, was born on April 

15, 1915, in the community named for his own family. It was in 

Coderre, Saskatchewan that he completed his grade school and 

after which he attended College Mathieu in Gravelbourg. 

 

Mr. Coderre began his career in selling household products and 

later was employed by the provincial hospital in Weyburn as a 

nurse. When World War II broke out he enlisted in the South 

Saskatchewan Regiment in 1939. Mr. Coderre became a 

distinguished, successful soldier, being part of the raid on 

Dieppe. He was later promoted to Major and commanded his 

own company. And his military career ended in 1945 when he 

was wounded in Holland. During his convalescence he met and 

married his wife, Pauline Graf. 

 

Following his efforts in World War II, Mr. Coderre returned to 

Saskatchewan to buy and operate the local power plant in 

Coderre and subsequently he opened a shop to sell and service 

radio electronics in the Coderre area. 

 

Mr. Coderre first sought office in 1956 in the Gravelbourg 

constituency and was re-elected in three succeeding general 

elections. During his terms in the legislature, he was appointed 

to several ministerial portfolios, including Co-operative 

Development and Public Works. But he took on a very, very 

difficult portfolio of Labour in the Thatcher government, an 

administration not noted for its good relations with the labour 

movement. 

 

Lionel Coderre was truly a politician ahead of his time, Mr. 

Speaker. Those of us who knew him were always impressed by 

his tenacity, his intelligence, and his honesty. He always cared 

for the common citizen. Even after his defeat in 1971, he 

continued to volunteer for the local food bank and to aid his 

acquaintances, his friends, and his family in every way possible. 

Everyone knew him as an advocate for the poor and 

underprivileged and his former colleagues from all political 

stripes have stated that the Assembly was enhanced by his 

presence here. 

 

Lionel Coderre loved his country; he loved his province; he  



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

loved his fellow citizens; but his first love was always his 

family. He is survived by his wife Pauline, his children, 

Claudia, Richard, and Barbara, and the lights of his life, his 

grandchildren, Anika, Marc, and Nicholas. 

 

Now in Lionel’s own words, Mr. Speaker, I will end with this 

quote: 

 

It is my hope that my sons and daughters will remember 

me when I’m gone, not just for the battles of my life  

politics and war  but in memories of our home. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I must sadly inform this 

Assembly of the death of another former member of this 

Assembly, the late Mr. Ernest Franklin Gardner. Mr. Gardner, 

better known as John Gardner  that’s how I knew him  died 

on Saturday, May 13, 1995 at the age of 72 years after a lengthy 

battle with cancer. 

 

He leaves to mourn his wife Ruth, his sons, Don, Ron, Dean, 

and Glen as well as 16 grandchildren, one great-grandchild, and 

many other family members. Mr. Speaker, I wish to pass this 

Assembly’s most sincere condolences on to Mr. Gardner’s 

family and friends. 

 

John Gardner served as a member of this Assembly for the 

constituency of Moosomin from 1965, when he was elected in a 

by-election, until 1975. He held numerous positions with the 

government of the day including minister of Public Works from 

1965 to 1967, and as Chair of a little known but as it turns out 

in my mind a very important committee function, as Chair of 

the Saskatchewan Flag Selection Committee. 

 

I want to depart from my written notes to say that as is the 

history I suppose in things of this nature, the debate 

surrounding the selection of the Saskatchewan flag tended to be 

rather emotional and heated at times. It certainly proved to be 

that way in the case of the federal government’s selection of our 

national emblem. 

 

And John Gardner’s task as Chair of the Flag Selection 

Committee was not made any easier by the various submissions 

by people who took an intense interest in the chronology and 

the history of our people and our province, and the heraldry and 

all of the symbols which go into the proper selection of a flag. I 

think they did a pretty good job. I love the Saskatchewan flag as 

much as I do the Canadian flag. 

 

And at the time, the controversy seemed maybe to even 

endanger the political career of not only John Gardner, but of 

the government of the day. But it proves again that if you really 

apply your mind to doing what’s right, what’s proper, and 

what’s correct, even if you make mistakes, you’re going to win 

out at the end. And we won out at the end with John Gardner’s 

activity on this particular committee. 

 

John demonstrated his community-mindedness in a number of 

ways, including terms on the Kipling Hospital Board and the 

Cannington Home Care Board. He was actively involved in the  

Royal Canadian Legion, and in his later years he served on the 

executives of the Southeast Regional Library, the Saskatchewan 

Library Trustee Board, and the local Kennedy board, Kennedy, 

Saskatchewan being his home town. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I told you that he was first elected to this 

Assembly in 1965 in a by-election and I mentioned Kennedy, 

Saskatchewan. And I want to tell you that’s when I first met 

John Gardner. Hard to believe that a young person like myself 

would have that kind of a connection back, but it’s true. I was at 

that time a very young  not even sure admitted yet, maybe 

articling student  lawyer to a Saskatoon law firm who had as 

one of its members a very distinguished Saskatchewan person, a 

Canadian by the name of George Taylor. 

 

And the ’64 election produced the defeat of Woodrow Lloyd’s 

government. In some ways it was a narrow victory by the 

Liberal Party and there were a number of contested seats as a 

result of that general election situation. One of those was down 

in the Moosomin area and a controvert was in process. And we 

were hired, at least George Taylor’s firm was hired  I was 

there as an employee and a person basically carrying George’s 

bags; those who will know George know that that’s more true 

both in substance and appearance than you might care to think 

 to go down there to act on behalf of the CCF-NDP. 

 

And we were collecting affidavits and doing all the things 

needed to be done with respect to the controverts. And I want to 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, it was one of the hottest several days in 

Saskatchewan’s history, at least I thought. I don’t know what 

the records show, but man oh man, it was hot. And every step 

that you took, sweat was coming out of the forehead and you 

could barely do your work. And all of a sudden there was a 

honk of a car. It was John Gardner and his lawyer and his 

campaign manager calling me over  I was there by myself at 

this particular day trying to get the evidence, as it were  to 

join him in his car which had the God-given luxury, as I look 

back at it now, of having air-conditioning. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Probably a LeBaron in those days. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  It was a LeBaron wasn’t it? A nice 

Chrysler LeBaron. And so there we were. We sat down in the 

car and he turned on the air-conditioning, and the discussion 

turned to the fact that we had competing visions. I was not in 

politics, I was in law. But here was a highly educated, 

intelligent man. John Gardner, in fact, in addition to being in 

farming, was also involved in the university world, as the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone knows for sure. 

 

And from that moment I didn’t know that I was going to run in 

the 1967 general provincial election. In fact my own personal 

intentions were not to enter politics, certainly not provincial 

politics. And there it was. The controvert produced the 

by-election, the by-election produced the victory of John 

Gardner  I think my colleague will have a word or two to say 

about that, the member from Regina  and he served 

subsequently in a number of capacities, minister of Public 

Works from ’65 to ’67. I’ve already told you about the flag 

work as well. 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 294 

And in this House, Mr. Speaker, he was again one of the gentle 

creatures of this Assembly. And I don’t mean in demeanour, 

lurking under the demeanour a ferocity or an anger, which 

sometimes happens from time to time in the make-up of 

individuals. But I mean truly a gentle man and a gentle person. 

And while he held his views passionately, he had a certain 

academic disposition to him, as demonstrated by his career at 

the university and the like, which permitted easy access and 

easy discussion with him. 

 

I very much am a strong proponent of this man’s contribution. 

And I say that we should all be very, very proud that we had the 

honour and the privilege to have in our midst, in our public life, 

a man of the quality, the ability, and the integrity of the late 

John Gardner. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would therefore like to move, seconded again by 

the Leader of the Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Ernest Franklin (John) Gardner, who died on May 13, 

1995, was a member of this Legislative Assembly for the 

constituency of Moosomin from 1965 to 1975. Better 

known as John, Mr. Gardner was born on January 5, 1923 

in Kennedy, Saskatchewan. He completed his early 

schooling there before continuing his education at the 

University of Saskatchewan. He enrolled in mechanical 

engineering but interrupted his studies to serve in the 

Second World War. He trained as a pilot and navigator 

with the Royal Canadian Air Force and rose to the rank of 

pilot officer. After the war he returned to the university to 

complete his studies. 

 

Mr. Gardner’s first employment position was as a selection 

officer with the federal civil service. Subsequently he 

returned to his farming background, combining winter 

months teaching at the Saskatoon campus of the University 

of Saskatchewan with summers working his land. Mr. 

Gardner’s commitment to the university did not end with 

his retirement from teaching but continued up until his 

passing. He was serving his second term as a member of 

the University senate. Besides his chosen professions, John 

Gardner was an active participant in a variety of 

community organizations. He served as a councillor for the 

rural municipality of Wawken and as mayor of Kennedy. 

The Kipling Hospital Board and the Cannington Home 

Care Board also benefited from his membership as did the 

Royal Canadian Legion. 

 

Mr. Gardner next turned his attention to provincial 

concerns on June 30, 1965 when he was elected to this 

Assembly in a by-election. He retained his seat in the 

general election of 1967 and again in 1971. 

 

During his terms of office he held numerous positions, 

most notably as the minister of Public Works from 1965 to 

1967 and as Chair of the Saskatchewan Flag Selection 

Committee. He also served on the executive of the 

Saskatchewan branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association. I might deviate from the motion to say, 

another important organization of this Assembly which 

should be supported by all members. 

 

In his later years, Mr. Gardner enjoyed long tenures on the 

executive of the Southeast Regional Library, the 

Saskatchewan Library Trustee Board, and the local 

Kennedy board. He also chaired the Regina Rural Health 

Region from 1988 to 1994. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

Liberal Party of Saskatchewan and members of our caucus, I 

would also like to recognize the late Ernest John Gardner, a 

former member of this legislature. 

 

Mr. Gardner’s 10-year term as Liberal MLA began when he 

won a by-election in Moosomin constituency in 1965. His 

predecessor, Hammy McDonald, had been named to the Senate, 

so he had big shoes to fill. But according to those who knew 

him, John Gardner had no trouble filling those shoes. 

 

Members of the Liberal Party remember him as a progressive 

and educated farmer whose dedication and vision helped him 

define his success. He was a modern thinker with an 

old-fashioned commitment to hard work and honesty. 

 

John Gardner was a vital part of Ross Thatcher’s government 

and a key member of the cabinet. Besides taking on the role of 

deputy premier, he held the portfolios of Agriculture minister 

and minister of Public Works. 

 

But not all his successes came in this House. He was also a 

respected councillor for the RM of Wawken and he was mayor 

of Kennedy. His dedication and forward thinking also showed 

in his work with organizations such as the Kipling Hospital 

Board, the Legion, the Cannington Home Care Board, the 

Southeast Regional Library Board, and his own local library 

board. 

 

He was a husband, a father, a grandfather, and a 

great-grandfather, and a very strong family man. Perhaps this is 

his greatest legacy of all. 

 

I join with the Premier and other members in this House in 

paying tribute to this man who gave his time and his devotion to 

a better quality of life for Saskatchewan people in his 

generation and in many generations to come. 

 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

honour to stand today on behalf of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) caucus and on behalf of the Moosomin 

constituency to pay homage to Mr. Ernest Franklin Gardner, the 

former MLA for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Gardner, or John, as he was known, was an individual who 

truly understood the words of duty and dedication. His 

dedication to his fellow citizens was evident in many ways. 

Although he ultimately was educated as a mechanical engineer, 

he put that on hold during the Second World War to serve in the 

Royal Canadian Air Force. His dedication was demonstrated 

again in his early employment history when he served in the 

federal civil service as a selection officer. 

 

Mr. Gardner epitomized much of what we think of as a 

Saskatchewan way of life. Although he ultimately made his 

career teaching at the University of Saskatchewan, he stuck 

close to his rural roots by returning to work on his family farm 

every summer. 

 

On his retirement from teaching, Mr. Gardner displayed again 

his characteristic sense of duty, his active interest in community 

groups — his work as an RM councillor, his term as mayor of 

Kennedy, and his service to the Kipling Hospital Board, and the 

Cannington Home Care Board, as well as library boards in the 

area. And it was my pleasure to serve with Mr. Gardner, both 

on the hospital board and on the Kennedy Library Board. 

 

All of these things and many more show how the needs of 

others was always foremost in his mind. I find it quite moving 

to note that right up until his passing, Mr. Gardner continued 

his work as a member of the university senate. 

 

Of course in remembering Mr. Gardner’s service to his 

community, it is impossible to ignore the time he spent here as 

the MLA for the constituency of Moosomin, the constituency I 

now represent. I know from talking to my constituents that Mr. 

Gardner is still held in the highest regard by those he knew and 

those whose lives he touched. We have heard already Mr. 

Gardner’s distinguished political history. I think it is important 

to recall, his service as an MLA and as a minister was only one 

part of a life of devotion to the good of the community. 

 

Despite his long battle with cancer he maintained a keen 

interest in provincial politics. My slimmest of marginal 

victories in the 1991 election may have been due to a letter to 

the editor just before election day when Mr. Gardner suggested 

Liberals could be liberal again. 

 

In officially recording the deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

the third party caucus would like to affirm the Premier’s motion 

and extend our most profound sympathy and our most sincere 

respect to his wife Ruth, and family, and all other members of 

the Gardner family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me close by reiterating that it has been an 

honour for me, on behalf of the PC caucus and the Moosomin 

constituency, to take part in paying respects to such a fine man, 

Ernest Gardner. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

it is with both pride and sorrow that I join with other members 

in this House to honour the memory of the former member, 

John Gardner, who passed away on May 13, 1995. And I extend 

to the family of Mr. Gardner my most sincere sympathy. 

 

Mr. Gardner was born on January 5, 1923 in Kennedy, 

Saskatchewan where he completed his schooling. And he later 

attended, as has been cited, the University of Saskatchewan 

where he was working toward a degree in mechanical 

engineering. He interrupted his university education to serve his 

country, and he served his country as a pilot and then as a pilot 

officer in World War II. He then returned to our province and 

completed his studies after the war. Upon completing his 

university education, John served with the federal civil service. 

And he loved farming so much that he decided to return to 

farming while teaching at the University of Saskatchewan in the 

off-season. 

 

Mr. Gardner’s career in public office began as a councillor in 

the municipality of Wawken and he later was the mayor of 

Kennedy. Mr. Gardner was elected to this Legislative Assembly 

for the constituency of Moosomin in a by-election held on June 

30, 1965. He was subsequently re-elected in 1967 and in 1971. 

Mr. Gardner served as the minister of Public Works from 1965 

to 1967. And during this time, was the period in which the 

Premier referred, he was the Chair of the Saskatchewan Flag 

Selection Committee and an executive member of the 

Saskatchewan branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association. 

 

Mr. Gardner also served as an executive on the Southeast 

Regional Library and later on the Saskatchewan Library Trustee 

Board and the local Kennedy board. As well, he chaired the 

Regional Rural . . . pardon me, Regina Rural Health Region 

from 1988 to 1994. 

 

Mr. Gardner was a most respected MLA who fought tirelessly 

for Liberal principles. According to his Liberal colleagues at the 

time, he worked very, very hard to keep caucus in the Thatcher 

Liberal government on the centre of the political spectrum. 

According to one respected colleague who cited this: 

 

The record will show that John lost as often as he won but 

he never ever stopped trying. 

 

John Gardner will be remembered by all as a man who most 

certainly stood for his convictions regardless of the 

circumstances surrounding him. And I wish to thank, in this 

forum and on this public record, Mr. John Gardner for his very 

kind support of me. Mr. Gardner is lovingly remembered by all 

who knew him, but especially by his wife Ruth; his children, 

Don, Ron, Dean, and Glen; their 16 grandchildren, and one 

great-granddaughter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I’m going to 

be relatively brief. I did have the . . . it was a pleasure to have 

contested an election with Mr. Gardner. He was, as the Premier 

stated, he was the candidate in 1965 when the former leader of 

the Liberal Party had retired and taken a seat in the Senate. He 

was our candidate. 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 296 

The CCF-NDP, as they then called themselves, blamed 

themselves for the loss of that by-election  they felt they 

should have won it  and handled it very badly. The same was 

true in . . . ’67 was not a great election for the CCF-NDP. There 

were some notable exceptions to that. But in 1971 again blamed 

themselves for having lost that election . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . that’s right, exactly. The member from 

Kindersley says, all these flukes. That was exactly right. We 

were very slow to admit that John Gardner was actually very 

difficult to defeat. 

 

He was a real gentleman. And it was partially a difference in the 

style of politics at the time. One of the changes I think was the 

television in the House, but there was a different atmosphere. 

We were members of a profession, and the relationship between 

us as professionals mattered to us, And we didn’t always . . . 

sometimes allowed the public political concerns to come 

between us. More often we did not. 

 

I once remember, as a lawyer, sharing a taxi to the court-house 

with an esteemed member of the bar. We had a case against 

each other. My client got into a terrible fit about it and . . . 

(inaudible) . . . chamber’s application. When the chamber’s 

application was done, I told him to take his file and get out of 

the office. One of the real pleasures of practising in a small 

town, you can do that with a fair amount of impunity. My 

relationship with my professional brethren was more important 

than a relationship with a client. 

 

That was also true of politicians of the day in a way. And that 

has passed, and I really regret that. I think the public are ill-

served by the current mood in which it’s sort of total warfare. 

We try to destroy each other. I think we are not always well 

served by the current relationship we have with each other. 

 

It was also partially though the individual. He was of a sort. If 

he saw you struggling down the street on a hot day he would 

stop the car, invite you into his car to cool off in his 

air-conditioned Chrysler. Air-conditioned cars weren’t all that 

common in those days. 

 

I remember I was the victim of his good manners in some way. I 

remember going to a hockey banquet; to my chagrin, who was 

chairing the hockey banquet but none other than the MLA, 

somewhat to my surprise. I say I was a victim of it because it 

was not treated with any discourtesy; the opposite was true. He 

made a point of introducing me; did so in the most civil way: 

“Everybody has opponents; I have an opponent; I want you to 

meet him, Ned Shillington.” And I felt about that high. 

 

And I learned a little from John Gardner about treating 

opponents in elections. I learned to treat opponents with respect 

and you in turn gain public respect. So if I learned anything at 

all from John Gardner, I learned manners in the political sphere. 

He was a gentleman. He served his constituency well, and I 

want to add my condolences to the members of his family 

whom I knew and have met on many occasions. I want to 

forward my condolences to them as well, for someone who was 

a gentleman and he served his constituency very well. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I sorrowfully rise today 

to inform this Assembly of yet another death of a former 

member of this Assembly, the late Mr. Frank Kenneth Radloff. 

Frank Radloff leaves to mourn, his wife Inez and four children; 

Sharon, Shirley, Spencer, and Debbie. Mr. Radloff was well 

known and respected within his community and across the 

province. He dedicated himself to serving in a number of 

capacities including school trustee, member of the Elks’ lodge, 

Independent Order of Odd Fellows, and the Rotary Club. And 

he also served as mayor of Nipawin for many years. The esteem 

in which he is held in Nipawin is clearly demonstrated by the 

fact that a new subdivision there will be named Radloff Place in 

his honour, and quite appropriately so. 

 

As so often happens with those who serve in municipal politics, 

Frank Radloff turned his attention to the provincial political 

realm. And he was elected as a member of this House in 1964 

and was successful in retaining his seat in the 1967 election. 

Mr. Speaker, at that time I entered the House and this was 

another acquaintance, and I would say even friend, that was a 

colleague of mine and a friend and acquaintance as a result of 

my election at that time. 

 

Frank served in the back benches, as the term is used, and on 

various committees of the House, various committees of the 

legislature, and various other duties as assigned by the 

government of the day to him. 

 

And I want to say that, especially from the position which I now 

hold for the time being, how important it is in the working of a 

parliamentary democratic system that we understand that we are 

all equals essentially in this House; that we all play a function, 

which is to improve the quality of service and improve the 

quality of life for people, but we may do it in various capacities. 

I often say to my caucus that a cabinet is no more, no less, than 

a committee of caucus. And we have several committees of 

caucus and we have several committees of the legislature. And 

each one of us in our various committees can play a very 

important role in the shaping and the development of public 

policy. 

 

Most recently, the example, sir, of yourself as one of the 

members of the committee respecting the question of drinking 

and driving and the introduction of legislation — which has yet 

to be debated of course — I think is an example of powerful 

public policy which is initiated in a way other than what the 

journalists sometimes think is the only way that legislation or 

action is initiated; namely through cabinet. It is initiated 

through individual MLAs and committees. 

 

Frank Radloff was that kind of a person, who served with 

integrity and independence, always loyal to the Liberal Party 

and the Liberal cause, always loyal to the government and the 

leader of the day. And in his loyalty and in his devotion to 

committee service he contributed mightily to the seven years, 

’64 to ’71, of the Thatcher administrations. Believe me, I know 

that Ross Thatcher relied on that loyalty, on that sincerity, 

knowing that Frank Radloff would take on the various functions 

which were available to the people of the House   



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

not available to the people of this House  which it is the duty 

of the members of this House to undertake in this view and in 

these roles. 

 

Frank was fairly  how should I describe this?  opinionated. 

Perhaps that’s the wrong word to use on a condolence motion 

but he had strong views about many things. And that period, as 

has been pointed out by myself and the member from 

Greystone, was a period where there was for the first time after 

20 years, a different ideology in place. And the debates were 

sharp; Frank’s views with respect to those debates were equally 

as sharp. 

 

But there’s another aspect about that period as well. On the 

national scene we saw a very difficult situation in Quebec with 

street protests culminating in the Quebec crisis of 1970. 

 

I remember a large debate in this House about whether or not 

the emergency measures Act as introduced by Mr. Trudeau 

should be supported by this Assembly and the various feelings 

which were felt by members of the day. Frank was opinionated 

and he had a view on this. We used to try to tease him. 

 

One day, one of the members on our side  I don’t know who 

it was, Mr. Speaker  wrote him a two-word note. It simply 

said, “Viva Luega.” I don’t know what it means. In fact I turned 

around to the House leader on this side to make sure that I have 

not used a phrase which is inappropriate, but that was what was 

written on the note. I was shown the note. I said, what does it 

mean and why are you sending it to Frank? He said, I think it 

means “Long live the revolution.” He said, I think it’s going to 

get under Frank’s skin. Let’s just see what happens. 

 

So we  I shouldn’t say we  one of the members called over 

the page and asked that the page do the appropriate thing, as 

sometimes pages are asked to do. And then they just slip out 

one of the side doors and around and back and so forth so that 

the page could not show the trail from the sender of the note to 

Frank Radloff who was seated in the back bench in 

high-spirited debate of the motion. And he opens up this note. 

And you could see his face turn eight or nine shades of white, 

pink, orange, fuchsia, bright flaming red, asking the page, 

where did it come from? Of course she was sworn to secrecy 

and did not tell. 

 

Then the note was shown to some colleagues and then he points 

over to me and said out loud, Romanow, you did it. What did I 

do? I didn’t do anything. Of course, Mr. Speaker, I did not. 

 

And I thought at this stage in the game, I had really betrayed a 

friendship of a person who I quite liked. There was blunt talk 

with Frank. I could hardly wait until adjournment because I 

wanted to go over to him and say look, I had nothing to do with 

this and I hope it’s okay with you. 

 

Well much to my easing of mind and I might say joy, Frank had 

no ill feelings at all, notwithstanding the fact that he felt that the 

note was in some way treacherous or a betrayal or perhaps 

maybe even unloyal, disloyal in the context of the debate of the 

moment and of the period. And he said to me, he said, I think, 

Romanow, you did it. I’m not going to tell anybody that you  

did it. He said, but what does it mean? I said, I don’t know what 

it means. I think it means, long live the revolution. Frankly, 

what I really meant to say was long live the Liberal revolution 

 with a wink. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And he gave me a wink back; we had 

a laugh about it. And that was it, on that occasion. Campaigning 

against him in 1967  I campaigned in my own riding, but also 

in several other ridings in 1971  it was always a treat, because 

as my colleague, the House Leader pointed out in reference to 

John Gardner, it was the nature of campaigning in those days 

that you did not try to belittle or demean, on a personal basis, 

opponents. 

 

It was the basis of campaigns that you could certainly tell the 

community, look, that person stands for all of these issues and 

ideas which are wrong, and I stand for all these issues which are 

right. But there he is, trying to serve, or there she is trying to 

serve the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It wasn’t uncommon to have our paths cross during the 

campaign trail. In 1971, I remember driving up there for a rally, 

the election of . . . (inaudible) . . . and Frank was on the main 

street knowing full well that our rally was taking place that 

night. And, Mr. Speaker, it was a grand rally because the 

government was about to be defeated and everybody comes out 

on those occasions. Believe me, those are the highs of political 

life. 

 

But one could take time to stop the car and speak to Frank. 

Where are you off to? Off to the rally to campaign against you; 

I hope you don’t mind. Well no, just say a few kind words 

about me and good luck; I think a lot of those people will be 

mine there, in any event. It was that kind of an exchange. And 

he could take it and he could give it, and you’d take it in the 

same spirit. 

 

Well I think this is a great quality, and Frank Radloff, no 

wonder he was such a dominant force in municipal politics and 

served so well in this House. He was very much held in esteem 

and I personally will miss him. 

 

So Mr. Radloff was elected, as I said, in ’64 and re-elected in 

’67. He is going to be sadly missed and fondly remembered by 

those with whom he worked over the many years of public 

service. 

 

And so again, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of 

the Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of the Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Frank Kenneth Radloff, who died in Nipawin on May 15, 

1995, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 

representing the constituency of Nipawin from 1964 to  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 298 

1971. Mr. Radloff was born in Star City, Saskatchewan on 

December 9, 1916 and attended local public and high 

schools. On June 30, 1938, he married Inez Nygaard and 

together they had four children. 

 

A merchant by trade, Frank Radloff distinguished himself 

in his chosen career and in his service to his community. 

He was president, shareholder and manager of Seruw 

Stores Limited and received the Master Retailer Award for 

Saskatchewan in 1964. 

 

He served for a decade as a school trustee from 1942 until 

1952. Mr. Radloff devoted 21 years, Mr. Speaker, as 

mayor of the town of Nipawin, serving first from 1953 to 

1963 and again, after his defeat in ’71, from 1974 to 1985. 

(That’s quite a record.) Local service clubs also benefited 

from Frank’s time and efforts. He was a member of the 

Independent Order of Odd Fellows; the Elks lodge and the 

Rotary Club. He was an honorary member of the Canadian 

Legion. His leisure interests were reflected in his 

involvement with the Nipawin Curling Club and the 

Nipawin Golf Club. 

 

Mr. Radloff’s provincial political career began as a 

candidate for the Liberal Party in the 1960 general election. 

Although he was unsuccessful at this time, he did win 

election in 1964 and again in 1967. Frank Radloff sought a 

third term in the 1971 general election but did not retain 

his seat. 

 

In recording it’s own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. Thank you. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

extend the sympathy of the Liberal opposition to the memory of 

Frank Radloff. I had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Radloff 

subsequent to 1991, when I first became involved in politics. 

And it’s with a great deal of regret today that I have to 

acknowledge that in intervening years he had offered at some 

occasions for us to sit down and he would tell me some stories 

about his career in politics. And after hearing the Premier relate 

a story about the note-passing, I now very much regret that I 

don’t have a wealth of stories to add to that because they may 

get closer to the bottom of who was really responsible in those 

days. 

 

I also would like to  although there is some repetition  to 

read into the record some of the information that I have. And I 

particularly want to do it because Frank’s widow was kind 

enough to provide me with this information when she knew that 

this acknowledgement of his public career was going to happen. 

 

Frank Radloff was born at Star City, Saskatchewan where he 

was raised and educated. On June 30, 1939 he married Inez 

Nygaard, and they resided on a farm for a year, when they 

moved to Nipawin. 

Frank and Inez owned and operated Seruw Stores Limited in 

Nipawin. Frank was very active in community development and 

served in numerous capacities. As the Premier mentioned, he 

was the mayor of Nipawin for 22 years. He was also the 

chairman of the Nipawin School Board for 10 years. He was a 

member of the Saskatchewan legislature for eight years, during 

which time he was a secretary to the Hon. Douglas McFarlane. 

 

Frank was also a life member of the Benevolent and Protective 

Order of Elks. A Rotarian, he received the Paul Harris Fellow in 

1985. He represented the Rotary Club District 555 in a 

friendship exchange in India, Philippines, and South Africa. He 

was a recipient of a 25-year IODE (Imperial Order Daughters of 

the Empire) pin for his years of service. 

 

Frank Radloff also earned many awards. In 1952 the degree of 

Honorary Citizen of Nipawin was conferred by the Nipawin 

Composite High School. In 1953, by command of Her Majesty 

the Queen, a medal was conferred on Frank Radloff. 

 

In 1963, in Saskatoon, the Golden Jubilee Award in recognition 

of outstanding contribution to retailing and service to his 

community by the retail merchants of Canada. In 1964 a Master 

Retailer Distinguished Award was presented by Saskatchewan 

retail merchants association. 

 

In 1965 Frank Radloff was honoured by the Saskatchewan 

Liberal Association and presented with a scroll written by 

Premier Ross Thatcher which read, “A tribute of appreciation 

and gratitude for your work as a Member of the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan.” 

 

(1545) 

 

In 1983 an honorary membership in the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. In 1983 as well, a special merit 

certificate for 35 years of devoted and unselfish work in the 

Nipawin Rotary Club. In 1985, Radloff Day was celebrated to 

honour Frank and Inez Radloff. 

 

It was because of Frank Radloff’s political clout and his 

commitment to the community that many improvements were 

made in that area. Frank Radloff was very proud and always 

tried to be in attendance at his family’s accomplishments. 

 

Left to treasure his memory are his wife, Inez, currently of 

Nipawin; his daughter Sharon of Saskatoon; grandchildren 

Byron and Kim and great-grandchildren Jason and Jasmin; 

daughter Shirley of Nipawin; grandchildren Dylan, Candice, 

and Wade; son Spencer of Calgary; daughter Debbie of 

Kingston, Ontario; grandchildren Kaili and Bryn. 

 

Frank Radloff was a man who always had time to hear what the 

other person had to say. Whether it was early or late in the day, 

his life was lived caring for others. 

 

This poem by an unknown author was Frank Radloff’s 

favourite, and I would like to end by reading it into the record 

in his memory: 

 

Take time to live; it is the secret of success. 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

Take time to think; it is the source of power. 

Take time to play; it is the source of youth. 

Take time to read; it is the foundation of knowledge. 

Take time for friendship; it is the source of happiness. 

Take time to laugh; it lifts life’s load. 

Take time to worship; it is the highway to reverence. 

Take time to pray; it helps bring God near and washes 

 the dust of earth from our eyes. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

it is with great sadness that I join all the members of this 

Assembly to pay tribute to the memory of the former member, 

Frank Radloff, who passed away on May 15 of this past year. 

And I too extend to his family and friends my most sincere 

condolences. 

 

A merchant by trade, Frank Radloff was a very prominent 

business person who was respected by all who came to know 

him, those who he serviced and those with whom he worked. 

He began his career as president, shareholder and manager of 

Seruw Stores in Nipawin and received the Master Retailer 

Award for Saskatchewan in 1964. 

 

As was cited earlier, his career in public service began by 

serving as a school board member from 1942 to 1952. And 

immediately following this became the mayor of Nipawin and 

known by all throughout the province of Saskatchewan as that 

community’s most ardent supporter. 

 

Mr. Radloff first sought political office in 1960 for the riding of 

Nipawin. And while his initial candidacy was unsuccessful, he 

was elected in the two subsequent general elections of 1964 and 

1967. Frank’s history of serving the public goes well beyond his 

political career. He was a member of the Independent Order of 

Odd Fellows, the Elk’s Lodge, the Rotary Club, and an 

honorary member of the Royal Canadian Legion. During his 

leisure time he belonged to the Nipawin Curling Club and the 

Nipawin Golf Club. 

 

Now I do want to share some comments by a former colleague 

in this House that add to and give further insight into Frank’s 

character. She said, and I quote  and this is from Sally 

Merchant: 

 

Frank was a gentle, gentle soul who always knew exactly 

what was important. He was a relentless advocate for his 

community of Nipawin which he called the pearl of the 

pines. He gave up a great deal to be in the Legislative 

Assembly and brought the prestige of his own background 

and superb qualities to this Assembly. 

 

Indeed what she was talking about with me this week, as did 

some other members of this House, they said that with the kinds 

of individuals we’ve been honouring today, they actually 

elevated the Legislative Assembly by their presence. 

 

So left to treasure the memory of Frank are his wife Inez; his 

children Sharon, Shirley, Spencer, and Debbie; their seven 

grandchildren and their two great-grandchildren. 

So, Mr. Speaker, our province as we know, was built on vision 

and commitment of generations past, be they Liberal, 

Conservative, New Democrat, CCF, and just so many others 

who had vision and commitment. I am most privileged to join 

with everyone to honour the memory of Frank Radloff who 

served us so very well. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 

others today in offering my sincere condolences to Mrs. Inez 

Radloff and her family on the passing of Frank. Frank Radloff’s 

life was dedicated to his community and his province. As a 

member of this House in the 1960s, he vigorously promoted the 

needs of his constituency. He promoted a vision of economic 

development in the north-east. He was a great promoter of 

Nipawin area, and saw a great future in tourism, especially 

fishing on Codette Lake, and the potential for further 

hydroelectric development on the Saskatchewan River at 

Nipawin. Many of the projects that he envisioned have come to 

pass, and still there are some that remain to be completed. 

 

Mr. Radloff was also entrusted by the people of Nipawin to 

serve as their mayor for over 20 years both before and after his 

term as member of this Assembly. And before that he had 

served for 10 years as a school trustee. 

 

Mr. Radloff didn’t stop at elected services, as was mentioned 

earlier. He was also very involved in the Legion, the Forester’s 

Lodge, the Elks, the Rotary Club, the Nipawin golf and curling 

clubs. On top of all his community commitments, Mr. Speaker, 

he was also a respected business person. 

 

As I mentioned in my reply to the Speech from the Throne, the 

north-east is still an area of our province where the pioneer era 

is a time of living memory, and Frank Radloff was one of those 

pioneers. 

 

Mr. Radloff devoted over 50 years of elected service to the 

people of Nipawin. And his long public life and leadership in 

his community played a large role in making Nipawin the 

thriving and healthy community that it is today. I know that the 

family of Frank Radloff are very proud of his efforts to make 

Nipawin and area a better place to live. And I, Mr. Speaker, am 

very proud to be able to serve in the same constituency that 

Frank Radloff served some 30 years ago. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I sadly rise today to 

inform this Assembly of the death of a former member of this 

Assembly, Mr. Russel Allan Sutor. He died September 23, 1995 

in Fort Lauderdale after a short illness. Mr. Sutor is survived by 

his mother, Anetta, and stepfather, Ross Atkinson, who 

currently reside in British Columbia; his brother Don Sutor and 

his sister Dianne Lasek. 

 

Born in Mossbank on April 24, 1951, Mr. Sutor was 31 years of 

age when he was first elected to the Legislative Assembly as 

MLA for Regina Northeast in 1982. After three years of service 

to the people of this province, he resigned his seat for business 

and personal reasons. 

 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 300 

Mr. Sutor was well-known in Regina for his business 

enterprises, including ownership of a travel agency, a delivery 

service, and at one time, I believe the Inntowner motel. 

 

After his resignation to the legislature, Mr. Sutor retired and 

moved to Florida where he lived for the 10 years prior to his 

death. 

 

While he did not serve in this House for a long period, Mr. 

Speaker, he did serve the people of Saskatchewan well. Mr. 

Sutor sat on the government side but along with the opposition 

members on that side of the House. I was not with him because 

when he entered the House, I exited the House courtesy of 

voters of Riversdale and with their blessing. 

 

And it was a rather boisterous group of government MLAs at 

the time, as I’m told, because after, again, a long period of 

administration of a certain ideology with the election of the 

Devine administration and people like Mr. Sutor, a new agenda 

was on the table for Saskatchewan. It was a boisterous group of 

government MLAs. Perhaps those who will speak to Mr. 

Sutor’s memory can say more specifically a few words about 

that. 

 

But I was told, and from what I could observe by watching on 

occasion this new thing on television called the legislative 

proceedings of the Assembly, that Russ Sutor stood out as the 

quiet and reflective one. He was a true gentleman with a gentle 

nature and we were saddened to hear of his passing at such an 

early age. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move, seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and the province. 

 

Russel Allan Sutor, who died in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, 

on September 23, 1995, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly for the constituency of Regina Northeast from 

1982 to 1985. He was born on April 24, 1951 at 

Mossbank, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Sutor established his credentials as a businessman. He 

owned a variety of businesses, including a travel agency, a 

delivery service, and a Regina motel. 

 

Mr. Sutor entered provincial politics at the young age of 31 

by winning a seat in the 1982 general election. Initially he 

served as a government back-bencher but was later given a 

position as legislative secretary to the minister of 

Economic Development and Trade. Mr. Sutor resigned his 

seat in April 1985, citing personal and business reasons for 

doing so. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I too would like to add my voice of 

sympathy, sincere sympathy to the bereaved family on behalf of 

the official opposition and the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan. 

For someone to have reached the pinnacle of life, and being 

honoured by being elected to this Assembly is an achievement 

that should be recognized and very honourable. 

 

I would just like to once again express our sincere sympathy to 

the bereaved family and acknowledge the service to the people 

of Saskatchewan that Mr. Sutor had given during his lifetime. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to pay respects on behalf of the Progressive Conservative 

caucus to Russ Sutor, a former Progressive Conservative 

member of this Assembly. Mr. Sutor was elected in a 1982 Tory 

election sweep in the former constituency of Regina Northeast. 

I didn’t know Mr. Sutor personally; however I understand he 

was a very caring and conscientious individual. Although Russ 

didn’t run for another term in office, he did much to improve 

life for his constituents in the period of time he served as a 

MLA. 

 

In the end he did not seek re-election because he was probably 

simply too busy. Russ owned and operated several businesses in 

Regina, including the Inntowner motel, Gref’s Delivery, and 

North West Travel and was active in the Regina community 

associations as well, many of them. 

 

Although he loved our province and its people, the harsh 

Saskatchewan winters made it hard for Russ to do what he 

loved most  and that was to sail. That’s why he decided while 

he was still a young man to move to Florida, buy a sailboat, and 

sail to his heart’s content. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Russ was 

working toward an even bigger goal. He set his sights on sailing 

around the world. I’m very sorry to say that because of his 

untimely death, Russ was unable to fulfil that dream. 

 

Russell Allan Sutor is survived by his sister, Dianne Lasek, and 

his brother Don Sutor  both reside here in Regina  as well 

as his mother and step-father, Anetta and Ross Atkinson, of 

Nanaimo, B.C. (British Columbia). 

 

Russ is sorely missed by his many friends and family and we 

offer our deepest sympathies to them all. Thank you. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Such is the uncertain nature of politics these days that although 

Mr. Sutor left a scant 12 years ago, I guess it would be, only the 

member from Regina Elphinstone and I actually served with 

him in this legislature today. I didn’t get to know Russ Sutor 

well. I’ll tell you what little I do know, and I think you’ll agree, 

Mr. Speaker, it does tell us something about his character. 

 

I talked about the rather gentlemanly relationship  I would 

call it the professional relationship  which existed between  



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

politicians in the earlier era, in the 1970s. The 1982 election 

just marked a watershed. The whole atmosphere descended just 

on a toboggan ride. Nothing that occurs today comes anywhere 

near what occurred during those four years. We can only have 

sympathy for the Speaker of the day. I’m sure they have 

complaints against us which are equally bad but . . . We used to, 

we sat where the official opposition was. Where the third party 

was was actually taken up by government members. So loud 

was the heckling that we actually couldn’t hear ourselves think. 

When someone asked what it was like I used to say it’s like 

turning up your television set so loud it hurts your ears, then try 

giving a speech. That was kind of the atmosphere. 

 

In that atmosphere Russ Sutor stood out. He was just not a part 

of it. The members who sat on that side of the House were the 

ones who just tried to make it impossible for us to speak to each 

other. At times it was. We had to hand each other notes. 

 

I sat where the member from Humboldt sat, Lawrence Yew sat 

where the member from Saltcoats sat, and Russ Sutor actually 

sat where the member from Cypress Hills sat, so we did kind of 

get to know each other. In this atmosphere he really stood out. 

He was not part of this very raucous legislature. He did not take 

part in it. He did not try to shout anyone down. He was at all 

times a gentleman. 

 

I thought even at the time something unusual about this 

individual, because although he was a new member and might 

easily have followed the lead of others, he didn’t. He took his 

own way, was at all times a gentleman, was at all times civil, 

and although his stay here was relatively short, less than one 

full term, he did leave an impression on me at least of someone 

who was a gentleman, someone who was civil, and someone 

whom I thought, had the circumstances been otherwise, it might 

have been nice to have as a neighbour or perhaps even as a 

friend. 

 

So to his family, I pass on my condolences. And I express the 

thought that serving with Russ Sutor was a pleasure in a 

legislature in which I don’t think I’d say that about everyone 

who was a member of that legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Leader of the Opposition, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the resolutions just passed, together with the 

transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, 

be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Direct Sellers Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

This Bill is intended to improve consumer protection measures 

in direct sales. It also improves enforcement of the Act for the 

benefit of both consumers and direct sellers. Amendments also 

provide for interprovincial harmonization of cancellation rights 

and contract requirements under the Agreement on Internal 

Trade. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Direct Sellers Act has been in place for many 

years. It needs to be updated to respond to changing 

market-place conditions. These amendments were developed by 

the consumer-business-government working group that has 

developed the proposed consumer protection Act. This working 

group, in its review of existing market-place legislation, 

identified this Act as the priority for updating. The proposed 

amendments have also been the subject of extensive 

consultations with other consumer, business and municipal 

groups, including direct sellers. 

 

The Direct Sellers Amendment Act, 1996 will continue to 

balance the rights of consumers and direct sellers. It also 

continues to recognize, however, that direct sales are different 

from other types of retail sales transactions. It is for this reason 

that the Act provides, and will continue to provide, for a 

cooling-off period in which the consumer may cancel the 

contract. 

 

I want to be very clear, Mr. Speaker, that most direct sellers 

operate in complete compliance with the legislation. In fact 

many have better policies with respect to contract cancellation 

and return rights than are set out in the Act. However a few do 

not comply and continue to make direct sales without being 

licensed. In these situations consumers are not protected 

because there are no bonds to protect consumer funds. Where 

these contracts are for large sums, as with home renovation 

contracts, a significant amount of money could be put at risk. 

 

Direct sellers who comply with the Act suffer because of 

unfavourable publicity generated by those who do not comply. 

Unlicensed direct sellers are also unfair competition to licensed 

sellers. Several amendments, including increased penalties for 

non-compliance and improved investigative powers, will assist 

in addressing these concerns. 

 

One challenge in keeping direct sales legislation relevant and 

responsive is the variety of goods and services sold door to 

door. Direct sales include everything from contracts for the sale 

of food and cosmetics to lawn care and home renovations. The 

issues for consumers can vary among these different types of 

sales. 

 

Some of the amendments I am introducing today provide for 

greater flexibility to respond to the needs in different types of 

direct sales. For example, a new provision limits the amount of 

deposit a direct sales home renovator can accept before the 

cooling-off period is over. 

 

The Bill also introduces a requirement for those direct sellers 

who are exempt from the licensing requirements to carry  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 302 

identification cards. These sales people will be required to 

produce their identification card upon request by a consumer. 

And any failure by a direct seller to provide their sales people 

with the identification cards will render their contracts with 

consumers unenforceable. 

 

The sale of some goods is not appropriately governed by direct 

sales legislation and is best dealt with through municipal 

by-laws. This is true, for example, with respect to the sale of 

perishable, unfrozen food products. Exemptions from the Act 

are therefore updated to reflect today’s sales activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the Agreement on Internal Trade, provinces 

and territories agreed that harmonization of direct sales 

cancellation rights and contract requirements would benefit 

both consumers and direct sellers. Harmonization provides 

consumers in all parts of Canada with the same cancellation 

rights. Direct sellers who operate in more than one province 

will be able to use the same contracts in each province. This 

will reduce costs. 

 

Negotiations to harmonize these provisions are now complete. 

Some of the amendments I am proposing today are designed to 

put into effect these harmonized provisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, interprovincial harmonization will not in any way 

reduce the level of protection for Saskatchewan citizens. Under 

the terms of the agreement, provinces agreed to harmonize to 

the highest standard. For example, Saskatchewan is one of three 

provinces that currently has a 10-day cooling-off period with 

respect to direct sales contracts. All other provinces have a 

shorter period. The 10-day period has been accepted by all 

provinces as the appropriate standard. 

 

Harmonization also directly benefits Saskatchewan. For 

example, the content of all written contracts will be prescribed 

in the regulations. Regulations will also prescribe a clear 

statement of consumer cancellation rights that all direct sellers 

must give to purchasers. 

 

A new provision also ensures that where a credit contract is 

associated with a direct sales contract, cancelling the direct 

sales contract also cancels the credit contract. This is 

particularly important if the credit contract has been assigned to 

a third party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the regulations must be revised before these 

amendments will come into force. Regulations will contain 

contract requirements, additional exemptions, and related 

matters. The consumer-business-government working group 

will continue to be involved in the development of these 

regulations. 

 

We will also be consulting extensively with interest groups with 

respect to these regulations before this Act is proclaimed. 

 

Once again I would like to highlight the significance of the 

government’s partnership with consumer and business groups 

in developing this package of amendments. In their work the 

partnership adopted the principle of balancing the interests of 

all parties and recognized that it is necessary to afford special  

protection to vulnerable consumers. This Bill is a result of these 

efforts. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Direct Sellers Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to comment that we are in the process of reviewing the 

legislation and we are seeking opinions on certain matters 

related to the legislation presented by the minister and we 

would ask for adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 10  An Act respecting Marketplace 

Practices, Consumer Products Warranties 

and Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to move 

the second reading of The Consumer Protection Act. This Bill 

is intended to serve two main functions. It introduces market-

place practices legislation designed to bring increased fairness 

to consumer transactions in Saskatchewan. It also combines the 

existing Consumer Products Warranties Act and The 

Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards Act with these new 

provisions to create one, consolidated consumer protection code 

for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of this House will be all too familiar 

with the concerns which the market-place practices provisions 

of this Bill are intended to address. The elderly couple who are 

victimized by an unscrupulous home repair contractor who only 

does a partial repair of a roof at several times the cost of 

comparable services. Or the recent immigrant who is convinced 

to purchase repairs which are not required or not performed. Or 

the elderly woman who is pressured to buy a product she does 

not want or need. We have all heard these stories, often from 

our own constituents. These are the obvious victims of unfair 

market practices. 

 

We should also recognize that we all suffer the consequences of 

these actions. All consumers become wary and distrustful. 

Saskatchewan’s legitimate businesses suffer unfair competition 

and guilt by association. Our community as a whole suffers as a 

result. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me make it perfectly clear from the outset that 

most businesses in the province operate in an ethical and a fair 

manner. These businesses are not the focus of this legislation. I 

do not anticipate that any changes in their operations will be 

required by this Bill. This Bill will operate merely as a 

statement of the first principles by which they have always 

operated. 

 

(1615) 

 

Indeed, from the initial stages of the development of this 

legislation, a working partnership was struck between 

government, business groups, and consumer groups. This 

working group included members from the Consumers’ 

Association of Canada, Canadian Federation of Independent  



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

Business, the Retail Council of Canada, the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce, as well as the departments of Justice 

and Education of the provincial government. 

 

Established more than two years ago, this group was asked to 

work together with a starting premiss that they would respect 

legitimate business and consumer interests and that they would 

recognize that all parties to any consumer transaction have 

rights and responsibilities with respect to that transaction. 

 

With this concept of shared rights and responsibilities in mind, 

the working group was asked to consider our existing consumer 

protection legislative framework. They were asked to identify 

the cracks through which unscrupulous businesses were falling. 

They were also asked to consult with their constituencies and 

the broader community in order to test their conclusions prior to 

making recommendations to this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Consumer Protection Act incorporating the 

new market-place practices provisions is the result of these 

recommendations. The working group identified a gap in our 

current legislation between fraud as proven beyond a reasonable 

doubt under the Criminal Code on the one hand, and what we 

would consider to be standard ethical business practice on the 

other. 

 

It is within this gap that unscrupulous businesses have practised 

a thriving trade in our province without crossing the high 

threshold required by the criminal law. Indeed, seven of the ten 

provincial jurisdictions in Canada have market-place practices 

legislation to address this problem. Until now Saskatchewan 

has not. 

 

I am advised that the working group found the business 

practices legislation in other provinces to be instructive, but not 

determinative in their deliberations. The working group wanted 

a Saskatchewan solution which respected both consumer and 

business rights. They wanted to empower the parties involved 

in a dispute over a consumer transaction to resolve their own 

problem if at all possible, without prolonged and expensive 

court proceedings. 

 

However, where consumers were unable to adequately protect 

their own interests due to infirmity of any kind, the working 

group recognized that special protection must be available. 

Similarly, where a business is intentionally victimizing 

consumers, rapid intervention must be allowed to protect the 

public interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the market-place practices provisions contained in 

part II of the Bill can best be described as a balance — a 

balance between encouraging consumers and businesses to 

resolve their own disputes and providing sufficient teeth in the 

Bill to deal with the intentionally unscrupulous businesses and 

those consumers in special need of protection. A balance 

between respecting and endorsing the thousands of reasonable 

and fair consumer transactions conducted every day throughout 

Saskatchewan, and identify and addressing those few but 

troubling transactions that proceed in an unfair manner. A 

balance between the obligation of all consumers to educate and 

inform themselves of their responsibilities in any transaction  

and the need to prohibit unfair business practices. To strike this 

balance, part II of the Bill will apply to a broad range of 

consumer transactions in the Saskatchewan market-place. 

 

The Bill defines the types of behaviour that constitute unfair 

business practices, including misrepresentation, making a false 

claim, or taking advantage of consumers who are not in a 

position to protect their own interests or who are not able to 

understand the nature of a transaction. 

 

In addition, the Bill contains several specific examples of these 

unfair practices. It then takes the next step of making it an 

offence to engage in such an unfair business practice. Having 

set the ground rules, the Bill provides a variety of remedies to a 

consumer, depending on the severity of the breach under the 

Act. 

 

The consumer is given the ability to take court action where the 

consumer believes he or she has been the victim of an unfair 

practice. However, the Act requires the director to actively 

encourage consumers and suppliers to resolve their disputes 

through mediation. 

 

The Bill also provides for a voluntary agreement for compliance 

between the supplier and the director whereby a supplier agrees 

voluntarily to stop an unfair business practice. 

 

Obviously the best resolution of a dispute is one which comes 

from the parties themselves. However, where such a resolution, 

even through facilitated discussion or a direct dialogue between 

the parties, is not available, further steps may be taken. Under 

the Act the director will have limited powers to commence an 

action on behalf of someone who has been victimized by an 

unfair business practice. The director will also be empowered to 

administer the Act and to act on behalf of the disadvantaged or 

vulnerable consumers where they are unable to take steps to 

protect themselves. 

 

In other situations, where it is in the public interest to do so, the 

director is able to seek an order for a supplier to immediately 

comply with the requirements of the Act. The director can 

obtain an order requiring any person to refrain from dealing 

with consumer assets, or the director can apply to the court for 

an injunction to prevent an unfair practice. These are actions 

which only will be taken where a supplier has refused to 

cooperate with the director. 

 

In providing these powers to the director to act on behalf of 

consumers, the Act is of course careful to provide for both 

hearings and rights of appeal for suppliers affected by such 

orders. As part of this balance, the Act also sets out specific 

consumer responsibilities under the Bill. These include making 

reasonable efforts to minimize any damages that may occur, and 

where appropriate, attempting to resolve a dispute with the 

supplier before taking court action. 

 

By making this full range of remedial options available to the 

consumer, the supplier, and the director under the Act, it is 

anticipated that charging and prosecuting a business conducting 

an unfair practice will rarely be required. It will be limited only 

to the most outrageous offenders. The working group was  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 304 

careful to recommend a Bill which would protect consumer 

interests without creating an unfair or oppressive regime for 

responsible businesses. Throughout the Act the concept of 

reasonableness is central to any assessment of steps taken by 

either the consumer or the supplier. 

 

With respect to parts III and IV of the Bill, I would simply 

advise this Assembly that these provisions represent The 

Consumer Products Warranties Act and The Unsolicited Goods 

and Credit Cards Act, as they now exist, consolidated into this 

broader legislation. These Acts have served Saskatchewan 

consumers well over the past 20 years and I would encourage 

all interested parties to re-familiarize themselves with the 

significant existing protection which these Acts provide. 

 

The only substantive amendment to these provisions is the 

addition of section 44, of a mediation and arbitration clause, 

that would allow disputes regarding consumer product 

warranties to be resolved with some finality by these alternative 

methods. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the partnership between government, business 

groups, and consumer groups, which led to this legislation, is to 

be commended. This Bill is a true Saskatchewan solution. It 

balances legitimate interests while providing assistance and 

special attention to those who need it. 

 

I invite all members of this Assembly to support this important 

new addition to Saskatchewan’s consumer protection 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting 

Marketplace Practices, Consumer Product Warranties and 

Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, we are currently reviewing the 

Act with stakeholders and we therefore request to move to 

adjourn debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks 

I’ll move second reading of The Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since its establishment in 1988, the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology has been 

committed to providing quality education and training, to 

respond to business and industry, and to enrich individuals and 

communities in Saskatchewan. SIAST, as I’ll call it, the 

acronym for the institute, is geared to produce a skilled 

workforce that is flexible, entrepreneurial, and technically 

competent. 

 

When the original institute Act was written, Mr. Speaker, 

SIAST was a brand-new organization. SIAST has now had the 

opportunity to develop as an institution. It is now time to amend 

the legislation to reflect a number of changes in  

terminology and administrative practices which have occurred 

as SIAST has evolved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when SIAST was established, it was necessary 

that the Act enable the transfer of programs and employees 

from the advanced technology training centre to SIAST. In 

addition, it was necessary that the Act provide for an interim 

governing council until a board of directors was appointed. 

These provisions are no longer applicable and this Bill reflects 

the current practice. 

 

By changing the name of the Act from The Institute Act to the 

name in Bill No. 3, Mr. Speaker, this Bill more accurately 

reflects the organizational structure of SIAST, with a central 

planning and a coordination unit known as the SIAST 

secretariat, and the four major program delivery arms known as 

SIAST institutes. Most hon. members will be familiar with the 

Wascana, Kelsey, Woodland, and Palliser institutes as they have 

come to be known. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former SIAST campuses are now referred to as 

institutes to reflect the higher level of importance for the 

institutes. 

 

I welcome any questions hon. members may have during the 

Committee of the Whole, and during detailed discussions of the 

Bill’s provisions. These proposed amendments are based on 

consultation with the SIAST board of directors and their desire 

for amendments to the Act. 

 

I ask the members of the Assembly to support these 

amendments, and I therefore move second reading of Bill No. 

3, The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology Act. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 

counting on a spirit of cooperation, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1630) 

 

Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

explain the background and purpose for The University of 

Regina Amendment Act, 1996. The present Act requires 

amendment to update its administrative provisions as they relate 

to the powers of the board of governors to invest the monies of 

the university. 

 

This section is properly described as a housekeeping 

amendment of which I’ll be pleased to discuss in the 

Committee of the Whole. The existing provisions in the Act are 

outdated. The current provision restricts the university’s 

authority to invest funds to a specific list of authorized 

investment vehicles. This list is no longer appropriate and the 

university has been cited by the Provincial Auditor for improper 

investment; the investments not having complied with the 

existing provisions of the Act. 

 



March 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

The proposed amendment will give the university investment 

authority; power which will be consistent with the provisions in 

The University of Saskatchewan Act, 1995 which was passed in 

this legislature in the last session. It will also be consistent with 

investment authority given to other public institutions. 

 

The amendment maintains the past practice of having statutes 

for the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 

Regina mirror each other in areas where the university should 

appropriately have the same administrative powers or duties. 

Giving the university more up-to-date and flexible investment 

authority will enable it to maximize its return on invested funds. 

 

The University of Regina serves the needs of nearly 13,000 

students, Mr. Speaker. It takes justifiable pride in its tradition of 

teaching excellence and innovation. If we are to maintain that 

academic reputation into the 21st century, we must move with 

the times. It is important that the university have the legislative 

authority it needs to continue to effectively serve its students 

and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments were specifically requested by 

the University of Regina, which has identified them as a high 

priority. The government considers it important to support the 

university and its role in our province. I am pleased to move 

therefore that Bill No. 4, The University of Regina Act 

Amendment, 1996, now be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Counting on the 

increased amount of cooperation as expressed in this Assembly, 

I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 

and speak in support of The Community Bonds Amendment 

Act, 1996. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the community bond 

program has been very successful since it was introduced more 

than six years ago. 

 

Working through grass roots bond corporations, thousands of 

ordinary Saskatchewan men and women have invested more 

than $14 million in value added businesses  business that are 

in manufacturing, processing, destination tourism, and in the 

provision of export products and services; businesses that have 

brought needed jobs and vitality to many small towns in 

addition to strengthening the economic bases of our cities. 

 

The bond program has been an important tool for our 

community economic development and has helped contribute to 

a new development culture throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as, and the hon. members will know, community 

economic development has been at the heart of the highly 

successful economic strategy Partnership For Renewal. And 

community economic development is a central and strategic 

successor to the document Partnership for Renewal and 

included in Partnership for Growth which we unveiled on 

February 22 of this year. 

The changes our government has made to the community bond 

program legislation over the years have helped strengthen the 

bonds as a community economic tool, providing flexibility and 

greater partnership in the bonds process while continuing to 

ensure due diligence and protecting the bondholders and 

taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Previous amendments to the Act have made the program 

accessible to cooperatives and regional economic development 

authorities and have strengthened the Community Bond Review 

Committee and eligibility criteria. 

 

The amendments being proposed in this session continue that 

spirit of flexibility and diligence, of not burdening the bond 

corporations with unnecessary paperwork and regulation while 

ensuring that protection for their investors is there. 

 

The amendments are a mix of housekeeping measures and 

provisions designed to make it easier for bond corporations, or 

bond co.’s as they are also known, to raise funds and administer 

their affairs. For example, the amendments provide for some 

discretion in the requirement of a REDA (regional economic 

development authority), RDC (rural development corporation), 

or municipality nominee and a youth director throughout the 

life of a bond co. 

 

It has been difficult in situations where a project company is 

winding down and few bondholders remain to recruit 

candidates for those director positions. It has been similarly 

difficult, particularly in rural areas, to recruit experienced youth 

directors at the current age level of 16 to 25. In changing that 

range to 18 to 30, we are helping bond co.’s find the 

experienced candidates for their boards. 

 

Other amendments take out references to environmental bonds. 

The original intent with the environmental bond had been to 

have a specified rate of return as well as a separate legislation. 

However the environmental projects that came forward 

qualified under the manufacturing and processing eligible 

sector. And it was deemed that separate bond offering would be 

both unnecessary and administratively costly. Hence we’re 

proposing that the regulation be amended to add environmental 

projects as eligible community bond investments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another important amendment is to eliminate the 

small fee a bondholder had to pay each year to guarantee his or 

her investment. This fee for guarantee, three-quarters of one per 

cent, was established to help the government offset losses under 

the program. But the fee has caused more problems than it has 

solved. It has annoyed bondholders and it has proven a 

hindrance in some instances to the sale of bonds. Elimination of 

this fee will be appreciated by bondholders and bond 

corporations, which we will reimburse for the monies collected 

to date. This action of eliminating a nuisance fee is consistent 

with our commitment in Partnership for Growth to reduce 

regulations by 25 per cent over the next 10 years. 

 

Other changes are of similar administrative nature. They 

include: first, allowing bond co.’s more discretion in retention 

of their net earnings, changing the annual return filing dates to 

coincide with the bond co’s. filing of their own financial  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 306 

statements, waiving of the requirement for filing financial 

statements if the project company is bankrupt or if there are 

fewer than 10 bondholders remaining in the bond co., allowing 

a bond co. to dissolve after its early maturity date if the project 

company is bankrupt. 

 

And other changes are to remove the articles of incorporation 

that form . . . from the regulation and remove the annual 

amendment that was required to the regulation to prescribe the 

dollar limit of guarantees that could be approved each fiscal 

year. As this latter amount is determined by Treasury Board 

through the budget process, the listing of the annual limit is 

unnecessary and an unnecessary administrative task. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes I’ve outlined have resulted from an 

ongoing review of the community bond program. They reflect 

our desire to streamline and enhance the bond process by 

reducing the amount of red tape. 

 

These changes will help the bond corporation directors, most of 

whom are busy volunteers, to do their job better. And that in 

turn will help us all in our shared task of community economic 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that all members of the House will 

work together to ensure the speedy passage of these measures to 

further strengthen the community bond program. And it’s in 

that spirit that I now present The Community Bonds 

Amendment Act, 1996 for second reading. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Due to the extent 

and size of the Bill, we’d like more time to review this. And so 

at this time I’d move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 7  An Act to repeal 

The Industrial Incentive Program Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I just want to refer 

first of all in this second reading that this is a very minor 

amendment. The Department of Economic Development has 

requested that the Bill . . . the Economic Development 

department has requested this Bill is no longer needed and 

therefore we are here to do the work to repeal the Bill. 

 

The program that governed and was governed by this Act was 

introduced in 1984 and took applications until March 31, 1987. 

And it has not been active for a number of years and the 

legislation is no longer required. And the reason for that is 

obviously because many other programs have come into place 

to take the place of this piece of legislation. And if a similar 

program were to be contemplated in the future, it could be 

established through the regulations under the department as it 

now exists in legislation. 

 

In essence, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has been introduced simply to 

reduce and remove legislation that is no longer needed and 

outdated. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:43 p.m. 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................277 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................278 
  D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................278 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................278 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................278 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................278 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................278 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................278 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................278 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................279 
  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Hamilton ....................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................279 
  Lorje ...........................................................................................................................................................................................280 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................280 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................280 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Students Against Drinking and Driving 10th Anniversary 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................280 
 Tragic Shooting in Scotland 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................280 
  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................280 
 Passing of Dr. Geoffrey Buck 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................281 
 Banner Year for Saskatoon 
  Lorje ...........................................................................................................................................................................................281 
 Saskatchewan’s Maintenance Enforcement Program 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................281 
 Regina Lions Junior Band 
  Murray .......................................................................................................................................................................................281 
 Deputy Speaker’s 50th Birthday 
  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................282 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Rural Health Care 
  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................282 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................282 
 Municipal Government Amalgamation 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................283 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................283 
 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
  Mr. Goohsen ..............................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................284 
 High-risk Offender Identification 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................284 
 McDowell Report 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................284 
  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................285 
 Repayment of Government Funds 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................285 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................285 
 Sale of Cameco Shares 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................286 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................286 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 14, 1996 308 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 19  An Act to revoke the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................286 
 Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the Management of Forest Resources 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................286 
 Bill No. 21  An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, 1995 and to enact a related amendment/Loi modifiant la Loi 

d’interprétation de 1995 et édictant une modification corrélative 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................286 
 Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and Safety Act, 1985 and to make Related Amendments to The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 
  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 Bill No. 23  An Act to amend The Archives Act 
  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 Bill No. 24  An Act respecting the Prescription of Pharmaceutical Agents and Contact Lenses 
  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 Bill No. 25  An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 Bill No. 26  An Act to amend the Statute Law 
  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
 Bill No. 27  An Act respecting Architects 
  Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................287 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................287 
CONDOLENCES 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................287, 288, 291, 293, 296, 299, 301 
  Osika ..................................................................................................................................................................................288, 300 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................290 
  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................290 
  Haverstock .........................................................................................................................................................290, 292, 295, 299 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................292 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................294 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................295 
  Shillington..........................................................................................................................................................................295, 300 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................298 
  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................299 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................300 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................301 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................302 

 Bill No. 10  An Act respecting Marketplace Practices, Consumer Products Warranties and Unsolicited Goods and 

Credit Cards 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................302 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................304 

 Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................304 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................304 

 Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 
  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................304 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................305 

 Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................305 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................306 

 Bill No. 7  An Act to repeal The Industrial Incentive Program Act 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................306 
 

 


