
























































June 20, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2965 
 June 20, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Chairman, I forget what the 
question was. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I forget what 
his answer was. We’ll have to wait for Hansard tomorrow. But, 
Mr. Minister, I’m sure it had something interesting to do about 
grain cars. 
 
So we’ll move on from that point, although I do have some 
questions that could relate to . . . well not directly to grain cars, 
do relate to railroads, and this deals with rail line 
abandonments. What role does Saskatchewan Ag and Food play 
in rail line abandonments, particularly in the disposal of the 
lands after the rail line has been abandoned. Does Sask Ag and 
Food play any role in that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe at 
one time Sask Ag and Food was involved in, if not directly, at 
least in policy, dealing with rail line abandonments. And there 
has been some questions. I know it has come up in the House 
already, dealing with the uses of abandoned rail lines, whether 
or not it should be turned over to the farmers in some manner, 
whether or not it should be used in some other way such as a 
proposal for a hiking trail. Some of these types of proposals 
have come forward, Mr. Minister, and I was wondering if Ag 
and Food had any policies outlining that. 
 
Because some of the problems that have arisen in my area when 
it comes to the rail line abandonment properties  before we 
move on to the difficulties of farmers moving their grain after 
abandonment  but some of the difficulties with the disposal 
of the property is, who becomes responsible for noxious weeds, 
etc., that grow up along those abandoned right of ways when 
the titles are in transition, when the ownership is unclear. I 
wonder if you can comment on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the weeds . . . the situation comes 
under The Noxious Weeds Act and it is controlled under that 
Act. And the ownership  if the ownership is up in the air, 
there’s a number of things that you can do. You can work with 
the municipality or local farmers but there’s the Act, the 
provincial Act, covers that. 
 
And I remember what we were talking about before. I said I felt 
like the Premier because we had . . . now we’re back into 
Highways and Transportation, then you moved into Finance 
with the fuel, now we’re back into Highways and 
Transportation so I hope that you appreciate that if I can’t 
answer specifically, it’s because it’s actually another 

department you should be asking these questions of. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I 
remember what the questions were. It was how many fuel 
rebate . . . farmers received the fuel rebates and how many 
farmers or the spouses of farmers that are receiving the fuel 
rebate would now be entitled under these changes to receive 
further fuel rebates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I would have no idea. That comes out of 
the Department of Finance. When the Minister of Finance 
comes up, I’m sure she’ll be glad to answer those questions for 
you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. How does 
this ruling change the definition of a farmer? What is the 
definition of a farmer under Ag and Food and how will this 
Human Rights ruling change that definition in relationship to 
the Department of Finance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well it doesn’t really affect Ag and 
Food. For example, Crop Insurance, we do not have any 
specifications that you have to have one contract for the one 
unit. I mean a man or a woman could have . . . or a wife could 
have the contract. So it really doesn’t affect us too much at all, 
we think, that we know of right now. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. 
Why then was the Department of Finance having classifications 
or definitions on the term “farmer” as it applied to rebates, farm 
fuels, when under your Act, particularly Crop Insurance, a 
spouse . . . both spouses of a relationship were entitled to have 
contracts and were treated as separate entities? We discussed 
earlier in the case of leasing Ag and Food land, how one or 
more members within a family could be classified as an 
individual enterprise for the purposes of the leases, that they 
could be classified, as I said, as individual enterprises. Yet 
under Finance, those same individuals would be classified as a 
single unit rather than as an individual enterprise. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well you’ll have to get the details from 
Finance, more detail, because like I say, that’s not our 
department but under the . . . our Acts doesn’t prohibit a man or 
a woman from having a contract under Crop Insurance. 
 
Under the Department of Finance, the stipulation was one 
person per farm unit. And when this went to the Human Rights 
Commission, I guess the woman that took it there was ruled in 
her favour, saying that she had the right to apply as well. 
 
Serious implications financially. I don’t know the total number. 
But it’s in the millions and millions of dollars that this could 
have an effect. So what this ruling has done is made us have to 
sit down and take a look at the whole rebate program. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 



2966 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, to 
you and through you with the greatest pleasure, I want to 
introduce to you a group of people from Margo. There’s 24 
students and 7 adults and they’re in grade K to 6. The teachers 
that are with them are Ron Koroluk, Tammy Bagnall, and then 
we have Anella Domeij, Floyd Hendrickson, Bev Psuvsky, 
Dianne Johns, and Myrna Daviduk. 
 
Thank you very much for coming. I’m looking forward to 
meeting with you afterwards and if you have any questions, 
we’ll be able to have some fun while we’re having some drinks. 
So talk to you later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I wonder if you could outline for us the impact that the rail line 
abandonments are going to have on the future of agriculture 
along some of these particular lines? The paper I have here talks 
about the abandonment of a portion of the Assiniboia 
subdivision for abandonment of freight train operations 
extending from mile .06, to a point just west of Weyburn, to 
mile 36.5, a point just east of Pangman in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That line running west from Weyburn isn’t, relatively, good 
production land. It’s going to have an impact certainly on those 
farmers when it comes to hauling their products to market. It’s 
going to increase their costs very significantly. 
 
It’s going to have a major impact on our highway system, and 
we talked to the Minister of Highways about that last night to a 
certain degree  the impact that expanded traffic has already 
had on our roads and the terrible shape that those roads are in, 
the lack of support that is being provided for those roads, even 
though as the rail lines are abandoned, the government picks up 
more and more tax money from fuel taxes. And yet the roads in 
return are not maintained in a way that would provide for an 
easy access to our grain system. 
 
When you particularly look at this area, you’re going to have 
very significant loads moving in from the west of Weyburn into 
either the Weyburn Inland Terminal or the new Pool high 
through-put elevator just north of Weyburn. So it’s going to 
have a very major impact, Mr. Minister. And I believe that the 
Department of Agriculture should be preparing Saskatchewan 
for the eventuality of these abandonments, and I think it’s very 
important that the province be involved in that abandonment 
process to determine whether or not those lines are abandoned. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Minister, I think it would be very important 
for the province of Saskatchewan and Ag and Food to be  

involved in the encouragement of short-line services. We have a 
short-line service running south from Moose Jaw to Avonlea 
and does a very good job of moving the grain in that area. I 
believe there is another one down in the Simmie area. I could 
be mistaken on that, but I’m pretty sure there’s one down in 
there. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what is Ag and Food doing to encourage . . . 
or to deal with the abandonment and to encourage the 
development of short-line rails to handle those lines that are 
feasible for short line, even though the CPR (Canadian Pacific 
Railway) or the CNR (Canadian National Railway Company) 
doesn’t believe that it suits their particular purpose because the 
other rail lines in the neighbourhood are perhaps from the same 
company, Mr. Minister. Could you comment on that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well you’re not making this very easy. 
This is the Department of Highways and I have Department of 
Agriculture officials, so we don’t know for sure but we don’t 
think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s grain we’re moving here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  It’s grain we’re moving, that’s right. 
Well I think the member knows full well what department he 
should be asking questions of, but nevertheless we’ll answer 
them to the best of our ability. 
 
Just before we do that I want to go back to one of your 
questions that you raised before the supper break and that was a 
comparison of the dollars that was generated from oil leases. 
Last year, April 1, ’95-March 31, ’96  5,021,284. So this 
year, 4.7 million. So we’re down $300,000 from that year. So it 
hasn’t changed that much. 
 
But as far as the short-line railways is concerned, now the 
problem that I have, and I’ll just give you my personal opinion 
on this, the problem that I have with short-line railroads  I 
know we can’t stop development and shouldn’t stop the 
development  but it’s a direct offload from the federal 
government. It’s a direct offload. 
 
Right now this is a federal taxpayers’ responsibility  the 
movement of grain. When they abandon that line and let’s say 
somebody picks up the line, the line could probably function 
very well until it needs maintenance and upgrading, until it 
needs some new machinery. Then it becomes a provincial 
problem if this line can’t make any money and it’s . . . they 
need it. Where do they go for money? Not the federal 
government because there’s no more legislation  they’re out 
of it. So it’s an offload on the provincial government. 
 
That worries me. It worries me because we don’t have the tax 
base, and in this country, the billions and billions of dollars that 
grain generates for this country, we’ve always had a federal 
responsibility because that generation of that dollar goes to all 
Canadians. So there’s some responsibility on the part of the 
federal government. 
 
(1915) 
 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2967 

As far as railroads are concerned of course, they can run mains 
and secondary mains, and that’s all they need because they 
know all the grain has got to go through that line anyway, even 
if they closed the branch lines down. It’ll get trucked up or 
whatever. 
 
So I know the Department of Highways is working with the 
trucking industry very closely to try to develop new ways to 
prevent road deterioration. I think if you talked last night to the 
Minister of Highways, probably talked about low pressure tires, 
where they can, from the cab of the truck, inflate or deflate the 
tire on the semi, slow the speed down and do very little damage 
to roads. 
 
So we’re always constantly working with the industry on the 
things like this, simply because that seems to be the direction of 
abandonment. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You hit 
on one of the key points and that’s the fact that as far as the 
railroads are concerned, they could haul all of the grain out of 
Saskatchewan using simply a main . . . one main line running 
through the middle of Saskatchewan and force everyone to haul 
their grain to that point. 
 
And that would be their most efficient system, but it’s certainly 
not the most efficient system for the farmer. For his total 
movement of grain from the farm gate to the port is not 
necessarily the most efficient system for the railroad. Because 
obviously if the railroad has to pick it up in Trossachs and ship 
it to Vancouver, it’s not as efficient for them if they have to run 
a locomotive with three cars down to Trossachs from Weyburn. 
 
So if you have to move all your grain and pick it up at Moose 
Jaw at the Elders terminal there or the Wheat Pool terminal  
AgPro terminal  that’s certainly a lot more efficient for CP 
(Canadian Pacific) or CN (Canadian National) if they have one 
unit and they just run it back and forth. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, that’s not the best for the farmer. Perhaps an 
alternative: because of the lack of competition between CN and 
CP because it’s regulated, there’s a fixed price for the 
movement of grain. If that was to be removed and the 
restriction placed on the movement of grain in Canada, and we 
were allowed to ship south down the Mississippi to New 
Orleans or out to the west coast through BN (Burlington 
Northern) to Seattle, I think it would open up competition 
which would benefit Saskatchewan farmers and indeed would 
benefit farmers in the north-western United States, because 
they’re locked into a monopoly situation there with BN. 
 
Their freight rates in actual fact are higher than our own are on 
hauling on BN because they have a monopoly system when you 
move from the western part of North Dakota through to Seattle. 
Further east in North Dakota you run into competition . . . than 
shipping down the Mississippi as well as BN going west. And 
that rate going south down the Mississippi I believe, as I 
mentioned earlier, is about $4 less on rail than it is on barge 
even. 
 
So there’s a significant saving to be had by the shipper through  

competition. And that’s a competition mechanism we lack in 
this country because of the regulation in place, because of the 
agreements between the rail system on how grain is going to be 
handled. And I think we need to open that up, Mr. Minister, and 
that’s a role that you can play and your government can play in 
providing a more efficient service to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, to the producers of Saskatchewan, and indeed to 
the producers of all of Canada. 
 
What means, what methods, what involvement, do you have in 
improving those efficiencies for farmers to ship in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m sure he’ll be interested in it, and 
maybe he might even sit down and read Hansard he might be 
so interested in it. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that Burlington Northern, I’m told, 
through Montana, you know, it has access to . . . it’s got the 
highest rates in the U.S. (United States). The only way that 
we’re going to get competition in my estimation is for the 
federal government to legislate joint running rights. If you 
legislated joint running rights where each locomotive can go on 
each other’s tracks . . . and this is a little ironic. Maybe I should 
ask my Liberal friends to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
short-line too? Short-line locomotives joint running rights, sure. 
There’s nothing wrong with that. 
 
Maybe the Liberal friends should listen to this too because the 
irony of this whole situation is this. In power and telephone 
there’s great deregulation, a great deregulation trend on in 
Ottawa, and so that point in time will come where we will not 
be able to use our own facilities like our telephone lines just for 
ourselves. Other companies will be able to come into this 
province shortly and they will be entitled to use our 
infrastructure. That’s deregulation. It’s power. It’s telephone. 
 
But when it comes to railroads, when CP won’t let CN run on 
their lines, vice versa, well the federal Liberals just sort of close 
their ears to it. So it’s deregulation when it’s good for some, but 
no deregulation when it’s not good for others. And I’m sure that 
the CP-CN lobby has a great lot to do with that. So that, in my 
estimation, is . . . and the other thing that we must ensure that 
we do is, you know, in this whole scheme of things as far as 
branch line abandonment goes, we must make sure that the 
farmer gets the biggest advantage, and that means, you know, 
things like keeping the Canadian Wheat Board so he can get 
that extra cash in his pocket. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, we have you 
convinced to be a free-marketer and to do away with subsidies. 
We have you convinced that restrictions placed on commercial 
interests is a bad thing, that it impedes profit. We still have to 
work on you a little bit more on this Canadian Wheat Board 
thing but we’re prepared to do that this evening. But, Mr. 
Minister, I agree with you when it comes to running rights, that 
people should be able to purchase or have access to running 
rights on the rails, no matter who owns the rail. You simply pay 
a fee to run. You have somebody who is scheduling the routes 
so that there are no major conflicts, but that you have access to 
the system, to the rail bed system in its entirety. 



2968 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

And it’s not as if CP has paid out of pocket for all of CP’s road 
bed. A significant portion of that road bed, and the 
improvements to that road bed, were provided by the 
Government of Canada, and in actual fact we have probably put 
in, as taxpayers, enough money to own all of the CP rail bed. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I agree with you when it comes to the idea of 
running rights. I think that it shouldn’t be just restricted to CN 
or CP. Short-line rails should also have access to the entire rail 
bed, and indeed, if you or I wanted to start up a railroad, we 
could capitalize it to the extent of purchasing locomotive 
power. We could lease cars from the producers who will 
hopefully buy them, or from other entities. 
 
We should be able to enter into contracts to move grain with 
those kind of running rights  that the railroads simply become 
another means of transportation such as the highway system  
the highway system today, where you can put trucks on the 
road, you buy a licence and away you go. You meet the 
regulations and the safety requirements and you’re not impeded 
from commerce. That is the kind of system that I would like to 
see happen on the railroad. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Minister, while you are moving towards our 
direction a little bit, we might have to shift a little bit further to 
the left. I know it bothers me and it probably bothers you, but to 
have running rights on the rail system for everyone may mean a 
shift in the ownership of the rail bed. I think that’s something 
that should be looked at. I’m not sure how far we would want to 
go with that, but I think it’s an idea that may have some value 
and should be explored to determine how much value it would 
have to the farmers and producers, and indeed not just 
agriculture producers, but mineral producers, lumber, anyone 
who ships on the rail, Mr. Minister. 
 
That is an avenue that should be explored. Perhaps it is not of 
value, but I believe it is one of those things that we should look 
at because I think running rights would create a significant 
impact on transportation if everyone had access to that rail 
system, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I don’t mind doing Department of 
Highways and Transportation estimates, but I’m not the official 
spokesman for that area, the area you’re asking questions in, but 
I think that we have to work, say, from this province together 
with . . . and maybe some of our Liberal friends could stand up 
and give us their opinion on whether joint running rights would 
be . . . I’m sure the member would let you get up and tell us if 
you agree that joint running rights should be something that we, 
as a united House in Saskatchewan, should be asking the 
federal Liberal government to do. 
 
I said Liberal and friends in the same sentence. Yes, that’s an 
oxymoron, isn’t it? But no, because I think it’s important. I 
think it’s important that we have full cooperation from all the 
people in this House. And so maybe when I sit down, you can 
do that. 
 
As far as the competition and infrastructure, we can simply just 
keep working with the federal government. We keep lobbying 
them. I never, ever thought I’d hear myself say that we should  

be looking at New Orleans . . . and I’ve gone through this 
thought process because it is an option. It is an option to go 
down to New Orleans, to take our grain to Winnipeg, because 
the rail line hooks up to the rail or barge system in the 
Mississippi and you go straight down the port. But the reality is 
. . . and that would put political pressure on the federal Liberal 
government to clean up their act, because there’s a few more 
votes in Vancouver and Thunder Bay and east than there is in 
Saskatchewan. And sometimes you have to do this. 
 
But the reality is that our grain probably would be moved last, a 
low priority in the whole scheme of things. And then if you’ve 
got the port problem, what facilities do you use? 
 
Anyway, it’s certainly an option worth looking at. I mean what 
about Churchill? Churchill, you’ve got 20, $25 advantage, rate 
reduction. In this whole system of selling CN, and now the 
costs going up significantly, we have to make sure the federal 
government uses Churchill, and we have to apply pressure. And 
maybe that’s something else the Liberal members could talk 
about  what they’ve done to talk to their federal counterparts 
about Churchill. So lots of efficiencies you have to build in the 
system. And look at the history. 
 
John Payne, Central Western Railway of Alberta. I don’t know 
if you know Mr. Payne or not. He had the first short-line in 
western Canada. First couple of years worked wonderfully well 
because he was still getting the federal subsidy. As soon as that 
ended, he’s now running tourists up and down the line, which is 
great. I don’t know if he’s making a buck at it or not, but the 
fact of the matter is we’ve got to be very, very careful of what 
money we put into these infrastructures because they are 
tremendously expensive. And if it’s up to the taxpayers of . . . 
300,000 taxpayers in Saskatchewan to pay for this, I’m not sure 
that we can accomplish what we set out to accomplish in the 
first place. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude:  Through you to the Assembly I take great 
pleasure introducing three very special people  Leanne, 
Jocelyn, and Leasa, who make our life not only bearable, but 
exciting in here. Welcome, girls. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I 
thought we were the only ones who couldn’t stay away from  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2969 

this place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that there are a number of options 
available . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know the minister 
would like to get out of here but we have one or two more 
questions for him. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that there are some areas where we could 
be utilizing the rail service a little better, particularly heading 
down to New Orleans and the gulf coast. You look at the rail 
line running south from Steelman through Alcott, 
Saskatchewan, across the border. It would take about four or 
five miles of upgrading in that particular stretch to move from 
light steel to heavy steel, to have a significant piece of traffic 
available to move on that line to alleviate some of the pressure 
off the Soo line running through North Portal. Not a major 
upgrade  and yet would serve us right down to New Orleans 
if that was needed. 
 
(1930) 
 
So the options are there for us, and the opportunities. You 
mention the fellow in Alberta who is now running tourists up 
and down his rail line. Well the short-line south of Moose Jaw 
is still existing. I don’t know what they may receive for 
financial support from government in any sense, but they’re still 
existing and, as I mentioned, the one over at Simmie is still, I 
believe, working. 
 
So there are people who are doing it. They’re restricted, because 
of how the system is set up to work, on what they can haul and 
where they can haul it to, but if running rights were available, 
I’m sure that they would certainly run significant competition to 
CN or CP, who in their near-monopoly position  I believe 
oligarchy is the word for more than a single monopoly  under 
that system they don’t have to become efficient. And now with 
the change to the Crow rate, another transportation means 
somewhat opening up at a slow pace, perhaps the rail line 
system will have to move into the 21st century. But until that 
really starts to get moving, I think we need to be looking at 
other means of transportation here. 
 
The availability of trucks going south is an option, and that is 
why a number of the farmers are taking advantage of that 
opportunity, be it in the approved manner or not, because the 
transportation costs associated with movement of grain, farmers 
are looking for other options. They’re looking at other 
opportunities for themselves to maximize their returns, and 
avoiding the excessive costs of rail transportation as provided 
by CN and CP is one of the reasons why they’re doing that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I’d like to move on to something else, though. We sent you over 
questions for globals. I’m not sure whether we received the 
answers to those or not. Can you please indicate whether you 
have? 
 
Also we provided the House Leader with an additional set of 
questions that he was to pass on to all the departments for 
answering. The Minister of Finance indicated she would answer 
them, the Department of Highways was going to answer, and  

three or four other departments that came through. There was 
19 questions on this sheet. If you haven’t got it, we will supply 
it to you, and if you can indicate . . . they have all agreed to 
supply the answers. The Minister of Finance looked them over 
very carefully and indicated that she had no problem in 
providing the answers in those areas, and as did the other 
ministers when they looked the questions over. So if you can 
indicate . . . give some indication on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The globals . . . I handed over the 
globals last time we did estimates. We are not familiar with the 
new questions that you have put forward to the House Leader. 
There must be some miscommunication here somewhere, but if 
you have a copy we will undertake to answer them in great 
detail. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. We’ll 
get you a copy of them right away. 
 
One of the questions that I have on there that I would like to ask 
directly though, deals with your deputy minister and any heads 
of department that may have CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) 
vehicles. Can you please indicate which ones are entitled to a 
CVA vehicle, which ones utilize a CVA vehicle, and which 
ones may be charging personal mileage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  At the executive level, there is just Dr. 
MacLaughlin, my deputy, and Crop Insurance  Doug 
Matthies from Crop Insurance that have CVAs. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, they’re the only ones 
entitled to them and are they both utilizing the CVA vehicles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, yes. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to the officials. I wanted to speak with you a little bit 
this evening about the Canadian Wheat Board dual marketing 
and the whole debate surrounding that, Mr. Minister. 
 
As you know, there has been numerous court cases surrounding 
the whole issue of dual marketing, things of that nature. You’ve 
made some fairly strong statements with respect to dual 
marketing and what you thought of the farmers who wanted to 
move outside of the Canadian Wheat Board jurisdiction to 
market grain themselves into the United States. 
 
And I’m wondering whether, Mr. Minister, whether or not you 
regret any of the statements you made about the motives of the 
. . . or what you attributed the motives of the farmers who were 
looking for a better dollar for the grain that they grow 
themselves, put into the ground, pay for all of the inputs, make 
all of the payments on the machinery and the land and 
everything else, and then not have the opportunity to sell to the 
highest bidder as they see . . . I can’t think . . . frankly, I don’t 
know of very many parallels to that in any other area of the 
economy, and I’m just wondering if you can give us sort of 
your general overview as to what you see the . . . as to the 
debate surrounding the dual-marketing issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well we went over this with your  



2970 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

colleague, but we’ll go over it again. One of the nice things that 
I appreciate: at least I know where you stand. And I was 
encouraging my Liberal friends to get up and give us their 
position on the Wheat Board and dual marketing, but I haven’t 
heard that yet. So maybe they’ll take the opportunity to do that 
tonight. 
 
So no, I stick by what I say. You don’t set public policy by 
breaking the law. 
 
An Hon. Member:  The law hasn’t been broken. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well why were they charged? You say 
the law hasn’t been broken. 
 
An Hon. Member:  They were acquitted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  On a technicality, and that loophole was 
fixed so that the law now states what it was intended to state 
earlier. That’s fine. But the fact of the matter remains. And we 
can boil this all down. Why do you want to allow a handful of 
people  and this is what I talked about earlier; does their 
individual right take precedence over the collective rights  
why do you want to let a handful of individuals break the law 
and destroy the Canadian Wheat Board that, by living proof, a 
study done by Kraft, Tyrchniewicz, and Furtan, show that we 
get a half a billion dollars a year premium? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Fixed report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well he says, a fixed report. Well you 
can discredit these very well-known and well-respected ag 
economics professors, one from each province, if you wish. I 
don’t think that you should do that though, because I think, 
because of their credibility, your credibility is diminished when 
you do that. Nevertheless, and you may want to listen to Mr. 
Carter out of the university of Berkeley. Fine. Mr. Carter 
changed his position from two years ago when he said the 
Wheat Board was a great tool for Prairie farmers, to today when 
he says no, it’s not. 
 
So it doesn’t matter. The fact remains, why do you want to take 
$500 million a year away from Saskatchewan farmers . . . or 
Prairie farmers? 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I’m not 
exactly sure where you’re getting your $500 million from. You 
talk about western producers having an extra $500 million in 
their pocket because of the Canadian Wheat Board. The facts 
are, Mr. Minister, what was the Wheat Board doing when . . . or 
the Pool doing when the former minister, Charlie Mayer, took 
barley out of the . . . opened it up for dual marketing for awhile. 
 
Where was the barley going? It was going across the border. 
Even the Pool was moving barley and grains into that American 
market. The fact was, Mr. Minister, where did that money go 
to? Did that money come back into the hands or the pockets of 
farmers? Or did it go into the hands of any of the grain 
companies moving it or even the Wheat Board? 
 
And how much of that money is actually used for  

administration and does the total amount come back to farmers? 
What you’re telling us here to night is that every dollar that the 
Canadian Wheat Board derives in sales comes back into my 
pocket or the pockets of producers across this province. 
 
Well I haven’t really seen any report, any real opening of the 
books, by the Canadian Wheat Board to show exactly what 
comes back and what is used to run the administration of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
It’s interesting that the director of the Canadian Wheat Board 
and the office of the Canadian Wheat Board seems to be 
somewhat closed. They’re more than willing to talk about 
opening of the books, but when you try to ask for everything, 
then you have a hard time trying to get to the bottom of what 
it’s really costing to run the board. 
 
And when you look at . . . I looked back about a month ago, Mr. 
Minister, and I found it very interesting. I believe it was The 
Western Producer had a headline which read: Canadian Wheat 
Board bumps initial prices in a matter of . . . I think it bumped 
the initial prices in a matter of about six weeks, three times. 
And the interesting part, Mr. Minister, was the fact that that was 
when some of the biggest debate was going on as farmers were 
trying to move their grain into the American market because 
there was a market available with a price much higher than 
what the Canadian Wheat Board was offering. 
 
And the facts are that the producers I’m getting to know and 
talking to are not the individuals who were here in the ‘30s and 
the ‘40s when the Wheat Board began. And it’s a fallacy to call 
it the Canadian Wheat Board because it basically deals with the 
Prairies, grain on the Prairies. It has nothing to do with Ontario 
and Quebec or even B.C. (British Columbia). 
 
The facts are, Mr. Minister, what I am finding, is individuals 
and the younger generation of farmers are looking to become 
marketing agents themselves if you will. If they find a market, 
they want to have the ability to gain access to that market. The 
only thing the Canadian Wheat Board is doing, the only thing 
the Canadian Wheat Board is doing is marketing and trying to 
guarantee a product into the European or into the world market. 
 
But the thing is, Mr. Minister, if the Canadian Wheat Board 
was doing its job, one would have to wonder, if there was a 
market available in the States right now, or if there’s a market 
in a certain area of the world that’s available, then you would 
think that the . . . if the Wheat Board is doing its job properly, it 
wouldn’t be afraid of competition; it would be out there 
showing the competition that it can do the job as well or better 
than anybody else in the system. 
 
And you can’t blame a producer who’s facing higher fuel costs, 
who’s facing higher input costs to produce his crop, for looking 
at markets if he is getting . . . his take-home today is about four 
fifty on wheat and yet he can haul it across the border . . . In 
fact there’s an ad  and I’m not exactly sure if I’ve got it with 
me right now  an ad that just came out the other day. There’s 
a group in Ontario willing to pay nine dollars and I think it’s 39 
cents for thirteen five Canada western hard wheat. Now how 
come they’re offering that  this group in Ontario? 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2971 

There’s a catch to that and the fact that I think, and I haven’t . . . 
didn’t call the number just to find out exactly all the details, but 
you know, a person sees that and says nine thirty-nine and I’m 
supposed to haul it down to the Sask Wheat Pool elevator or 
Cargill or United Grain Growers, and I’m going to get four fifty 
for that take-home right now. And eventually I might see five 
fifty by the time we’re at the end of the crop year. 
 
The thing is, Mr. Minister, what most producers and the 
younger generation of producers are looking at is, they’re 
looking at the money in their pockets today. And I would 
suggest to you that maybe the Canadian Wheat Board has to be 
a little more forward, and when they’re looking at markets . . . 
they’re a marketing agent. If they’re a marketing agent out there 
and they can see where the markets are going to be, they’re 
already looking at what they can sell. They know what they’ve 
got for a product available. They’re looking at what they can 
move into the world market. They’re already negotiating deals 
as far as the price of that product they’re going to move into the 
world market. 
 
Then I think it’s up to the Board to pass on some of that 
funding right now rather than waiting till into January and 
February, 18 months after a person has started putting grain in 
the bin. And that’s one of the biggest concerns with producers 
 that with the board you wait so long for that final payment. 
And then at the end of the day, you look back and ask yourself: 
now did I get the best price for my products? So I think that’s 
the one thing that the Canadian Wheat Board has to do. 
 
Number one, it just can’t stand up and say, I’m the best 
marketer. I’m the best agent to deal with your product. Prove it. 
Prove it. Let them get out and show me that they can offer . . . If 
I were to drive a truck across the line right now and get six 
seventy-five in my pocket for grain  and I’m just using that 
number because I’m not exactly sure what the deal is  then 
the Canadian Wheat Board, if that market is out there and that 
price is there, the Canadian Wheat Board should be able to say, 
here’s what you’ve got today. As of a final payment, this is 
what we anticipate we will be able to . . . and we should meet 
that target because we’re moving this amount of product into 
the market-place and here’s what you should receive. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, if the Canadian Wheat Board were to 
do that, if the Canadian Wheat Board kept their prices in line 
where the other prices are, there would be most of the 
producers out there would certainly be willing to take a solid 
look at what the board is doing. 
 
(1945) 
 
But what we’ve got today is a system whereby it doesn’t matter 
what happens, many producers are really questioning the reality 
of how well the board is working for them. And a good 
example, Mr. Minister, was I believe somewhat 15 years ago. 
We had an annual meeting with Sask Wheat Pool, and the Pool 
delegate at that time was telling me  I was just a fairly new 
producer at that time, fairly new in the agriculture field  was 
trying to tell us that Sask Wheat Pool was doing the best job of 
any agency in the world to help us by giving us a product at a 
competitive price. 

And I noticed around the room, as we were debating the issue 
. . . and the issue that came up was the issue of chemicals, Mr. 
Minister. And the facts were that right across the line  right 
across the track, pardon me  in our own little community, 
there was a $10 difference on product. 
 
And yet this Pool delegate was trying to tell us that he had a 
better product and that his product, at the end of the day, was 
going to cost us less because we’re going to get a dividend 
sometime when we retire or if we may reach that age of 65. 
Well you try to tell a young person who’s got a pile of bills that 
if he buys from the Pool, $10 more than the competitor, that it’s 
money in his pocket. 
 
And that’s the problem the Canadian Wheat Board is showing 
right now. It’s not really showing to many young producers out 
there that they’re actually being the best marketing agent. And I 
think that’s the thing they need to work on  to show that they 
can be that marketing agent. And if you will, if you will, Mr. 
Minister, if the Wheat Board is not afraid of a dual-marketing 
system, why are they so staunchly opposed to it? 
 
If they are doing their job as well as they are, a dual-marketing 
system won’t hurt them because a dual-marketing system may 
not last, if they’re doing the job and are the best marketing 
agent in this country for western . . . and let’s talk western 
Canadian prairie wheat or prairie grains. It has nothing to do 
with the other parts. 
 
If we’re talking Canadian, include all Canadians. And then that 
miller in Ontario will be then getting access to my product at 
what I’m getting for it today. I won’t have the option of being 
able to sell to him at nine thirty-nine. 
 
So that’s the concern out there, and that’s what’s happening in 
the system right now, Mr. Minister. People are looking at what 
they can get access to, the funds that they could put in their 
pockets. And if you will, the ones that I really hear opposed to 
it, the individuals or the individual producers I really hear 
opposed . . . or supporting the board, are the individual 
producers who do not want to take the time to look at some of 
the options. They do not want to become the marketing agents. 
So that’s fine. Let them use the board. 
 
But why not allow other producers, who through the technology 
that’s available and can find ways and places to move their 
product, why not allow them the opportunity to get that dollar. 
And if they get a lesser dollar at the end of the day, that’s not 
the board’s problem. The board worked hard for those 
producers who supported them. That’s a choice that they made. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Who are you trying to kid, though? This 
is a philosophical argument, and I know what your background 
is, and you cry about your political territory. That’s fine. In an 
open-market system  and I said this today to your colleague 
 there is only one price. You know what that price is? It’s the 
price that you get that day. That’s the open-market system  
one price. Fourteen years of sales were reviewed by three highly 
regarded professors from western Canada, and they said no, in 
the Wheat Board system there is not one price. There’s more 
than one price because they proved that they were getting  



2972 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

a premium. They were getting a price higher than the street 
price on a consistent basis. 
 
An Hon. Member:  And what are they concerned about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Now he says, what are you concerned 
about. And here’s the problem. And I don’t know if I’ll ever be 
able to explain it to you so that you’ll understand it because 
none are as blind as those who do not want to see. 
 
Anyway, the barley issue. Let’s look at barley. We have a 
dual-marketing system in barley. Okay? Last December, Japan 
had an order of barley, and the Wheat Board couldn’t fill the 
order. You know why? I know why, because people were sitting 
on the barley because the price was going up. And you know 
what? They had to fight and claw to get enough barley in to fill 
that order, and they filled it. But had they not filled that order, 
had they not filled that order, what would have happened was 
the Japanese would have said, you’re not a reliable supplier any 
more. And you know the ironic part of this would be, when the 
price is going up, nobody wants the board. But when the price 
starts going down, you wait and see how many people will want 
to jump back onto the Wheat Board bus. Yes. 
 
So therefore the dual marketing is the end of the Wheat Board 
simply because you can’t control it. 
 
And I just want to say one more thing, and I get lured in . . . I 
could make a great, hour speech on this thing. At least I think 
it’s great. But when you talk about people wanting to market 
their own grain, give me a break. You’re not going to market 
your own grain. Cargill, Bunge, Wheat Pool, somebody else is 
going to market it for you. You might market the odd load. 
You’re not going to market your own grain. 
 
And then you start looking at the basis . . . at the basis points to 
get your grain from your farm to the port position. They’re 
exactly the same  exactly the same  except for one thing: 
profit. And it’s natural. We live in a capitalist society. People 
who market your grain are going to charge you a fee for doing 
that, about 17 basis points for canola. And the Wheat Board 
system all goes back into the pooling system, back to the 
farmer’s pocket. 
 
But don’t try to go around and tell the young people that they’re 
going to be super heroes and market their own grain all over the 
world. I don’t think it’s going to happen. They got a system 
now where basically I can make an argument as zero, zero 
administration. Maybe I’ll just go through that for you. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Zero. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Right, here’s why. And I said this to 
your colleague early today. 
 
Two, three years ago, the federal government allowed the 
Wheat Board to buy paper instead of going to the banks for 
their $6 billion; 5 to 6 billion that they use every year or on 
constant basis, okay. That interest rate on paper is much, much 
less. Now because the way the board is structured, when a 
country defaults on a loan, when a country can’t pay their loan,  

the board goes over and sits down with them and says, okay, 
we’ll stretch it over a few more years but here’s the interest 
rate. Here’s the interest rate you’re going to have to pay. Last 
year . . . I said 50 million just today, but I’m wrong, it was 57. 
Last year the difference between what the board bought its 
paper for and the interest they charge on default loan gained us, 
netted us, $57 million. 
 
The administration, total administration fee for the cost of the 
Wheat Board last year was $43 million. Do you think that we 
would be able to do that, had we not had a Canadian Wheat 
Board arm’s-length arm of government with a government 
guarantee on the $6 billion so they could go get paper at a really 
cheap rate and make that kind of money? 
 
You know I just don’t understand. I know your philosophy, I 
know you have the right to lose money, but I don’t know why 
you’d want to take everybody else down with you. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, that’s 
the most eloquent defence of the most indefensible thing you 
could ever see in this province. 
 
The little statement you made about this interest thing  and 
whose money were they using in the first place? Whose money 
were they using in the first place? Whose money sits in an 
account for 18 months before they ever see one dime of it back 
in final payments? The Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And you could argue, I suppose, that the interest is accrued 
back to the account. But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Minister, 
no matter what you say about this argument, there are a number 
of farmers out there that will never believe you. There is a 
growing body of agriculture producers, and I would dare say 
it’s, generally speaking, younger producers who’ve had 
experience in growing canola and marketing it themselves, and 
have had experience in growing speciality crops and marketing 
themselves, and all of those kinds of things, and they’re not 
afraid of this big, bad market-place that you like to present all 
the time, Mr. Minister. 
 
There’s no other parallel. Is there such a thing as a Canadian car 
board that tells automobile dealers how to sell their cars? Or is 
there one that deals with equipment for farmers or chemicals for 
farmers or anything like that? There aren’t parallels in the 
economy. 
 
In fact when you talk to business writers or business people 
around the world or in this province even, Mr. Minister, that 
aren’t familiar with agriculture and you explain it to them, 
they’re astounded that anyone would subscribe to that sort of 
method of marketing their product. They just don’t buy it. 
 
And you stand and you say, well you have a study and the 
Canadian Wheat Board commissioned a study that supports 
your argument because they looked at the information, all that 
sort of stuff. Well we have a study here as well that says the 
exact opposite. 
 
I don’t know where the truth is in it all, Mr. Minister, but I 
suspect it’s sort of somewhere halfway in between. It’s not the  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2973 

Canadian Wheat Board’s study, and it’s probably not the 
Carter-Loyns study either. But that isn’t the issue, Mr. Minister. 
 
The issue is, should producers have the opportunity and the 
right to sell a product that they put all of the inputs into, all of 
the costs, all the blood, sweat and tears into it themselves, or 
should they be obligated to sell it through an agency that they 
may or may not support? That’s what it comes down to  the 
fundamental argument of should they be able to sell their 
product themselves, or should they be forced to go through 
something that they may or may not support. That’s the 
argument, I think, and the bottom line. 
 
And if you want to cloud the issue with whether or not they’re 
going to get more from the Canadian Wheat Board or more 
from the free market, you can do that. But the fundamental 
argument should be, should I as a producer have the right to be 
able to market my own product, or shouldn’t I? We think you 
should. 
 
We don’t think that that means the elimination of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. I have never advocated the elimination of the 
Wheat Board. I think there should be a dual market. I think 
there’s a growing body of support for that view as well. 
 
And the reason why it can work, Mr. Minister, is because I 
think farmers want it to work. I think all farmers want that 
dual-marketing system, if it were to come into place, to work 
the way it should work. You have a contracting program right 
now that the Canadian Wheat Board runs. If they can still 
source the grain through that contracting program, they still will 
have opportunity to market grain. 
 
So if you go to the large number of producers out there like the 
member from Saskatoon wherever, Northwest, who’s a strong 
supporter . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Used to be a farmer 
but I don’t know whether he is any more or not. He’s a strong 
supporter. He’s a strong supporter of the Canadian Wheat 
Board. And I know that. Good friend. If he wants to support the 
Canadian Wheat Board, he contracts 100 per cent of his 
production to the Canadian Wheat Board; 100 per cent is 
contracted to the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
I may not have as much confidence in the Canadian Wheat 
Board as he does, so I only contract 50 per cent of my 
production to the Canadian Wheat Board and decide that I’m 
going to use 50 per cent on the open market. So then if I don’t 
comply with my contract, you put the penalties in place that 
force me to comply. What would be wrong with that? 
 
Or give me a time frame that I have to operate in. If I’m going 
to operate outside the Canadian Wheat Board on half my 
production, I have to operate entirely outside of the Canadian 
Wheat Board. Same thing. You have the opportunity . . . the 
Wheat Board knows exactly the amount that’s contracted to 
them and what isn’t contracted to them. I think those type of 
opportunities, that type of system, can work. And I think that 
the Canadian Wheat Board and you, Mr. Minister, and your 
department should be thinking about how it can make it work. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if that is something that your  

department doing. Or are you just steadfast in saying we are not 
going to allow this to happen no matter what? Or is your 
department actually looking at whether or not it can work or 
not? Are you spending one iota of energy and time looking at 
whether the system . . . and how it can work, or are you just 
devoting all of your energies, as I think you are up to this point 
anyway, to saying no, no, no to the farmers of Saskatchewan 
who want outside of that system? 
 
And I would make the prediction, Mr. Minister, that you’re 
going to see it happen whether you like it or not. So you might 
as well accept it. You might as well look at ways to address this 
situation. You might as well, because the farmers, I think, will 
prevail in the end. 
 
Because it seems to me that as the markets are shifting, as the 
global deregulation is happening all over  global competition 
 there are more and more producers who say, I think I have to 
take more control over the marketing decisions that I’m making 
to work in the best interests of myself, to win or to lose on my 
own and not have someone else make those decisions for me. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, that’s what you’re seeing. That’s 
what’s happening around Saskatchewan more and more. Five 
years ago you couldn’t get a good debate going on this thing 
hardly, probably because there was strong opposition to it. You 
know yourself that it’s shifting out there, and it’s shifting 
quicker than I would have imagined, and I most certainly think, 
shifting faster than you would have imagined as well. 
 
When you go into the coffee shops on the western side of this 
province or into the southern part of this province, it’s moving 
extremely quickly. And I think before long you’re going to have 
an absolute mass protest. You may see a thousand trucks in a 
convoy pass through into the United States at some point. 
 
(2000) 
 
You may see that, Mr. Minister. And I think what will happen 
at that point, it will become a national question then. You will 
see the news writers, the news columnists all over this country, 
looking at this with a critical eye because they are not, I believe, 
supporters of a system that people may or may not want any 
longer. You can’t deny people the freedom to do what they 
want with the products that they grow, I don’t believe, any 
longer, Mr. Minister. 
 
And they . . . and if you are of that view, and I know you are, I 
think it is just a sort of a paternal instinct that says I know better 
than the farmer out there knows. And I don’t think that that’s 
acceptable, Mr. Minister. I don’t think the farmers want you to 
decide what is best for them any longer. I think they want the 
opportunity to make that decision for themselves. 
 
I don’t think that you do know better in all cases than what they 
do, or your department for that matter, or the study that you and 
the Canadian Wheat Board like to trumpet. I don’t think the 
farmers, a lot of them out there, care one iota about what that 
study says, because the final question in their mind is, should I 
have the right to market the product that I grow myself or 
shouldn’t I. That’s what the question comes down to. 



2974 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

And if you believe that the rights of the majority should be able 
to stampede over the rights of the minority . . . and in this case I 
think it’s shifting from minority to majority, rather slowing 
mind you, but it’s picking up steam. But I think at some point it 
will be . . . at some point it will be at the stage where you won’t 
be able to stop it even if you want to. 
 
I think that stage is rapidly approaching, Mr. Minister. I think 
you’re going to see in the not too distant future, by July 1 
perhaps, the Alberta government’s going to move on this issue. 
They are going to challenge the Canadian Wheat Board 
monopoly. They are likely going to challenge it by looking at a 
product movement into Mexico. They are likely going to 
challenge it by saying we are going to purchase the grain from 
the farmers of Alberta, we are going to sell it back to them 
outside of this country or the Canadian Wheat Board 
jurisdiction, either into United States or into Mexico. 
 
And at that point, then the producers of this country are going 
to have to decide, and the governments, more importantly, of 
this country are going to have to decide, is this the question, the 
fundamental question, or should farmers not have that right. 
And I don’t think you’re going to win on it any longer, Mr. 
Minister. I think if it went to a charter case, went to the 
Supreme Court, I think you’d lose on it. And I think that’s why. 
I think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Go for it. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Go for it, yes. Well we would ask you to go for 
it. Why don’t you make a reference to the Supreme Court if 
you’re so confident of your position, Mr. Minister. We would 
challenge you. Go for it is right. 
 
You’re telling me to go for it. I’m not in a position to go for 
anything. You’re in a position to go for it. You’re in a position 
to make some decisions about this, Mr. Minister. You’re the 
one that has the opportunity to stand up and say, all right, we’ll 
take this to the Supreme Court. We will see whether or not 
farmers should have the right to market their own product or 
not. 
 
And all of the paternal people over on your side with the smug 
look on their face, that want to have it exactly the way it is, can 
do whatever they like. But the fact of the matter is, is at that the 
end of day I think the farmers will overrule you. And they’ll 
overrule me. They’ll overrule this legislature because they’ll 
take it in their own hands, and I think that’s exactly what we’re 
seeing at this point. 
 
But I guess in . . . I just wonder, Mr. Minister  and I want to 
pose this question to you before I take my seat  is your 
department making any attempt to look at whether or not the 
system can work, a dual-marketing system, or are you spending 
all of your energies, all of your energies, just saying no, no, no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, we’re not spending all our energy 
saying no, no, no. I’ve looked at it many times, discussed it 
with the department and talked about it. And I know we have an 
agreement, I think, to go to Health estimates at 8 o’clock so I’ll 
just pick a short comment. 

But one of the things . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  No, I might not let you off that easy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well that’s fine, the day is long and the 
pay is sure, at least for a couple of more years. One of the 
things that where you’re fundamentally wrong  
fundamentally wrong  is that you’re misleading the people 
into thinking that a dual market, the board can still sustain 
itself. You can’t do it. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The barley issue is a . . . Why? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes, why. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Because when the prices are escalating 
and you’ve got an option of some few niche markets around, 
the price is going up, and the board has a sale to Japan of so 
many million tonnes  okay  then that board can’t fill that 
supply to Japan because people . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  If they have a contract with producers, 
they required them to deliver their grain, yes they can. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, no. The next thing . . . you’ve got a 
situation even now where there’s contracts being broken and 
they have a terrible time enforcing those contracts. 
 
But the fact of the matter is you want the board gone; I want it 
to stay. You want it gone; I want it to stay. 
 
I will fight you tooth and nail on this floor, inside and outside 
of this building, because I believe the collective rights of people 
to make $500 million a year more than they would have at the 
street price, is something that’s worth fighting for. The 
individual right in this case takes less precedence than the right 
of the collective. 
 
And I believe that and I will work for that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With me 
is Mr. Duane Adams, immediately to my left. He’s the deputy 
minister of Health. And beside him to his left is Kathy Langlois, 
who’s the executive director of finance and management 
services. Directly behind me is Glenda Yeates, who is the 
senior associate deputy minister; and beside her, behind Mr. 
Adams, is Steve Petz, who is the associate deputy minister of 
Health. 
 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2975 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials. It’s certainly a pleasure to have you 
back in the Assembly and to address some more questions 
regarding health care. In view of the fact that, Mr. Minister, my 
colleague attended a meeting in Kerrobert . . . and if it weren’t 
for the fact that we had estimates here tonight, I’d be attending 
a meeting in Wolseley. 
 
Meetings all across this province are springing up. And while a 
number of them were board-initiated to get information out, 
they’ve turned into very public meetings, meetings where 
people are beginning to really raise the concerns about the 
issues that are facing them on a daily basis, especially the 
decisions that are being thrown at people over the last few days. 
And I guess, if you will, one of the reasons I think we’re still 
sitting in this Assembly is we realize that health districts would 
not be coming down . . . or indeed may have even been asked to 
hold off on the changes that they were going to have to make as 
a result of the reductions in the funding level that came from 
your department. 
 
And I think, as my colleague the member from Kindersley 
mentioned last night, the people in Kindersley finally, finally 
realized who the real guilty person is and looked beyond the 
board that was facing them, and thanked the board for at least 
being open, but finally acknowledged the fact that if it wasn’t 
for the Minister of Health, for the Premier, and for this 
government, the board wouldn’t be left with the decisions that 
they’re making. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, we have seen and we are seeing on an 
ongoing basis, a continual reduction in services in the area of 
. . . or health services in this province. In fact I just received a 
letter today from an individual in the city of Regina, a letter that 
you may have in your office. Unfortunately I don’t have it with 
me right now, but that individual wrote about her mother being 
taken to the General, quite ill; told by emergency staff, we have 
no room for you; sent her home. And about two months later 
when she’d gone back again because she really was ill and no 
one seemed to really acknowledge it, ill enough that staff at the 
General finally realized, some staff finally realized, and 
admitted her and started to take some tests, did some blood 
tests. But before the results came back, she had passed on. This 
lady, unfortunately, doesn’t have a very sound view of the 
health system in the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s what 
we do have, and I hear it on a continual basis, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I guess, if you will, for the reductions that have been 
passed on or that individuals across this province have had to 
face, health districts and hospitals and care homes such as the 
Swift Current care home that is facing, possibly facing closure, 
although I don’t know exactly . . . there’s some discussions 
taking place right now. But what we’re finding, Mr. Minister, is 
more and more people are becoming more and more annoyed at 
what’s taking place, and the results are that people are finally 
taking the time to show up at meetings to try and get some 
information. 
 
The unfortunate part is, up until now, most of the times they  

followed the lead you set in this Legislative Assembly and 
they’ve been blaming the boards. But the boards have finally 
helped them to realize that the decisions that they’ve been left 
with . . . and I talked with a board member just the other day 
who shared with me what they were going to have to do in their 
health district, and shared how they were going to have to cut 
the number of acute care beds in that district, and how they 
were going to have cut some of the other services. And 
hopefully they were going to have a little bit left to offer the 
residents. 
 
And his comment was, I’d really appreciate it if you would not 
say anything about what’s taking place until we get a chance to 
meet with our local people and let them know what we’ve had 
to do as a result of the cuts that have come our way and the 
decisions that were forced upon us by a government  a 
government that he even acknowledged and admitted that he’d 
never voted for any other party in his life, but the one in front of 
us. And his comment as I was leaving, once we’ve released the 
information, I don’t care what you do with it, but I’m getting 
somewhat tired of having always had to bear the brunt of the 
concern of people. And I think it’s time the anger that the 
public have regarding the health system really is focused 
towards the top of the health care system, which means it falls 
at your feet, Mr. Minister. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, how many acute care beds, as a result of your 
funding cuts, have been cut throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan in the last few days as district boards have had to 
deal with the level of funding and how they’re going to meet 
that funding level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I thank the member for the question. The 
member has raised a number of points. Let me say that one of 
the things that bothers me about what the member says is that 
he repeatedly says that I somehow want to blame the health 
districts for the decisions they make. And I have said to the 
member repeatedly that I do not blame the health districts for 
the decisions they make. 
 
I think what the member wants to say to me is, Mr. Minister, 
you have to accept responsibility for what’s going on. And I 
will say to the member very clearly, right now, just to get this 
out of the way, I accept responsibility. And if it makes the 
member happy and his party happy to say, Mr. Minister, 
everything that is going on in the province is your fault; you’re 
to blame, the member can say that and I’m not even going to get 
into an argument with the member about that. If that makes the 
member feel good and helps him sleep at night, that’s just fine 
with me. 
 
(2015) 
 
But I want to say to the member that if he wants to live in the 
real world, then what he should do, in addition to blaming me 
and placing all the blame for every problem in the health care 
system on me, is to acknowledge this: that first of all  I know 
that I’ve said this many times  but the reality is, the federal 
government has imposed upon, not only this province but every 
province in Canada, the biggest unilateral cut to health care 
spending in the history of our country. 



2976 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

The reality is, Mr. Chair, and I say to the member, that this year 
the federal Liberals took out of our health care spending for 
Saskatchewan, $47 million. The reality is, on April 1, 1997 they 
will take out $100 million, and that money has to be made up 
by us. The truth is, if the member would acknowledge it  
which I’m sure he will not  is that we put in an extra $47 
million in provincial funding into the health care system this 
year. The truth is we have committed to put in $100 million 
extra provincial funding into the health care system next year. 
 
But I say to the member that the world is changing. And I agree 
with the member that it makes people frustrated, it makes them 
angry. If they want to blame someone and they want to blame 
me, that’s fine, they can do that. 
 
But why are we facing change? We’re facing change because 
the federal Liberals are taking money out of health care  
everybody knows that. There’s change because we pay $860 
million, every year, interest on the debt that that member’s party 
ran up while they were in office for 9 years. 
 
It’s changing because people make different choices; they 
choose sometimes to get their health care services outside of 
their own communities. It’s changing because medical 
technology has changed, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . or Mr. Chair. 
 
It’s changing because you used to go into the hospital for long 
periods of time. That’s not true any more. Now we have laser 
surgery, arthroscopic surgery, laparoscopic surgery, and people 
are on their feet and out of the hospital much more quickly. 
That’s why we have fewer beds. But we’re going to have the 
right number of beds to meet peoples’ needs; that’s what we 
need to do. And we’re going to have the right number of 
nursing home beds too. 
 
I want to say to the member, who says that services are getting 
less, I would argue that there’s a broader range of services 
available to people today. And I want to tell the member that 
one of the things we’re doing  and the member asks the right 
question because he says you’re taking money out of hospital 
beds, and that’s true because we need fewer hospital beds  
that’s what we’re doing. 
 
But we’re putting more money into new services that people 
have never had before. Services like home care in support of 
independent living, day programs for seniors, expanded 
physical therapy, expanded occupational therapy, more 
counselling for mental health, alcohol and drug abuse, than ever 
before; health education, respite care, home intravenous 
programs, better prevention services like milk nutritional 
supplements to expectant mothers instead of just using hospitals 
afterwards to care for low-weight babies. 
 
And I could go on, Mr. Chair, and I support that because that’s 
what we should be doing in the health care system. We should 
not just be looking at how many people can we put into hospital 
beds, how many people can we put into nursing homes. We 
should be looking at how many people can we keep healthy and 
independent and active in their own communities. That’s what a 
real good health care system would do. 

The member doesn’t share that vision. The member wants to 
cling to the past  a past that is changing, not just here, Mr. 
Chair, but everywhere in Canada. 
 
In answer to the final question the member asked, I would say 
to the member that in the last while I believe the number of 
acute care beds that have been reduced are approximately 30 in 
Regina; 6 in Canora; 4 in Kamsack; and 4.5 in Wilkie; for a 
total of about 44.5 is my information. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Tonight  I 
would not normally introduce one of my staff people  but in 
the Speaker’s gallery is one of my MAs, (ministerial assistant), 
Sheila Stensrud. And I’m introducing Sheila because she has 
brought her young son, Tyler, with her tonight to watch the 
proceedings and introduce him to a little dose of politics in the 
legislature. So let’s welcome Tyler to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, and 
welcome, Tyler, to the legislature this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, when I talk about the blame or the focus being put 
on district health boards, you’ll have to admit that every time 
we’ve raised a question, even yesterday when I raised the 
question about the Wilkie Hospital, and the Wilkie care home, 
you stood up in this Assembly and you said, well that’s a board 
decision and what they do is their business. The reason the 
board had to make that decision was because your department 
cut the funding. 
 
So I guess if you will, Mr. Minister, maybe you’re going to 
have to find another way of responding to the questions so that 
the boards aren’t always dragged into it. It was their decision. 
The way you’ve presented the responses on many occasions has 
been on the basis of the board made the decision and you had 
nothing to do with it. And the realities are, a number of the 
boards right now are finding that they’re just being upfront with 
the people they deal with and saying, as they go around . . . and 
you gave us a list of a number of acute care beds. I do happen to 
know that there are some in my area that are being cut out of 
the system, and I guess you probably don’t have all the 
information from all the districts as to the reductions and acute 
care beds that are being cut out of the system to date. 
 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2977 

We would trust and ask, Mr. Minister, that when you finally 
receive the report that each one of the boards is going to be 
sending to you as to how they are meeting their goals this year 
and how they’ve had to address their reductions in funding as 
. . . I would ask, Mr. Minister, that you take time to indeed send 
to our office a copy of all the proposals put forward by the 
boards and the reductions in the services that have taken place 
in their district, including the number of acute care beds that 
have been cut, the number of hospitals that have been closed, 
the number of heavy care beds that have been reduced in they 
system. 
 
And you talk, Mr. Minister, about some of the services that 
have been increased, and I would like to suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that there are people around who . . . while you talk 
about increasing services, especially in home care, I run into 
many people who really feel that home care does not provide 
the basic need that they are feeling right now in the health care 
system. And in many cases, they find it very difficult to get any 
help because even home care in many of the districts . . . and 
I’m not saying all because I’m not sure of all of them. But I do 
know a number of districts are having difficulty with the load 
that’s being offloaded on them and, with the increased attention 
to try and providing more of the care at home, are finding that 
they still do not have  even with the minor increase in home 
care funding that you’ve provided today  they do not have the 
ability to meet the demand in their districts regarding home care 
services. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, yes, we can talk about the program, home care 
program. We can talk about, well it is serving individuals. 
Unfortunately there are individuals who are continually falling 
through the cracks, and there are families being left trying to 
cope with heavy care family members, and they’re trying to run 
their everyday lives, and it’s becoming a heavy burden on them. 
And that in itself, Mr. Minister, creates another added burden to 
the health care system. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked about the fact that the reason some of 
the decisions were made was because of a reduction in the 
amount of funding from the federal government  from the 
federal Liberal government. You talked about the fact that a 
reduction was made because of $837 million in interest. 
 
And I find it very interesting, Mr. Minister, that it’s the result of 
a government of the 1980s that created that debt. You obviously 
should have been listening this afternoon when we were 
discussing agriculture with the Minister of Agriculture. I 
suppose you were one of the individuals working in the law 
firm of the day that put the package together to go to the New 
York banks to borrow all the money to buy the land bank land 
in this province at the high interest rates, interest rates which 
were four times what they’re at today, three times for 
government. 
 
And it’s Grant Devine and the Conservatives who are at fault 
for having that debt load put on them or the fact that money was 
borrowed to buy potash mines when, as Mr. Johnson pointed 
out, the $50 million dividend from CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) to general revenue this year . . . 
once one dividend payment in the last . . . I think  

this is the second time in the last four years there’s been a 
dividend out of CIC, and yet all the other large companies, the 
private companies and the oil companies, put in over 220 
million. 
 
It would . . . one has to wonder what was going through the 
minds of the NDP (New Democratic Party) of the 1970s when 
they felt they had to own land. Number one, they had to own 
land. Number two, they even had to go out and borrowed the 
money, and then they competed with the producers who were 
struggling to survive, pushing the price of land up. The other 
thing is buying potash mines. Why in the world would you do 
that? 
 
And there’s so many other things we can get into. In fact, Mr. 
Minister, I’ve got information that just shows that that land 
bank land cost the former government dearly, all those years, 
because of the fact that it didn’t derive . . . under the agreement 
that had been drawn up with land bank tenants, there wasn’t 
enough revenue derived on an annual basis to pay the interest 
rate. And the government had to go to the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund just to make sure that they could pay the interest 
and basically drew the same amount as they were getting in 
revenue. 
 
So I guess we can stand here philosophically and argue about 
where the debt is. If you were anywhere a gentleman like the 
Minister of Economic Development, you would acknowledge 
that a substantial amount of the interest payments that you’re 
paying today are as result of NDP policy in the ’70s and some 
of that policy even in the ’80s. But that doesn’t really help us in 
regards to meeting the needs of people tonight in regards to 
health care. 
 
Mr. Minister, the thing that . . . when we look at services, and 
you look at . . . well you talk about the reductions in health care 
funding from the federal government; one still has to ask  we 
were talking with the Minister of Highways last night  one 
still has to ask that, with all the reductions that have taken 
place, with the number of hospitals that have closed down, with 
the number of acute beds, care beds that have closed over the 
past number of years, the number of beds that have been closed 
in heavy care situations, why are we still spending $1.6 billion 
in health care? The Minister of Highways can stand up and say, 
here’s what I’ve done; I have cut back; I’ve been asked to cut 
back. My budget was over 300 million; it’s just over 200 
million now. He has something to show for the fact that there 
were cuts made in his department, actual reductions. 
 
And yet in the Department of Health, for all the reductions in 
services that have taken place, the fact that the drug deductible 
 which was outrageous  at $135 a year is now over $1,700, 
and all of these factors included, Mr. Minister, you would think 
with all that money that’s available to you, the fact that you’ve 
cut all these services, there should have been at least a reduction 
on the top line . . . or the bottom line if you will, in health care 
spending. If we were spending almost 1.6 in 1991, with all 
these reductions, how come we’re still spending 1.6 today? 
 
I could buy your argument if you had . . . because you had  



2978 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

made choices to cut hospitals and close hospitals; because you 
had made choices to close acute care beds; because you had 
made choices to close heavy care beds, Mr. Minister; because 
you had made a choice to gradually phase out the Plains Health 
Centre: I could buy it if, through all those closures, we had seen 
a reduction from 1.6 to  I’m throwing a number out  maybe 
$1.3 billion in spending in health care. 
 
Most people would say, if you’re cutting out all these services, 
there should be something that shows the bottom line is actually 
cut back. Unfortunately it isn’t. One has to ask, well where is 
all that money going? And certainly we’re going to get into 
debate in a few other areas. The Whitespruce Youth Treatment 
Centre, we’ll get to address that in a few minutes. And there’s 
so many other areas. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the question I have for you, as a result of all 
the decisions to cut funding, cut expenditures, why haven’t we 
seen a reduction on the bottom line in spending in health care in 
this province? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I think that’s the most important 
question the member could ask. We have never said that there 
has been a cut in health care spending. I’ve stood repeatedly in 
this House and said to the members opposite, we have not cut 
health care spending. Let me repeat that. We have not cut health 
care spending. In fact this year, we the province, the people of 
Saskatchewan, are spending $47 million more of provincial 
money on health care than we did before, as a result of the 
federal Liberal cut-backs. 
 
The member says, well if you’ve reduced spending on hospital 
beds and some hospitals have been converted to health centres, 
then why is it that we’re not spending less? We have always 
said the same thing to the members over there, Mr. Chair, 
which is this. We have taken $44 million out of spending on 
hospital beds, most of which were empty in the last number of 
years. 
 
I’ll repeat that for the member. We have taken $44 million out 
of spending on empty hospital beds. 
 
The member says, why aren’t we spending less money? 
Because we have taken that money and shifted it. We haven’t 
cut spending; we’ve shifted spending to other areas. We’re 
spending $10 million more on nursing home care than we did 
before. And we’re spending $47 million more on community- 
and home-based care. 
 
So the member says, why hasn’t spending gone down? It’s 
because the money we took out of funding hospital beds, which 
were largely used quite inefficiently, was taken out, put into 
nursing homes and to community-based care and home care. 
That’s where the money went. 
 
It wasn’t our intention to cut health care spending. We have not 
done that. Our intention was to spend in different ways. I might 
say for the member’s information and the House, I noticed a 
small article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, very short. And  

it says: 
 

Statistics Canada reports that the average stay in hospital 
dropped to 11.4 days in ‘94-95  down three full days 
from the peak reported seven years earlier. 
 

So hospital stays are much shorter. 
 

Public hospital operating expenses continued to decline . . . 
 

And then they give the numbers. But they say down 9 per cent 
in that two-year period, ’92 to ‘94. 
 
So I say to the member that what has happened in 
Saskatchewan is not unique. People go to the hospital for 
shorter periods of time; techniques have changed; people like to 
go to larger centres for some surgical techniques. This is a 
national trend and indeed it’s an international trend. 
 
So the hospital system has changed. But I say to the member, if 
he’s wondering where these cuts have gone and where the 
money has gone, we have always said to the member the same 
thing and I say it again. Yes, we’ve taken some money out of 
empty hospital beds, about 44 million. We put more money into 
long-term care, community care, and home care, so that in the 
home care area, for example, funding increased by nearly 50 
million between ’92 and this year. 
 
And the services delivered to people increased by 38 per cent, 
to service 5,000 more people than before, in their homes. Many 
other services were added. But I say to the member, this is what 
we’ve done. 
 
When we’ve cut spending on hospitals, we’ve put the spending 
into other areas. If your vision of a health care system is that it 
should consist only of hospitals and nursing home beds, then 
the member and this government have a disagreement, because 
the member would say, never take money out of hospitals and 
nursing homes and put it into community care and home-based 
care. 
 
If however, like many progressive people in our society, many 
health care professionals and commentators from around the 
world, you believe that a health care system should be more 
than taking care of people when they’re sick or infirm, but 
should go out in the community to encourage them to stay well 
and to provide community services and let them be independent 
in their homes, then you support what we’re doing. 
 
But it does very much depend upon whether you have a 
contemporary vision of what health care should do and whether 
you’re forward-looking, or whether you only look to the past. 
And of course if you belong to the Conservative Party, you tend 
to look to the past even though the relatively recent past for the 
Conservative Party is not all that glorious. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I find that very interesting, Mr. Minister, because 
I know a number of your colleagues who are sitting in this 
Assembly would sit here and on a daily basis drag in 
individuals into the debate and complain bitterly about any 
reductions in health care spending as far as hospital beds, acute  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2979 

care beds, or indeed heavy care beds. 
 
And for you to stand here and smugly tell me that I’m trying to 
tell you to spend more on acute care funding or on heavy care 
funding, Mr. Minister, is just somewhat ludicrous. 
 
You know exactly where Ms. Simard was as an opposition 
member. You know exactly where the Minister of Economic 
Development was as an opposition member. Or the Minister of 
Labour and some of your other colleagues, you know exactly 
where they stood. And while the government of the ‘80s even 
made some deliberate attempts to cut expenditures . . . or not 
necessarily cut expenditures but try to address the funding and 
how it should be put directly into services, there were hue and 
cries when your colleagues were on this side of the House about 
how people’s lives were being disrupted because of the choices 
that were being made in those days. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, while you talk about, you talk about empty 
beds, Mr. Minister, if you would have followed the debate, even 
in the past, when I was on the government side of the House, 
you will never have heard me say that we should maintain the 
bed structure that we had. But I certainly didn’t come out and 
say that we physically pull a bed out of a room simply because 
it isn’t being utilized today. 
 
I think we needed to look, Mr. Minister, at a system whereby it 
was recognized that the bed was physically being used . . . and 
I’ll admit back in the ‘80s and in ‘70s and in the ‘60s, a lot of 
the funding was based on if you could keep your acute care bed 
numbers up. And so you always had to keep people physically 
in those beds so you could keep your daily census up because 
that’s how the funding was allocated, and we needed to look at 
that. And there’s no doubt about it. 
 
But what we’re finding today, Mr. Minister, there are still 
situations . . . because you physically remove a bed from a room 
doesn’t necessarily mean that that facility may not at some time 
in the year, as a result of an epidemic that hits a community, 
find that they’re in need of two or three or four more beds. And 
yet because it’s physically in the room doesn’t necessarily mean 
as well that it should be funded. 
 
I think those are some of the things that needed to be looked at, 
and quite frankly a lot of people certainly agreed with that. 
People were wondering why are we . . . why would you put 
someone in a hospital who doesn’t really need to be there other 
than because of the way funding was allocated at that time. 
There was a lot of that being done. 
 
Mr. Minister, the problem on the other hand that we’ve 
experienced recently . . . and I bring to mind a situation where 
an individual had received an operation and was sent home and 
basically told to watch for certain signs, and I’m not exactly 
sure, wasn’t really offered home care service, wasn’t even 
offered the services of a local nurse to maybe just kind of check 
up. And as a result of a major infection that took place, that 
individual ended up back in the hospital for one whole month 
until they finally had the problem cleared up. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering how you can say that we  

save money by sending that individual home and saying, well 
we got them out quicker, we got them out in a day and a half 
rather than . . . Maybe that person should have been in for three 
or four days to make sure there was proper observation and that 
there was proper healing taking place and that the person could 
go home without having a problem at the end of the day. 
 
Because when you look at a month’s stay in the hospital, to 
have maybe kept that patient in for two or three days extra at the 
front would have certainly meant a substantial saving. Because I 
don’t think it’s all that cheap to keep a person in a hospital bed 
for a period of a month as a result of complications that set in 
that may have been picked up immediately through observation 
and wouldn’t have resulted in the extra care that was needed. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, there were some things that needed to be 
addressed in the ‘80s, and even as a result of the changes in 
health care today, Mr. Minister, there are things and issues that 
need to be addressed today. 
 
One of the things that needs to be addressed is do we always 
. . . or do we insist that a person be sent home immediately 
following day surgery. Are there procedures that maybe are a 
little more riskier or the type of procedure that was involved, 
that possibly there should be some flexibility in the system  
not a directive going from the department  that allows a 
doctor and staff to determine whether or not the patient they 
have currently provided a service to should have a little more 
. . . an extended day or so, say, in the hospital, to make sure that 
they don’t run into complications. 
 
I wonder if, Mr. Minister, that shouldn’t be in there. Because 
certainly if you don’t do that, if there isn’t some flexibility in 
the system, if there are more people like this one . . . and it’s not 
just one; I’ve run into a number of cases. Certainly just up at 
the Plains Health Centre recently, I ran into another one where a 
person was back in the hospital for extended period of time. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, what that does is, it actually takes real 
dollars out of providing a service for someone else who needs 
or may need some health care because of the fact that we’ve 
had to . . . and I don’t know exactly what would have . . . why 
this situation would have been caused up front, whether it was 
the fact that the districts are feeling pressured by the department 
and the hospital staffs are feeling pressured by the districts to 
get a turnover or what. 
 
But I think, Mr. Minister, this is something that needs to be 
addressed, because if you’re talking of wellness, we certainly 
haven’t treated people well who end up with major infections 
and end up back in a hospital in an acute care bed for an 
extended period of time. 
 
So these are some of the concerns that are out there. And those 
are some of the concerns that need to be addressed as to how 
we fund them so that we’re not just saying, here’s the dollars, 
you can only have so many acute care beds, you can only 
provide a service . . . it’s a number of the procedures are 
out-patient services that’s . . . and you’re going to have to do it 
this way. I think there needs to be some flexibility. 



2980 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

You also made the comment about the fact that the reason some 
of the costs are incurred and the reason more of the services are 
funded in the larger centres is because people choose to go 
there for the services. The realities are, a lot of the smaller 
communities do not have the services. They have general 
practitioners, but they can’t get . . . very few operations in the 
smaller centres, Mr. Minister. So I’m not sure we can argue that 
a person had to come to a Regina or go to a Yorkton or to a 
Moose Jaw for a service and the reason they ended up there is 
because they chose to go there when the reason they had to go 
there is that was the closest place for that particular service. 
 
So I think we need to be mindful of that fact, that people don’t 
just go where the service is. They’re not leaving their 
community looking for a service some place else. They’re 
leaving their community because they’ve been referred on the 
basis of the fact that that service was not available in that 
community. So I think that’s something that we need to bring to 
the forefront too so we don’t get all concerned about the fact 
that . . . and people starting to believe well, you mean 
everybody’s leaving their local community because the service 
isn’t available; you mean people are going to see general 
practitioners in the Regina’s and Moose Jaw’s of the world 
because they don’t have them in some of these centres. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think there again, you need to be somewhat 
careful in how you respond to some of the questions because 
you’re leaving the impression with a lot of people that pretty 
well everybody is making a choice to go to the large centre. It 
was their choice versus the fact that that’s the only place that 
they could receive the service. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’ve thrown out a lot of things for you to chew 
on a little bit and maybe I’ll just sit back for a minute and give 
you a chance to respond. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, well I’m very happy to respond, Mr. 
Chairman. The member raises some very good points. 
 
I want to say to the member and the House that . . . the member 
says people will leave their community to get a service 
elsewhere because they can’t get it at home, and that’s true. 
Because sometimes, when we had many more hospitals than we 
have now, there would be no surgeon and no anesthetist in the 
hospital, which would make it very difficult for somebody to 
get surgery so they would go to another centre. And this did not 
occur only subsequent to health reform. 
 
As the member probably knows, the biggest shift from smaller 
centres to larger centres to go to the hospital, access medical 
services, was actually prior to health reform, in the 1980s, when 
people began to go to larger centres in very big numbers. The 
number of surgeries done in smaller hospitals throughout the 
‘80s went down by about 60 per cent I believe, and the number 
of births went down very substantially, prior even to the 
conversion of the 52 hospitals in ’92. 
 
(2045) 
 
But the member is right, and I agree with the member that that’s 
part of the problem we have to deal with. The pattern of choice  

in going for medical services changes and the system has to 
adapt to that. And that’s the point the member is making. I 
certainly agree with that point. 
 
And when we adapt the system, it causes a lot of controversy 
because change is very difficult for people that work in the 
system, for people that don’t feel secure about what’s going on 
in their community. That happens, and I agree with the member 
that that is a process of change. 
 
The member also raises a good point about, if somebody is 
released from the hospital too early and that causes them a 
problem, that’s not a good thing. It does occasionally happen  
the member is correct  and when that happens, to the extent 
that it happens, the system has failed. 
 
But I want to say to the member that this is not a new matter, as 
the member will know. If you go back 10 years or 20 years or 
30 years, this has always happened, that people are re-admitted 
because of a problem that arises. 
 
One of the interesting things about health reform is that it 
doesn’t take away from the fact that the member raises a 
legitimate problem if somebody’s released too early. But the 
rate of re-admission has not gone up; in fact it’s gone slightly 
down since health reform. Prior to . . . well in 1991-92, 14 per 
cent of patients were admitted to hospital again within 30 days 
of their discharge, compared to the latest figure for ‘94-95 is 
thirteen and a quarter per cent. So the number of re-admissions, 
I suppose if you have any within 30 days, is probably too high, 
but the number of re-admissions has not gone up under health 
reform. That doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t try to avoid any 
re-admissions whatsoever. 
 
But I think as the member will also know, part of what the 
medical profession is telling us today  and things have 
changed a bit  is that if you have a heart attack for example, 
and you go into the hospital, they used to tell you to lie around 
in the hospital bed perhaps for several weeks. Now they don’t. 
Now they say no, go home, be reasonably active, you’ll 
probably get better sooner. 
 
And also if they can get you out of the hospital — in general 
terms — instead of lying around, the medical people today, 
generally speaking, think that that is a healthy thing to do. And 
one of the problems with being in hospital is there are a lot of 
infectious diseases in hospital. One of the biggest problems 
people in hospital for a prolonged period of time have, is that 
they often get sick as a result of the fact that they are in the 
hospital, and they’re exposed to various infections. And you 
don’t want to keep people in the hospital longer than you have 
to. That’s a trend around the world. It’s certainly supported by 
the medical profession. It doesn’t take away from the point the 
member is making, that don’t release people too soon. But 
nevertheless, the reality is that all over the world, medical 
practice is that people are released much earlier. 
 
Part of the reason too is changes in technology. If you get your 
gall bladder out, previously you would be laid up for several 
weeks and in the hospital. Now it’s generally done 
laparoscopically. They put a few incisions in, take the gall  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2981 

bladder out, and you might be on your feet in a few days, 
whereas before you might be in the hospital for several weeks. 
Those things have changed a great deal, and it changes the way 
hospitals operate. 
 
But I want to say to the member too that, as he probably knows, 
even with the many fewer hospital beds that we have in 
Saskatchewan today . . . I think we have about 1,200 fewer 
hospital beds today than we did four or five years ago. In 
Regina, for example, I think they’ve gone down from about 
1,100-and-some to 700-and-some, and it’s the same in 
Saskatoon, because things have changed. 
 
But the number of surgeries we do is the same as before. In 
other words the number of procedures performed on people or 
the number of people going into the hospital has not gone down 
even though the number of beds has gone down. People are 
going in for shorter periods of time, and often they’re being 
cared for in their home and the rate of re-admission has not 
gone up. 
 
So more people are actually served today by a smaller number 
of hospital beds. And I realize that the member is saying well 
some of these changes are very upsetting to communities that 
are affected by change. But I would say that this is not 
something that is unique to Saskatchewan. 
 
I cited The Globe and Mail . . . or Statistics Canada study just a 
few minutes ago that says that across the country hospital 
spending has gone down about 9 per cent just in a two-year 
period. I’m not sure it’s gone down that much in Saskatchewan 
actually because we have more than twice as many hospitals per 
capita as anywhere in the country. 
 
But nevertheless, we are not immune to change. Technology 
changes, medical practices change, people’s preferences 
change, population has shifted in the province, and we’re not 
immune to change. But I acknowledge to the member that 
change can be difficult to cope with, certainly. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well that’s quite true, Mr. Minister. The headline 
in the February 29 edition of the Star-Phoenix is: 
 

Health-care employees traumatized: executive. 
 
Four years after the province introduced its wellness model 
of health care, employees in the health-care system are still 
sick with fear, anger and resentment, says a senior 
executive with (the) Saskatoon District Health (Board). 

 
And then further down it says: 
 

Many of us have lived for four years with the idea that 
tomorrow we may be the one that’s gone. People don’t feel 
safe. 

 
Just the other day I happened to come across a couple on 
another issue and found out that the wife was an employee in 
one of the health centres in this community, and as of August, I 
believe, her job is terminated. 
 

So people certainly have been traumatized. While individuals 
who are wondering as to the level of service that will be 
available to them . . . and certainly in the rural communities 
more so than the larger urban centres, because of the fact that 
where you used to have a hospital down the street in your small 
community, you may not have access any more. Maybe it’s a 
15-minute trip or a 20-minute trip or, in some cases, it’s up to 
an hour’s trip. 
 
And I guess the concern that really hits people’s minds, when it 
comes to the availability of hospital care and medical care and 
acute care centre, is the fact that if you don’t happen to have a 
small ambulance in your small community  or I shouldn’t say 
small, just the word . . . use the word, ambulance  in your 
small community, even though it doesn’t have an acute care 
facility, if you have to call an ambulance, you may be calling an 
ambulance that has to travel over some road conditions that 
certainly all that . . . aren’t all that conducive to getting to the 
scene of a medical case as quickly and efficiently as possible, 
and then as a number of individuals and certainly nurses in the 
. . . nurses down in that Wawota area have been talking to me 
about having to ride with patients in the ambulance and 
respond, in one case, to an accident scene in the Wawota area. 
 
Mr. Minister, the calls came in from nurses about the fact that it 
took what would have been normally about a 15- to 20-minute 
run for the Kipling ambulance to respond ended up 30 minutes 
because of road conditions. And so those are some major 
concerns to people in the rural areas. 
 
And so people in the larger centres may feel fairly comfortable 
that even while the Plains Health Centre may be closing down a 
number of acute care beds and you’re transferring them to other 
centres, they still have access to acute care facilities, whereas a 
Wawota or a Ponteix or some of these other communities, when 
they lose their facility, the feeling of really being looked after, 
the feeling of comfort and knowing that they are close to a 
facility, is a major concern to them. 
 
So I’m just saying, Mr. Minister, that many people have been 
affected with the changes that have taken place. And I think 
part of the effect comes from the fact that, Mr. Minister — and 
a question I want to raise in just a moment — is the fact that 
while we talked about rationalizing the system, while we talked 
about reducing the number of administrative staff . . . and I 
think you’ve argued in the past that before the changes came we 
had an administrator responsible for the hospital in the 
community, we had an administrator responsible for the care 
home, we had an administrator responsible for home care. And 
in most cases the ambulances were tied in with the hospitals. In 
some cases there were separate ambulatory boards and they had 
a separate administrator. And I agree with you. And some 
changes were being made to address that. 
 
And in fact prior to 1991, a number of communities had come 
to the point of amalgamating all their health boards into one 
board addressing health as a total concept in the community, 
and in a number of cases as well, had one administrator. 
 
So they basically had cut down the cost, the administrative 
costs, substantially by eliminating maybe two administrative  



2982 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

positions. In most cases they did that through attrition as people 
left the community. So people themselves recognized that they 
needed to look at more efficient ways of providing the service. 
 
But if I hear anything today, Mr. Minister, it’s that we’ve made 
these larger districts, but have we cut back in the number of 
administrative positions. And I would like for you, Mr. 
Minister, to give me the number of administrative positions in 
all the health districts  38 health districts across the province 
 and what I’m looking for is I’m looking for the 
administrators, the CEOs (chief executive officer). In some 
cases I see some districts have three or four administrative 
positions in their head offices, plus they have kind of directors 
of care, if you will, or persons responsible in the community for 
the different facilities. 
 
I would like to know how many of these positions are there in 
the districts, including staff members in the offices, because 
those are some of the issues where people feel that the 
reductions have not taken place, and as a result there’s been a 
reduction in the level of funding available to that district to put 
into services for people, whether it’s in home care, whether it’s 
in acute care facilities, or even in heavy care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the 
member for the question. I think I’ll deal with first the question 
about emergency access to health care then the administrative 
numbers question. 
 
I agree with the member that what is important to have is a 
good feeling of security out there, that if you need to go to the 
hospital you’re going to go there. But what I want to say to the 
member is that the interesting thing is that since health reform 
started and the conversion of the 52 hospitals into health 
centres, the number of people that go by ambulance to the 
larger centres like Regina, Saskatoon, Yorkton, Swift Current, 
and so on has not actually gone up, the reason being that if 
somebody on the farm or in a small town suffers a traumatic 
event and has to be taken somewhere by ambulance, they 
usually would be stabilized in the local community, perhaps in 
the small hospital but now maybe in the health centre, by a first 
responder and then taken to a larger centre. 
 
So in one sense, in the situations the member’s talking about, 
nothing has really changed. They always went to the larger 
centres anyway because those centres had surgeons and so on. 
 
One of the things that has happened, thanks to a lot of 
volunteers and good people in all our communities, in the last 
number of years is the first responder program. And we now 
have about 1,200 first responders  but that number is growing 
every day  who will get out to their neighbours within a few 
minutes in the event of a heart attack or some trauma, and we 
never had that before. 
 
And in many ways . . . because we have the same number of 
ambulances as before and we want to enhance the ambulance 
service to some extent. With the first responders, often people 
are attended to much more quickly than before, and it’s an 
excellent program. Lives have been saved because of first 
responders. 

And one of the things that has disappointed me in this session, 
actually, was to hear the member from Wood River, quite close 
to the beginning of the first session . . . of this session, I should 
say, up in the House on more than one occasion criticizing the 
first responders and saying that, what are you doing having 
untrained, volunteer people out attending to their neighbours? 
And that’s very unfortunate because these people in fact do a 
very good job. 
 
They are public-spirited, community minded people and they 
are saving lives. And because of them we have better 
emergency first response than we’ve had before. But I agree 
with the member when he says, as I think he’s saying, what we 
need to do is ensure that we do have a good emergency first 
response system and get people to the place where they can get 
the help they need. 
 
In answer to the member’s question about administration, there 
is no question that the number of people in administration has 
been reduced quite a bit since health reform. These figures are 
not up to date, but between October ’93 and ’94, health districts 
outside of Regina and Saskatoon reduced in-scope positions  
that is, usually union positions that the member was referring to 
in his question  by less than 3 per cent; and management 
positions were reduced by an average of just under 15 per cent. 
In Regina and Saskatoon, the in-scope positions were reduced 
about 5 per cent; management positions were reduced about 20 
per cent. And the number of people, the Leader of the Third 
Party asks. Obviously with respect to the in-scope, unionized 
worker positions, would be a larger number than the 
management positions. But the number of managers in the 
system, on average across the province, is reduced by about 18 
per cent. 
 
(2100) 
 
The number of people laid off is between 3 and 5 per cent 
across the province in the in-scope side, but what you must 
remember, Mr. Chair, about those positions, is those people 
usually are in a union subject to a collective agreement. They 
have recall rights. And most of the time they are recalled to 
work within, you know, a year  within the first year, actually. 
 
So there is no doubt that the number of administrators we have 
today in the health care system is much lower than before for 
the reasons the member says, that with consolidation you don’t 
need the same number of administrators. There has been some 
job loss. The job loss has been relatively small and one thing 
we lose sight of is that the job loss in health care is actually 
much less than many other sectors of our economy. 
 
If you look at transportation, such as railways, or some of the 
mining sector, retail sector in some areas like department stores, 
they’ve had much bigger job losses than in the health care 
system. But health care assumes a much bigger profile in our 
community so we tend to think that’s where all the jobs are lost. 
It isn’t actually the fact. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to have you, when you get the reports in, I would 
like to have, by district, an account of all the management  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2983 

positions, the CEO (chief executive officer) positions, the 
administrative positions. And when I’m talking management 
positions, I’m not sure if some are called facilitator positions, 
but I do know that in the two districts that I happen to represent, 
a number of the individuals who were administrators have been 
moved into head office and put under different names as far as 
their positions of responsibility, such as a facilitator, 
coordinator or the . . . I just don’t remember all the names 
offhand. 
 
But in each one of the facilities as well, there’s not just a 
director of care but an individual who’s responsible to manage 
and run that facility outside of the district board. So, Mr. 
Minister, in order for us to get a better handle and a better idea 
of what is administration, of what is, if you will, the job force 
providing the service to individuals such as the nurses and the 
CNAs (certified nursing assistant) and all those other positions 
 not just the care-givers, but you’ve got your cleaning-up 
staff and all that, Mr. Minister, I’d like a breakdown so we can 
assess and basically determine whether or not there have been 
real changes, real reductions. 
 
And so far, from some of the information I’ve received, it’s 
been very difficult to really break it out as to what we have for 
administrative positions, what are management positions, and 
the different level of services that are being provided as 
administrative positions in the districts. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d certainly appreciate if you’d take the time 
to . . . whether you can do it tonight or take the time to break it 
out as each district gives you their annual report; so we can see 
exactly where the money expenditures are going and how much 
money is going into direct acute care, how much money is 
going to into heavy care, how much money is going into home 
care and the other services that may be provided in the district. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I’d be happy to give you the latest 
numbers that I have. They come from the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations, I believe, and they are 
only up to October ’94. I don’t know that they have statistics 
going beyond that although presumably shortly they will. 
 
But in any event these are by district and they give you the 
number of in-scope employees prior to October 1, ’93 and as of 
October 1, ’94 which was subsequent to the conversions and 
the major lay-offs. 
 
And they show that the number of in-scope employees went 
down by about 2.93 per cent, and the number of management 
employees  the numbers for each district are here  went 
down by about 15 per cent. And then the figures in Saskatoon 
and Regina that I referred to before are here as well. So if it 
would be useful for you to have these, I’ll certainly ask one of 
the pages to get a photocopy because we only have one copy, 
and we’ll send a copy over to you. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, does that break it down by clerical 
staff as well? Like individual . . . and so basically the 
information you’re giving me is just saying either union or 
non-union but it doesn’t necessarily say whether you’re the 
CEO of the district, whether you’re the facilities manager, or  

the person managing the medical staff and these positions, or 
you’re a secretarial position in head office or a receptionist in 
the hospital. There is no real breakdown on that basis in what 
you’re giving me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  That’s right. We don’t keep those statistics. 
Those statistics would be kept at the local level, but they’re not 
kept at the departmental level. And I think, never have been, 
basically. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, I would certainly appreciate 
if that information was available. And I’m not exactly sure 
when you expect . . . or when the districts are supposed to have 
their annual reports in for the year. I think you mentioned this is 
for ’94-95. I would anticipate that before long there should be 
reports coming in for the year ’95-96. And I would ask, Mr. 
Minister, that your department take the time and that you have 
each district itemize, not just put it by unionized or 
non-unionized employee, but have your department indicate the 
levels of staffing in each district based on the administrative 
position, the clerical positions, and certainly the staffing 
positions as far as nurses or CNAs, and the other staffing within 
the district. 
 
That’s the only way, Mr. Minister, we’re really going to know 
whether or not there have been some major changes. Because 
the numbers that you’ve just passed over to me may look like 
there’s been some changes, but a number of those position may 
have moved into a higher level of remuneration for a service. 
 
The districts may have just generated and created, instead of a 
nurse on the floor . . . they may have an administrative position 
that would possibly draw a higher remuneration, which means 
while there’s been a reduction on the floor-service level in order 
to maintain the dollars, there’s no way for us to really determine 
where the monies are going. And that’s a major concern. And I 
would ask of you, Mr. Minister, that you make a requirement 
that you ask for this, if you will. If it’s available at the local 
level it should be available to you. 
 
I think your department would want to know as well that the 
dollars that you’re allocating to the districts are going, as much 
as is possible, to direct patient services versus more 
administrative levels of service. And if all you’ve got is the 
union and non-union, it really doesn’t give you, I don’t believe, 
a fair idea of how the funds are being allocated and spent in that 
district. So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could make a 
commitment to get us that information, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I’m not prepared to make that 
commitment, Mr. Chair, just because it would be quite 
expensive actually for the department to compile that 
information. But what I will do is  while not making a 
commitment to get the information in that level of detail 
because of the expense that it would involve getting the 
information at a time when we’re trying to cut down on 
administrative expense in the department, and we’ve reduced 
the staff at the department quite substantially, and cut down on 
our administrative expenses by 10 per cent . . . but that sort of 
information is available from each district if the member wishes 
to pursue it. 



2984 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

I will say this to the member. That I’m advised by the 
department that the amount of money spent on administration in 
the health districts is around the 3.5 to 4 per cent range  in 
other words, 3.5 to 4 cents on every dollar that health district 
would spend. I will also say to the member that I have the same 
sort of interest the member has in getting this sort of 
information and I will ask the department to provide me with 
information over time, as it becomes available from the 
districts, and I’d be happy to share it with the member. It’s 
public information. 
 
But at the present time, I’m not willing to commit to a project 
which will put this information together for the member. I think 
that would be quite expensive; but I will make an effort over 
time to get more full and better information and to share it with 
the member in due course. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, I’m 
certainly not asking your department to go on to another level 
of trying to put information together. I guess what I’m asking, 
Mr. Minister, is that the information that you receive from the 
districts, as far as their reports, breaks it out so that . . . and not 
on the basis that you’re going to sit down and then reiterate it, 
but you’ve got it available by district if you feel that you needed 
to look at it a lot closer. 
 
And the reason I ask for it, Mr. Minister, is because I’ve been 
asking some of the districts for this type of information, and 
unfortunately I guess, I get kind of a blanket, and this is 
administrative level. But it doesn’t indicate to me or to any of 
the other individuals and the concerned citizens in the district, 
as to how many administrative positions or levels are there in 
the district offices. And how many . . . there’s CEO, and then 
how many people work under the CEO in each of the facilities 
in the different communities? How many directors of care, I 
guess is, I think the term, in those communities? And then 
you’ve got clerical positions underneath them. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this is information that I think, as you said, is 
public. And I think it would certainly be appropriate for each 
district to list . . . they could even list the positions, to be quite 
frank and quite candid. I think your department, in the Public 
Accounts, if I’m not mistaken, every person working in the 
department is listed with their salary grid or level. And I don’t 
see this as being a problem as well for individuals in the 
different districts. 
 
Each and every one of us, as MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) in this Assembly, every amount of dollar that goes 
through our hands, our salary and everything that accrues to us, 
is publicly available. So I don’t see why it shouldn’t be 
available in the districts as well and that it’s itemized in an 
annual statement of some kind that people have access to, and 
that they can look at and say oh, there’s five people with kind of 
an administrative position working out of the district health 
board. 
 
And I guess the reason it comes up is because there are people 
who have just moved from what they were at one time, the 
administrator in the local hospital and administrating two 
facilities, have moved to a position of . . . administrative  

position in the health board, and then they put a director of care 
in the facility to kind of manage it. So it’s almost like you’ve 
got a duplication of services. 
 
And in many ways . . . I haven’t argued this strongly, 
strenuously, with you because in some cases it has meant a 
family has remained in the community. And I think decisions 
were made based on what families had done as far as 
establishing themselves in the community, and in some cases 
just nicely getting into a building project, building a new home, 
and then all of a sudden something that they weren’t aware of 
takes place. 
 
And so the district health boards in some cases have reached 
out to try and work into their district plans, positions where they 
could continue to maintain and give that person an access, the 
opportunity, to a job, even though maybe the definition of that 
job may have changed a little bit from what that person was 
doing before but has the qualifications to do it. 
 
So I would hope that you would take the time to ask for this 
type of information, at least have it available in a format that 
anyone could look at. That if they wanted to, at an annual 
meeting, would have the availability to it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked about first responders a few moments 
ago. Maybe I’ll give you a minute to respond. 
 
(2115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Basically, Mr. Chair, I don’t disagree with 
the member. I think that the sort of information that the 
member’s talking about should be public information and each 
district, as the member mentioned before, is obligated to hold at 
least two public meetings. Some of them hold more than that. 
Most of them would be quite happy, I’m sure, to share the 
information with the public about the number of administrators 
now versus before because it would be lower in each case. 
 
And when I say to the member that I’m not going to commit to 
getting that information together, I’m simply saying just that  
that I’m not going to commit to getting it together because we 
don’t do that in the Department of Health. But when the 
member says that this information should be available to him 
and every other member of the public, I agree, and any member 
of the public that wants that information, or the member 
himself, can go to the district health board and get that 
information or indeed talk to his or her elected representative on 
the district health board and ask these questions and get that 
information with respect to each board. 
 
And I’m sure that the district health boards would be more than 
happy to share the information and I agree with the member that 
anyone that wants to know should certainly have access to that 
information. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, a few moments ago you talked 
about first responder units and I can certainly concur in the fact 
that we have a number of first responder units in the 
constituency I represent and I’ve run into first responder units 
in other communities outside of the constituency. And I think  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2985 

any community that has worked to build . . . I think they started 
out . . . a number of these first responders started out as 
emergency measures responding units that went through a 
training program back a number of years ago and have just 
evolved into upgrading themselves to the point of being a first 
responder now and able to meet the needs of a person in the 
community that may need some help and assistance very 
quickly while they’re waiting for ambulatory services, if you 
will, if it’s not available right at the time to get there. So 
certainly first responder units play an important role in the 
current health system. 
 
Mr. Minister, a while back we were discussing the 
Whitespruce-Calder amalgamation, and you’ve argued that this 
has been done and is being done as a cost-cutting and a 
cost-saving measure. However, Mr. Minister, I understand 
while we’re talking about doing this as a cost-cutting measure 
that when you’re looking at moving the services that the 
Whitespruce Centre has been providing to many youth in our 
province who have had addictions, and looking at moving them 
to Calder Centre in Saskatoon, there are some changes that are 
taking place, are going to have to take place at Calder Centre in 
Saskatoon to address the different level of client that is now 
going to be there, and the fact that you’re going to have younger 
clients as well as older clients as Calder Centre currently helps 
them. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, the concern that continues to 
arise is the fact that when you start mixing youth with adults, 
are you going to get the same level of treatment and care? Are 
you going to be able to provide the same level of service? 
 
The feeling has always been, and certainly Whitespruce has 
provided an excellent level of care and . . . I’ll find it in a 
minute. I’ve got a letter here. Yes, a letter to the editor that I 
picked up, and this happens to come from an individual from 
the Shaunavon area. 
 

I feel a personal concern over the closing of the 
Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre, perhaps more 
personal than most. I was a client. If it wasn’t for this 
facility, who knows where I would be today? I was 16 
when I went through Whitespruce and probably, like the 
other 23 clients, was sick, rebellious, uncaring, and very 
afraid. Whitespruce was the last resort for my family and I. 
My other option was the streets. 
 
Had this facility not been there for us when we needed it, I 
would probably be just another statistic under prostitution 
as this is the easiest means of survival for young girls on 
the street. As a taxpayer, I would prefer to pay for 
rehabilitation in a program such as this rather than for a jail 
cell. 

 
And this person goes on to say that it was tough; it was the 
toughest thing they’d ever done, going through this 
rehabilitation program, but she goes on to mention of how 
much she appreciated what Whitespruce and the program had 
done for her. And the feeling, Mr. Minister . . . I’d just like to 
mention later on in her comments she talks about what the 
program did, how it was geared for youth, how the program  

was quite successful, how it helped her. Her question for the 
Romanow government is simply this: 
 

How can you allow politics to take that away from our 
youth and try to justify it by claiming it will save money on 
health care? In reality you will simply be displacing it from 
the health care system into the judicial system. 
 

And she goes on to say: 
 
Today I am a happy, self-confident, sober, married woman 
who is raising two children and maintaining a good job 
with the love and full support of her family, the same 
family that had almost given up and lost hope for their 
daughter. As far as I’m concerned, if Whitespruce has 
saved only a handful of our youth from becoming 
statistics, then it is a success. 
 

So we see here, Mr. Minister, there is no disputing the fact that 
Whitespruce played a role in the lives of many people. And the 
concern is twofold. Number one, the fact that you’re mixing 
youth with adults, is that going to create a problem? Are we 
going to be able to provide the same level of support and 
encouragement to many of the young people? 
 
The other thing, Mr. Minister, when Whitespruce was looked at 
and established, it was established because it was out away 
from the large urban centres. Most people would say it probably 
. . . when you’re looking at building a facility or getting into a 
program like this, you should do it close to a community of 
some kind. It wasn’t that far from Yorkton, but it was out in a 
rural setting. And in many cases, if you will, Mr. Minister, I 
think just being out in a rural setting where you’re out amongst 
nature even a little more is more uplifting and can provide 
actually quite a healthy experience for you versus just being 
within the confines of a large urban metropolis with hot paved 
streets around you or cold walls of buildings around you. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, these are some of the concerns and the 
questions that need to be asked, is why would we consider 
combining, when you had, I think, two programs that were 
running quite effectively, and in combining them if the only real 
reason was the economics, you would have to ask yourself 
would it have been just as economical and if not more 
beneficial to the individuals to maybe look at another avenue 
where a few dollars could be saved rather than amalgamating a 
program that may or may not provide the same level of support 
and encouragement and helping individuals through a 
rehabilitation program from the type of problems that they may 
be facing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I believe I read the letter the member also 
refers to and I agree with the member that this is a very 
important kind of service to provide. And what we’ve got to 
continue to do is in fact to continue to provide the same level of 
programing. The member is correct that Whitespruce is being 
consolidated with Calder Centre in order to save money and I 
believe the savings are in the order of over a million dollars per 
year. 
 
But I want to assure the member that the facility for youth at  



2986 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Calder will be a segregated facility. In other words, the youth 
will be in a facility segregated from the adults, although both 
programs will be in one larger facility. The youth will not be 
treated with the adults. 
 
It was felt by those who advise me with respect to these matters 
that the co-location in Saskatoon offered access to some 
services that were not available at Whitespruce, and it was also 
the advice I received that to involve the youth in the community 
more so with respect to recreational activities and education 
was a positive thing in fact to do in conjunction with their 
programing, and that that wasn’t as available at Whitespruce. 
 
But I want to say to the member, I certainly agree his point is 
valid. This is the sort of service that we have to continue to 
have for our youth, and we will. We have to have a segregated 
program for youth, and we have to make sure that the 
programing at Calder will lead to the same sort of result that the 
woman who wrote the letter that the member read from 
experienced. And like the member, I’m committed to ensuring 
that we do in fact maintain that kind of service whether at 
Whitespruce or at Calder. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, what will be the total cost of 
renovations to Calder? What has to be done to upgrade this 
facility to receive young people, the youth that would have been 
treated at Whitespruce? And as well, Mr. Minister, will there be 
a gym facility at Calder like the Whitespruce one had? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The renovation cost is $250,000. The 
saving per year is $1.1 million. I’m not sure whether there’s a 
gymnasium at Calder or not. Frankly I doubt it. But I can tell 
the member that in the city of Saskatoon there are many 
gymnasiums and recreational facilities. And it is not a difficulty 
to access recreational facilities. And certainly that will continue 
to be part of the programing for the young people undergoing 
treatment for alcohol or drug abuse. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, what is currently being done with 
the state-of-the-art Whitespruce facility? I ask this on the basis 
of a number of individuals who have basically asked, okay, well 
this seems like the government is bound and determined to 
move the treatment centre to Saskatoon. We’ve got a facility 
that’s had a fair amount of monies put into it, a facility that 
could continue to provide a service of some kind to the 
community or to the area. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, 
what is currently happening with regards to the Whitespruce 
facility and how it will be utilized in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  This is actually under the jurisdiction of 
the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, and I haven’t been privy to the 
discussions he’s been having. And I suppose if he was here, he 
wouldn’t necessarily wish to reveal the details of all of the 
discussions he’s having either. 
 
But I want to assure the member that we do want the facility to 
be used in some productive way. And I believe there are a 
number of parties who have expressed an interest to the 
Minister responsible for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) with respect to potential uses of the  

facility. 
 
And as the member knows, that minister is also the member for 
Yorkton, which is adjacent to Whitespruce. The minister is very 
actively discussing the matter with several parties and it is our 
hope that a very good use will be found for Whitespruce and 
that it will not in fact be vacant. So that if that is an objective of 
the member, which I’m sure it is, that also is an objective that 
we share. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s unfortunate, Mr. 
Minister, that we weren’t aware of the fact that the facility is 
falling into the hands of the Minister responsible for SPMC 
prior to tonight. It just seems when a department’s responsible 
for a facility, for a service, you take for granted that the facility 
might be part of it or you might be involved as to what takes 
place with regards to that facility. 
 
So we’ll have to probably ask the Premier, as his estimates are 
all inclusive. And I believe SPMC has already been moved off 
the slate. 
 
Mr. Minister, received a letter from an individual, actually a Dr. 
Scot Lappa, and I’m not sure if you’ve heard of this individual. 
And I’d like to read into the record a number of the points that 
the doctor raises regarding the treatment of substance abuse. 
I’m going to start by reading the first paragraph: 
 

I was interested to hear that Whitespruce is moving from 
Yorkton to Saskatoon. I was born and raised in 
Saskatchewan and completed both my medical and 
pediatric training at the University of Saskatchewan. 
Currently I am in San Francisco training in the specialty of 
adolescent medicine and hope to return to Saskatchewan in 
another year. I provide primary health care for adolescents, 
including those from residential drug treatment programs 
and group homes here in San Francisco. 
 
Whitespruce is one of the few adolescent drug treatment 
centres in Canada, and despite its waiting-lists has served 
youth from across the country. Therapy for 
substance-abusing adolescents is a specialized enterprise; 
therefore there are a number of issues you should consider 
before merging adolescent and adult substance abusers at a 
single location such as Calder Centre. 
 

And then she gives a number . . . or this doctor gives a number 
of points, and I’d like to bring those points forward. Number 
one: 
 

The psychological tests used to assess substance abuse in 
adults are not valid nor reliable for assessing adolescent 
substance abuse. In the last few years, tests designed 
specifically for adolescents have been developed. A true 
measure of substance abuse and related problems before 
and after treatment is necessary to show funding agencies 
our treatments are effective and to improve the 
effectiveness of our treatment strategies. 

 
(2130) 
 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2987 

And number two: 
 

Compared to adults, substance abuse in adolescents is 
much more a multi-system problem involving the 
individual, family, school, and peers. Successful treatment 
strategies address both the positive and negative roles of 
each of these areas. 
 
Family therapy is especially important given the major 
influence of family in their lives, and because unlike 
adults, they do not have the choice to live alone and will 
therefore likely be returning home. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, this is one of the points that’s been raised by 
a number of individuals that I’ve had the privilege of dealing 
with as they’ve come to me and asked where they may go and 
how they may deal with the problem of substance abuse 
amongst their family members. And certainly the reports that 
have come back have indicated that the treatment at 
Whitespruce was first class and the working together with 
families was something that was really appreciated by the 
family members as well as individuals such as this individual 
we just talked about from Shaunavon. 
 
And number three, another point: 
 

Rarely does severe risk behaviour such as substance abuse 
occur in isolation. Research on adolescent risk behaviour 
such as drug abuse, truancy, school failure, STDs, 
pregnancy, suicide, etc., suggest they are just different 
expressions of a larger whole. In-patient therapy and 
especially subsequent out-patient therapy must be willing 
to address these issues in order to decrease relapse 
potential. 
 
A teen mother with a learning disability who dropped out 
of school two years ago will need help to build a future. 
 

And I think this comes back to the point about not only 
combining, but also moving a facility back into an urban setting 
where you may be just closer to some of the problems that were 
associated with a person getting involved in substance abuse in 
the first place. And I think that’s why many people look at the 
facility at Whitespruce as providing a different means of 
providing for and helping a person be rehabilitated from the 
problems that they were facing. 
 
And number four: 
 

Not everyone likes to work with adolescents. Common 
responses when meeting someone who works with 
adolescents for the first time is, I couldn’t do that, or why. 
Testing and challenging the world around them is a part of 
normal adolescent development. 
 
It is important that those who work with adolescents also 
like and respect adolescents. This is especially true if you 
expect to gain their trust or change their behaviour. 
 

Now I think you’ve mentioned that there’ll be a total separation, 
but that may not address all of the concerns and  

some of the points that are being addressed here by Dr. Lappa. 
Number five: 
 

The level of activity and preferred activities. Music and 
topics of conversation of a teenager and a 30- or 
40-year-old are likely to be quite different. Adolescents 
requiring a residential drug treatment are the most severe 
cases among drug-abusing youth. 

 
Substance abuse, like other severe illnesses, often causes 
delayed intellectual and emotional development. For all of 
his apparent toughness, a 16-year-old who is abusing drugs 
since the age of 12 is more likely to behave and think like a 
12-year-old than an adult. 

 
And then number six: 
 

Among youth and residential drug treatment centres, 
multiple psychiatric disorders such as attention deficit 
disorder, conduct disorder, and major depression are quite 
common. Treating adolescents with these disorders 
requires different training and experience than that used to 
treat adults. 
 
While substance abuse may be the emphasis of a drug 
treatment centre, current research shows that successful 
treatment programs do not ignore these issues. 

 
And then the seventh point that was brought out: 
 

Many treatment centres rely heavily on adult-oriented 
12-step programs such as Alcoholics Anonymous and 
Narcotics Anonymous. Different steps require different 
levels of emotional and intellectual maturity. Trying to 
force an adolescent through a step she is developmentally 
incapable of performing invites only failure and frustration 
for both the adolescent and staff. 
 
A lack of knowledge in adolescent development may lead 
staff to accuse the adolescent of denial or resistance. Steps 
that ask an individual to give up control to a higher power 
can be especially hard for adolescents who have been 
physically or sexually abused. If not done correctly, it may 
even hinder therapy around their abuse issues which 
emphasize they’re taking back control of their lives. 
 
For these and other reasons, the current trend in substance 
abuse treatment is to segregate the adolescent population. 
It would take a very special institution and staff to be able 
to meet the diverse developmental and treatment needs of 
an adult and adolescent substance-abusing population. 
 
Adolescents are not cute like babies nor do they have the 
voting power of senior citizens. Their issues are often 
ignored by politicians and health policy makers to try to 
lump them in with small children or force them to be 
adults. They are our future and your decisions are shaping 
theirs. 

 
Mr. Minister, as you can see, this individual, having studied a 
fair bit in dealing with adolescents and looking at coming back  



2988 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

to the province, has obviously worked in a number of different 
scenarios and offers a number of points, a number of points that 
have been brought to my attention, points that I’ve raised with 
you. 
 
And I trust that . . . while I still strongly feel that Whitespruce 
was providing a very definite positive program and an effective 
program, your department is determined to move it into 
Saskatoon to the Calder Centre. I would strongly suggest, Mr. 
Minister, based on some of the information we even have here, 
that every effort is made to, if you will I guess, to make sure 
that the two programs aren’t overlapped so that somebody is 
missing out in the youth centre and maybe an individual in the 
adult centre is kind of missing out. So that there is that 
distinction. 
 
And I suppose that you’re hoping as well that some of the 
individuals or if not, many of the individuals, will look at 
possibly moving to Saskatoon so that they can continue to work 
in this program providing the services that they have in the past. 
 
With that, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask, of the current 
number of employees in Yorkton, and I believe they’ve all been 
offered or a number have been offered employment in the 
treatment centre at Calder, how many of the employees at 
Whitespruce will be moving from Whitespruce to the Calder 
Centre in Saskatoon? And at the end of the day, Mr. Minister, 
how many employees in total will be involved both in the 
Calder Centre at the adult and the youth program versus what 
we had involved in treatment centres, Calder and Whitespruce, 
in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  First of all, I’d like to say I don’t know if 
the member was reading from a letter that I received from Dr. 
Lappa and had a copy of that letter, but I have been actually 
corresponding with Dr. Lappa. And the letter that the member is 
reading went to the Conservative caucus, but actually I received 
the same letter. 
 
And I wrote Dr. Lappa. I think many of the points he raises are 
of course valid. I think the major source of his concern was that 
there wouldn’t be a segregated program for youth. He certainly 
thinks Whitespruce is a good program, but what he wanted to 
say, I think more than anything else, was we should not be 
merging the two programs. And he uses the term, merge. And I 
did write Dr. Lappa, first of all explaining that we were going to 
have a separate program for youth, and secondly, expressing my 
pleasure that he was contemplating returning to Saskatchewan 
with the training that he’s undergoing in the United States. 
 
To answer the question about the number of employees, 
previously at Whitespruce and Calder there were approximately 
91 employees in total. As a result of the closure of Whitespruce, 
I believe 41 positions, not all of them permanent, some part 
time and casual, 41 people though will be out of work. And that 
will leave a total of about 50 people that will be working in the 
two programs versus 91 at the present time. 
 
Most of the job losses will not be in counselling or dealing with 
the young people. Most of them I believe, will be in other areas  

such as maintenance, housekeeping, dietary, and so on at 
Whitespruce. That would be where the savings would actually 
come from. And of course like the member, I very much regret 
job loss at any time, but nevertheless the decision has been 
taken that the consolidation does make economic sense, 
financial sense, and that the programing can be done in a much 
more cost-efficient manner. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The unfortunate part is 
we do have job loss and I’m not sure what the opportunities are 
in Yorkton for these individuals. I’d be surprised if the member 
from Yorkton hasn’t been receiving a fair bit of complaints. 
 
In fact I was quite surprised in the way the member responded a 
number of weeks ago to some of the calls that were being made 
in view of the fact that he was representing an area where a 
number of jobs were going to be on the line; where people 
would be looking for work, and if there aren’t any other job 
opportunities. 
 
And the unfortunate part is somebody is going to be on UI 
(unemployment insurance) and then maybe down the road 
looking at social assistance for some help. But I would trust 
then, and I hope, and I haven’t had a chance to really talk to the 
minister about what’s happening with the facility out there, but 
hopefully there’s something in the works that comes together, 
that may open up the doors for some of these people to continue 
to work in the Yorkton area. 
 
Because I know that a number of people had really built their 
homes and their families around the community of Yorkton, 
and it certainly makes it difficult for people when all of a 
sudden the job that you’ve enjoyed so long moves to another 
location and you’ve just nicely got your roots down and then 
you’re asked to pick them up again. 
 
Although we hear many experts telling us that in the coming 
years and generations that most individuals entering the 
workforce today may change jobs about five or six times before 
they get to retirement age; that we’re not really sitting in a time 
period in our lives now where you could enter the workforce 
and build yourself into a certain field and stay in that field for 
the full length of your working days; that there are changes that 
will be ongoing and taking place. 
 
So although for those of us who grew up in that, it’s not always 
that easy just to start moving into a, well I’ll change and I don’t 
know where I’ll be five years down the road but hopefully 
there’s something else for me. It certainly is difficult. 
 
So I trust that your department has done everything it can, 
physically can, to deal with the emotional stress and strain of 
the employees who are certainly facing the pink slips and will 
not have jobs when the centre officially closes. 
 
And I’m not sure what day it’s closing. I think you are looking 
at moving clients into the Calder Centre by August. But what 
plans . . . and what has your department done or the Department 
of Health done to address some of the emotional stress that 
arises as a result of job losses, not only at Whitespruce but in 
many of the facilities across the province. 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2989 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I want to say, Mr. Chair, that I share the 
member’s view of course about the effect on Yorkton and also 
his hope that something productive will be happening at 
Whitespruce. And I assure the member that the minister in 
charge of SPMC is certainly doing his utmost to bring that 
about. 
 
And I tried to say to the member before that my answer about 
Whitespruce and what SPMC might be doing was not intended 
to evade the question. I had said that although it was for the 
minister of SPMC, if he was here, he might say to the member, 
yes, I’m having discussions, and I’m doing my best, but I’m not 
prepared to make any announcement or share any details at the 
present time because I think he’s in negotiations or discussions 
with more than one party. 
 
So it isn’t a matter of not wanting to answer the question. I 
think it’s a matter of developments not being at a stage where 
one would answer the question. And I suspect the Premier, if he 
was here, would have the same answer. 
 
But I share with the member the view that we should do the 
very best we can, and certainly I know the member from 
Yorkton shares that view as well. 
 
And in answer to the question, the effect on the employees who 
will suffer job losses as a result of this decision has caused the 
department to of course meet with the employees, and also to 
offer employee assistance and stress counselling to such of the 
employees who may want it or require it. I don’t know if any of 
the employees have taken the department up on that offer. But 
the sort of counselling that could be made available, I’m 
advised, has been offered to the employees, as it would be, I 
suppose, with respect to other employees in the Department of 
Health. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
reason I raise that is because the member from Saskatoon 
Greystone mentioned that she wouldn’t be here tomorrow 
because she’s meeting with and doing a session with a group of 
medical people in the Saskatoon area  a number of, I believe, 
nurses. And her comment was she’s been asked to come. I think 
she’s been, in her profession, a psychologist and has talked to 
different groups and laid out scenarios as to how you deal with 
stress in some of these situations. And she mentions that in the 
last while, she’s had numerous calls to come and talk to people. 
And it all relates back to that stress I was talking about, the 
uncertainty of jobs. 
 
And I think it is something that if your department hasn’t given 
some thought to or put in motion some kind of program or 
some way of dealing with this, it would surprise me, because 
it’s certainly been a department that has created a situation 
where there are . . . many employees are working under a lot of 
uncertainty, under a lot of pressure. And a number of jobs have 
been slashed throughout the province, which has created trauma 
for many homes. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me that we need something  

that gives people an ability to take a look at where they are, 
where they were, and the fact that their job has been cut, such 
as the one I just mentioned a little earlier whose husband had 
been in a major accident and were dealing with SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) on this one. And now 
she finds that her position as a nurse is probably cut. 
 
That creates a lot of emotional stress in families and homes. 
And we’ve seen in the past what happens to individuals and 
what can happen if the emotional stress becomes more than 
they can bear. And there again it may become a cost to our 
health system. So I think it’s important that your department 
have some kind of a program in place where you can deal with 
individuals or groups as you’re addressing the downsizing and 
the cutting of jobs and the different levels that are currently 
taking place in health care. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member certainly raises a very 
valid point. I would say to the member, Mr. Chair, that in fact 
the sort of stress that the member is talking about is certainly an 
issue in the health care sector. It actually is a very big issue in 
every sector of society. And I think that stress is one of the 
biggest problems in Canadian society today and perhaps in 
other countries as well because of the number of changes we’re 
seeing in just about every sector of society. 
 
The member is a farmer, I believe, and knows that because of 
some of the things that have happened on the farm, especially 
part of the last few years when prices improved a bit, have 
caused a lot of stress and have resulted in things like the farm 
stress line. This is true in the railway industry where tens of 
thousands of people have lost their jobs. It’s true in the public 
service. It’s true in many private sectors. It’s also true in the 
health sector. 
 
So I don’t disagree with the member, I just make the point that 
this is not unique to the health sector. It doesn’t mean it’s not a 
problem in the health sector. And I also think that the member 
is correct when he says that it’s something the Department of 
Health should be concerned about. 
 
We have to work with SAHO, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations, and the unions that represent the majority 
of employees in the health care sector to talk about this issue, 
because they deal with the employees who are not employed by 
the Department of Health, by the health districts, on a 
day-to-day basis. 
 
Certainly there have been discussions between the department 
and SAHO about ways to deal with stress. And the department 
and SAHO have had discussions about SAHO having a person 
in charge of stress. We, in the last provincial budget, allocated 
$1.8 million to be put into a workplace wellness program, the 
details of which are not quite worked out because they will be 
worked out with SAHO. 
 
But certainly part of the objective of that fund is to find ways to 
try to reduce the level of stress and injury in the workplace. Of 
course one other thing that happens is that the districts, in 
bargaining with the unions who represent the employees, will 
often develop employee assistance plans to assist employees  



2990 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

who are suffering from stress. 
 
And the member raises a very valid point. There’s certainly 
more that can be done and the department will certainly 
continue to pay attention to the issue. And if there are other 
things that we should be doing or SAHO should be doing, then, 
like the member, I believe we should keep working on that 
issue. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I just don’t remember if I jotted it 
down but one of my questions . . . I did ask actually a number 
of questions but I’m trying to remember if I did get an estimate 
of what it’s going to cost to upgrade the Calder facility to 
handle the transition from Whitespruce to Calder. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, as I indicated earlier, the cost of 
renovation is $250,000, which is a one-time payment this year, 
and the annualized savings are $1.1 million per year. 
 
Mr. Toth:  When you’re mentioning 250,000, what does that 
cover? What are you doing with $250,000? It doesn’t seem to 
be a lot. And also I’m just wondering where you get the $1.1 
million savings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It covers physical renovations in the Calder 
centre to provide for a segregated facility for youth, as we 
talked about before, and also transfers some systems like the 
telephone system, I believe, from Whitespruce to Calder. Some 
of the things they used at Whitespruce will be taken to Calder 
because they’re relevant to the programing. 
 
But I don’t have a more specific list at this time. But if the 
member requires a more detailed breakdown of the $250,000, 
I’m sure we could provide that to the member in due course. 
 
Mr. Toth:  And one other question, Mr. Minister. You 
mentioned about annual savings of 1.1 million. It would seem 
to me that the 41 positions wouldn’t cost you 1.1 million on an 
annual basis. What are you are . . . or how have you arrived at 
the $1.1 million savings on an annual basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The $1.1 million is made up of rent paid to 
SPMC for the Whitespruce facility of approximately half a 
million dollars per year and about $600,000 as a rough estimate 
in savings for wages. The 41 positions are not all full-time 
positions. Some are part time and casual but it would be about 
$600,000 wages and half a million dollars in rent. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I just want to point out one thing 
before one of my colleagues has some questions they want to 
enter into. 
 
You talked about $1.1 million savings as a result of the change. 
And you talked that part of that savings is $500 million in rent. 
Well maybe it’s a savings . . . or 500,000  500 million, boy, 
that would be just about enough to cover all the interest for a 
year, wouldn’t it? The interesting thing, Mr. Minister, is . . . 
what I find interesting is how you can use that as an expense 
and an expenditure to the taxpayers of the province when all 
you’re doing is passing it from one department to another. 
 

So I think it’s a $500,000 savings to the Department of Health 
but it’s going back into the hands of Property Management 
who’s another government agency. So it really is a neutral 
figure in the overall aspect of savings to government. So I just 
wanted to point that out for the sake of individuals who might 
be thinking, well boy, they just found another $500,000, but 
really it just goes into the hands of another department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  My understanding, Mr. Chair, to the 
member, is that the maintenance costs of Whitespruce that 
SPMC would pay in the usual course of events are less than 
$500,000, so that the cost to the taxpayer, even if nothing was 
done with Whitespruce, would be about, I think, about 
$300,000 to maintain Whitespruce. But I don’t have that figure 
in front of me. The rent is $500,000 so there’s a saving of 
$200,000 there. There’s a saving of $600,000 in wages and 
salaries, so even taking the member’s point, we would still have 
a net saving, I would estimate, of about $800,000 per year. But 
if we are successful, which we hope to be, in finding another 
use for Whitespruce, then in fact the saving would certainly be, 
to the government as a whole, the $1.1 million. If we were not 
successful in the long term, you would have a saving of about 
$800,000 per year. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, what was the cost per client per day 
in Whitespruce to provide the service, and the cost per day per 
client at Calder, and what do you anticipate the cost per client 
per day in the new Calder youth treatment centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, to the member, I don’t have the 
per diem cost. I can only say to the member that the annual 
costs at Calder versus Whitespruce would be $1.1 million less 
on the department’s analysis. On the member’s analysis, they 
would be approximately $800,000 less per year. Certainly if the 
member wishes, I would undertake to get that information 
because that information is available in the department. I just 
don’t have it at the moment. I’d be happy to provide the 
member with that information. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d be pleased to have 
that information, Mr. Minister, because we’ve been informed 
that the cost per patient per day at Whitespruce was about $166 
a day, and whereas the cost per patient per day in Calder is over 
$400 a day. And those figures we’d like to . . . I’d like to have 
that information based on . . . and of course, when I’m talking 
about this, Mr. Minister, I also want to ask you for what the cost 
. . . what do you anticipate the cost will be to treat youth in 
Calder versus the adult? Because I know when I’m using the 
figures here I’m talking about Calder at the present time as an 
adult treatment centre and there might be different costs with 
adults versus youth. So would you please get us what the actual 
cost was per day at Whitespruce to provide the service for 
youth, what you anticipate it will be in the Calder treatment 
centre once you’ve transferred all the youth to Calder, as well as 
the cost per day for the adult treatment centre at Calder? Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I’ll be happy to get that information 
for the member and we’ll send that over, not today but as soon 
as we get it together. 
 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2991 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I’d 
like to welcome the minister and his officials here this evening 
and give my colleague a little bit of a break here to re-collect 
his thoughts. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was contacted by some constituents about MS 
(multiple sclerosis), and I know that you’re aware of some of 
the problems of MS in this province. We have the highest rate 
in Canada. 
 
In particular, Mr. Minister, I have a news release that was put 
out by your department on January 2 of this year, dealing with 
Betaseron. And in its treatment for MS patients, it says in the 
news release from you that there is a national review being 
called for; that the review is in progress. Hopefully this is not 
the type of review that the Labour department or CIC has been 
doing on the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement), rather that you actually have a report in place. 
 
The Saskatchewan Formulary Committee was to be reviewing 
the information on this and that it was supposed to be available 
in early 1996 on Betaseron. Do you have that information 
available, Mr. Minister? What was the Formulary Committee’s 
decisions as it relates to prescription drugs on the Betaseron? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The matter . . . I do not have that report as 
of yet. 
 
An Hon. Member:  It is being prepared, is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Oh, yes. I’m advised that the drug is 
currently being reviewed by the Saskatchewan reviews 
committees. There’s more than one of them. There’s the Drug 
Quality Assessment Committee and the Saskatchewan 
Formulary Committee, which review drugs covered under the 
drug plan. And there’s also a third committee  this is a 
national committee  the Canadian Coordinating Office for 
Health Technology Assessment, or the CCOHTA, it says here, 
if you prefer. And they are reviewing the product. 
 
They were established by the provinces to provide economic 
assessment of pharmaceuticals and technology. They draw in 
experts from across Canada to perform their evaluations. Their 
review is expected to be complete, this says, in late summer 
1996. So obviously it’s been moved back. 
 
At this time, general coverage is not available in other 
provinces. Quebec has turned down Betaseron for 
reimbursement. Manitoba has provided coverage for a few 
social services clients. Yukon has approved coverage for at 
least one resident. And the drug is not a cure but appears to 
lessen the number and severity of attacks in some patients. 
 
At the present time, we’re awaiting the advice of the Canadian 
coordinating office, and also the Drug Quality Assessment 
Committee and the Formulary Committee. When we have the 
reports of those committees . . . which, by the way, as I think 
the member will know, is the normal course of events. The 
Minister of Health or the department doesn’t make any decision  

with respect to whether a drug should be made available until 
these committees report. Nor do we determine the rate at which 
they can do their work and report to us. But it’s an issue that, 
like the member, we’re watching very closely. And we will 
await the advice of those committees, and then certainly on the 
basis of that advice, make a decision as to the extent to which 
the drug should be made available in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you table 
that document please, since you were reading from it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I’m sorry, Mr. Chair. I apologize. Could 
the member repeat that question, please? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, I’d like you to table that 
document since you were reading from it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No, I . . . this is a personal briefing note of 
my own which I’m not prepared to table. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Deputy Chairman, I believe it has 
been the tradition in this House that any time a minister reads 
from a document in estimates that that document is then 
available for tabling. Perhaps we need some clarification on 
that. 
 
The Chair:  Order. I’ve listened carefully to the conversation 
about the tabling of documents. And past rulings in this 
legislature have upheld a minister’s right to have briefing notes 
and to not table those briefing notes. There are other papers that 
can legitimately . . . we can legitimately request be tabled. But 
briefing notes have been treated as ministerial property for their 
use in helping them with estimates. Therefore I sustain the 
minister’s right to not table that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, perhaps then you could explain why you do not wish 
to table that particular document. Obviously you read at least a 
portion of it, if not the entire document. Can you explain the 
reason why you would not want to table the document that 
simply says that the Betaseron drug is under review by your 
department and the national review process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I have answered the question for the 
member that he’s asked. And in fact I have two volumes of 
briefing notes with me this evening. I’ll be referring to briefing 
notes during estimates on a wide variety of matters. And I’ll be 
keeping my briefing notes to myself and not sharing them with 
the member. And I’m sorry if the member finds that offensive 
but that is the practice that is followed, and it’s the practice that 
I’ll be following. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  It’s also the practice, Mr. Minister, that I 
can ask you for them and ask you why you don’t wish to allow 
them for tabling in this particular House. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess I still have to ask again: what was so 
secret on the document that it wouldn’t be available to the 
members of this Assembly to see what was on the document 
that you were reading, because obviously you read a few 
paragraphs of it. Was there some secret information on there  



2992 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

that the House should not be entitled to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, I have nothing to add to my 
previous two answers. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister, I guess 
we just have to assume that there was something secret on there 
that you did not wish to reveal . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  What’s your girlfriend’s telephone 
number? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well perhaps his wife should ask these 
questions and not me, if that’s the case. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, obviously you have something you do not 
wish to reveal, and I find that unfortunate in this particular case 
because the drug Betaseron may have a significant benefit to 
some patients. Most drugs do not affect all patients equally, but 
certainly some patients seem to respond positively to Betaseron 
and I think in those cases, on the recommendations of their 
physician, that the drug should be available to them. 
 
Now I guess perhaps I should ask: is the drug available for use 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, the drug is available in Saskatchewan. 
It has been approved for sale in Canada so can be prescribed by 
physicians, but it is not covered by the drug plan at this point. 
And the decision as to whether it would be covered by the drug 
plan would be made on the basis of a recommendation of the 
committees which I’ve referred to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you 
table that letter please that you’re reading from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Chair, this is a briefing note of mine, 
and no, I’m not prepared to table it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I guess the minister can make his 
own interpretations on what’s a briefing note and what’s a letter 
since we’re not allowed to see it. I believe though, Mr. 
Minister, if you read from a letter in this House that you are . . . 
we’re entitled to ask for it to be tabled and you are then 
required to table that document. So perhaps if you want to read 
from letters, you should leave them laying on your desk rather 
than pick them up and hold them in your hand. 
 
Mr. Minister, since the drug is available in Saskatchewan for 
prescription by physicians, what cost does this drug cost for the 
full prescription, whatever that might be, for a physician to 
prescribe for a patient? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well I hesitate to get up holding a piece of 
paper in my hand, Mr. Chair, for fear that the member will 
come over here and bodily remove it, bodily remove it from me, 
or think it’s a letter or something else. I’m advised that the 
annual cost of this drug therapy would be about $20,000 per 
patient. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are any 

patients in Saskatchewan receiving Betaseron through the drug 
plan or through some assistance of the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Not any public assistance. I’m not aware 
whether any patients might be receiving it as a result of some 
other private coverage they may have. But at the present time it 
is not covered by the drug plan. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. At different 
times patients . . . or doctors are allowed to prescribe new drugs 
on an experimental basis. When that happens, does the 
provincial drug plan or the provincial Health department assist 
in any of those costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  No. If they are at the experimental stage, I 
am advised they’re not covered by the drug plan for the reasons 
I indicated earlier about the committees needing to recommend 
them to the drug plan. I’m also advised that normally when a 
drug is being used on an experimental basis, it is often provided 
free of charge to the patient through the physician so that . . . 
because it’s experimental, the physician might be providing the 
patient with the medication at no charge to the patient. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  In those types of circumstances, Mr. 
Minister, would the physician then receive the drug at no charge 
to the physician from the manufacturer, or how would those 
circumstances work? I just can’t imagine that the physicians 
would pay out $20,000 a year for this drug or some other figure 
for some other type of drug out of the benefit of their heart to a 
patient. I can see it happening once perhaps, but not on an 
ongoing basis. So do the drugs come from the drug plan . . . or 
not from the drug plan, from the manufacturer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, that’s correct. And I think that’s quite 
a common practice in fact, that the drug manufacturers give the 
physicians new drugs for use with their patients to establish 
their usefulness, and indeed after drugs are established, drug 
companies will often give free samples to physicians. But 
certainly the member is correct that the physicians would not be 
paying for the drugs. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You said 
that the review would likely be ready mid-’96 I believe it was 
on your first paper that you wouldn’t let us see. Is this all of the 
review processes or is this just one of the three review 
processes that are taking place that will be finalized mid-’96? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The Canadian . . . the national review or 
the review that is done on the behalf of several provinces 
together is expected to be done sometime this summer. The two 
Saskatchewan committees, which are committees, I think, not 
of civil servants primarily but people from the pharmaceutical 
industry  professional people  we don’t have dates from 
them right now as to when they will do their work or complete 
their work. They will complete their work in due course and 
advise us accordingly. We haven’t put any schedule to them as 
to when they must complete their work, nor do we normally do 
that. 
 
One would think that sometime this year they would be 
reporting to us, and I suppose we could ask them when they  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2993 

think they might be reporting, but it isn’t the practice that we 
hold them to any schedule. These are professional people who 
take the time they feel is necessary to study drug use, not only 
here but across the country and perhaps around the world, and 
determine the usefulness of drugs and in what circumstances 
drugs should be prescribed for particular conditions. And then 
they report to us. 
 
So I can’t give the member a precise date as to when the two 
Saskatchewan committees will be reporting. At least I can’t at 
this point. I suppose we could make an inquiry to those 
committees, and whether or not they would know precisely 
when they will have their work done, I’m unsure. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It sounds 
sort of like this House; we know we’re going to get it done 
sometime, we’re just not sure when. 
 
Mr. Minister, what kind of considerations would these two 
Saskatchewan committees consider that would differ from 
whatever reviews may have been done in Manitoba, and I 
believe it was the Yukon that had approved this Betaseron for 
use within their drug plan. What different review would 
Saskatchewan be doing than the national review that’s ongoing 
that will be reporting this summer, or what Manitoba and the 
other jurisdiction which approved the drug, that they would be 
doing? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I think the member may have 
misunderstood what I was saying in my earlier answer. I did not 
say that any province had approved of the drug for use in the 
sense that we’re talking about the drug plan approving it. There 
are a few instances where a very small number of people, 
perhaps one or two I think, have been approved for the 
medication. That’s not the same as those provinces having 
arrived at a determination necessarily that there should be 
general approval for the use of those drugs. 
 
So if I misled the member in that respect, then I certainly 
apologize. But each province conducts its own review. And I 
suppose this is true not just with respect to this drug but other 
drugs. And one might make the argument that we should have 
one review for all of Canada. But that has not been the way in 
which these things have been done up until this point. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it certainly seems to 
be somewhat redundant that each jurisdiction would carry out 
an independent review to make the determination on the same 
drug. 
 
I can certainly see that certain jurisdictions might have more 
interest in a particular drug and therefore be more willing to 
initiate the reviews on a particular drug. And Betaseron, since 
we have a very high incidence of MS in comparison with other 
provinces in Canada, perhaps this is one that we should indeed 
be on the leading edge of. And other jurisdictions should 
perhaps be reviewing other drugs based on their own needs and 
criteria, but that at some point in time the acceptance of a drug 
by the national committee or acceptance of the drug by a  

province, a particular jurisdiction, should carry some weight 
across the country. 
 
Now I can understand if it’s simply a matter of budgetary 
problems to say that, well we’re not prepared to pay for 
$20,000 worth of drugs in one year, and for that reason we’re 
not prepared to accept it. If it’s on a monetary level, we’ll 
debate the issue on a monetary level. But if it’s a reason that the 
drug for some reason doesn’t serve the people, well then I 
would think that a study across the country would either point 
that out, yes or no  this is either an efficient drug, a 
worthwhile drug, or it is not. 
 
And therefore that type of an evaluation should be valid across 
the entire country. The monetary situation is different. Each 
province has different requirements, different needs and 
different opportunities to meet the needs of their citizens. 
 
But on the question of whether or not the drug will perform as 
expected, whether or not there is any danger to the patient that 
is using it, I would think that kind of information should be 
shared equally across the country, evaluated equally, and 
accepted that there should be a set standard for it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. In fact this committee I referred to 
earlier, the Canadian Coordinating Office for Health 
Technology Assessment, is actually a fairly recent committee. 
The reason it has been set up is because of what the member 
has been saying, i.e., that we should try to have some 
coordination. And it’s a fairly recent development. They are 
looking at five or six different medications, and one of them 
being Betaseron. 
 
And presumably when they report, that will then impact on the 
way in which the committees in each individual province will 
deal with the issue, because the various provinces will each take 
some of the evidence that comes from the national committee. 
 
So there is an effort going on, which is just starting, to try to 
have better coordination of the assessment of drugs instead of 
reinventing the wheel in each province. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I’m certainly pleased to hear that, 
Mr. Minister, because I think it certainly is worthwhile. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe physicians also have an opportunity, 
when a drug is not covered under the drug plan, to request to 
the prescription drug plan, to medical insurance, that a 
particular drug be given an exception for a particular patient 
and that it be paid for by the prescription drug plan. 
 
Have you received any requests in dealing with Betaseron? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, there is such a thing as exceptional 
drug status, but before you have a drug that is approved under 
exceptional drug status, the drug will have been approved by 
the committees which I’ve referred to. And so they are 
approved by the committees; they’re not part of the drug plan. 
They’re approved by the committees for exceptional drug 
status. 
 



2994 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

And so that a physician cannot simply prescribe the medication 
to the patient; rather, the physician has to go to the drug plan 
and say, you’ve approved this for exceptional drug status and 
I’d like to have this patient actually get that drug. And then an 
assessment is made for each individual patient. And in the case 
of Betaseron, it would not be at the stage where you would have 
the exceptional drug status simply because it hasn’t gone 
through those committees. 
 
What may ultimately happen is that those committees, for 
example  I don’t know if they will or won’t  they may say 
it should be generally available, they may say it should be 
available on an exceptional drug status basis, or they may say it 
shouldn’t be available at all. 
 
But to get to that point, the committees would do their work, 
make a recommendation to the Minister of Health who would 
decide whether to adopt the recommendation or not adopt the 
recommendation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, thank you. I wonder if you 
could outline for me . . . you mentioned three different 
categories for drugs: basically available, generally available 
through an exception, and not available. What would be the 
criteria for each level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes. They would decide that it’s . . . Of 
course, they would go through a fairly technical procedure. But 
generally speaking, they would . . . if they said it should not be 
available under the drug plan it would be because they feel it is 
not useful, or is not as useful as something else that is already 
available. 
 
If they said that it should be generally available under the drug 
plan, it would be because they felt it was effective and useful on 
general prescription. If they said that it should be available on 
an exceptional drug status basis, that would be because they 
would have decided that it was only useful in a narrow range of 
cases, so that it might be useful for some people with a 
condition but not others and that a decision should be made 
whether it would be useful for the particular patient concerned. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay thank you. I think the first and the 
last are clear in the sense that it’s generally available or it’s not 
available. In the case of the exceptions, though, who makes the 
decisions on what information? I’m sure that a physician just 
doesn’t allow the patient to say, I want this particular drug, and 
then apply to the department for that drug. Surely a physician 
must have to prescribe it and then make the recommendation to 
the committee that this particular drug be made available to that 
particular client, to that patient. 
 
So on what information is the decision by the department 
made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  The decision would be made on the basis 
of technical criteria that would be established by physicians and 
pharmacologists. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  The consulting physician that the patient 
went to would have to make a recommendation initially, would  

they not, to have the committee look at the drug, then the 
committee would basically second-guess the recommendation 
of the patient’s physician as to whether or not that particular 
drug should be given as an exception? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well no, the physician would not go to the 
drug plan advocating for a particular drug unless the drug was 
already approved by the committees as being available on an 
exceptional drug status basis. 
 
So the way you put the question was: would the physician go to 
the drug plan and say, I want this drug available, but then 
advocate about the effectiveness of that drug? 
 
It wouldn’t quite work that way. The drug would be assessed in 
advance by the committee. They would make the decision in 
advance that it should be made available on an exceptional drug 
status basis. 
 
The physicians and pharmacologists would develop a set of 
criteria, in advance of the physician seeing the patient, as to in 
what circumstances the drug should be made available to a 
patient. The physician would then see a patient and would 
decide that those circumstances pertain to that patient, would 
contact the drug plan, and say, I have a patient that I think 
meets the criteria that you have set out as to when that drug 
should be made available. 
 
The drug plan would then in the normal course of events, on the 
basis of the advice of the physician, approve the use of that 
medication on an exceptional drug status basis. However, the 
drug plan certainly would have to satisfy itself that indeed the 
criteria for the administration of that drug were met. But I 
would imagine that in most cases, the physician would have 
already correctly made that determination but perhaps not in all 
cases. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  I guess that’s the position that I wanted 
to get to, Mr. Minister, was: does the drug plan committee 
re-examine the determinations and the diagnosis made by the 
physician, or do they generally accept the diagnosis of the 
physician and the prescription that this particular drug falls 
within the need of that particular patient and meets the 
exception criteria? So that is basically what would happen  is 
that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, I think that’s basically correct. And I 
should say too that what this really deals with is the question 
not whether a patient will get the drug but whether the drug 
plan will provide payment for the drug or part of the drug and 
so on, because it’s really a question of whether that drug will be 
included for coverage under the drug plan. 
 
So I wasn’t completely accurate in that regard before, but I 
think the member understood what I saying and I think what the 
member is saying is basically correct. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2995 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Just before we proceed further, I wanted to 
thank the officials for their assistance tonight and also thank 
members of the opposition for their very useful discussion. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth:  To as well express our appreciation to the 
minister and his officials and indicate that we certainly look 
forward to the same type of cordial response and debate when 
we meet the next time. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Agriculture and Food  Vote 1  

Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................2965 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2965 
Boyd .................................................................................................................................................................................2969, 2972 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2970 

General Revenue Fund  
Health  Vote 32  

Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................2974 
Toth .................................................................................................................................................................................2975, 2995 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2991 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Draude .............................................................................................................................................................................2966, 2968 
Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................2976 
 


