


















































April 2, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 671 
 April 2, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of people all throughout south-west 
Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, in regards to saving the 
Plains Health Centre. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, basically 
they’re all from Regina; every one of them is from Regina. 
Obviously, looking at this, it’s from Regina Albert South 
constituency and Elphinstone constituency. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
from Regina; they’re from Balgonie; they’re from all 
throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 
petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plain Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
throughout numerous communities throughout southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, from Rhein, Saskatchewan; Yorkton; Buchanan; and 
throughout the southern part of the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also  

rise to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Melville, Kipling, Carlyle, Langenburg, and 
other centres throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise as well on 
behalf of people in regards to the Plains Health Centre closure. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures are from Carlyle, Weyburn, Avonlea, and I even see 
one here from Brandon, Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 
names from people throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on this petition are mostly from Regina but also 
from Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today too to 
present a petition of names from people in the Regina area 
regarding the Plains Health Centre, with the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people of Regina in 
its entirety. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, do represent a 
rather broad cross-section of southern Saskatchewan, ranging 
from Swift Current, Waldeck, all the way across the province. 
We also have Moosomin on here, Weyburn, Central Butte right 
in the middle, among others. 
  



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today on behalf of people wanting rental accommodation in 
Saskatchewan and landlords who want fairness. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
action to allow an increase in the security deposits on 
rental properties to the equivalence to one month’s rent, 
and that your Hon. Assembly review the remedies 
available to landlords who are not given sufficient notice 
by Social Services’ tenants who vacate properties and 
whose rent in their new accommodations is paid by social 
assistance without regard for outstanding obligations in 
previous rental agreements. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from the Saskatoon, Regina, 
Springwater, and other parts of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker:  I’ll ask members of the Assembly to come to 
order, please. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly a guest in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Colin Maxwell, 
a former minister of Natural Resources for the province, now 
executive director of the Canadian Wildlife Federation. Colin is 
in Saskatchewan to launch National Wildlife Week tomorrow in 
Moose Jaw where I will be joining him at a school in Moose 
Jaw. And I ask all members to welcome Colin here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased this afternoon to introduce to you and all members 
of the Assembly, a fine-looking gentleman seated behind the 
bar here, behind the government benches. There are a couple of 
fine-looking gentlemen there, Mr. Speaker, but Mr. Darrel 
Cunningham, who has served with great distinction in this 
House during the last term. He’s now, I understand, visiting in 
southern Saskatchewan and has come to Regina on a vacation, 
and what beautiful weather he’s chosen to do that on. 
 
So I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming Mr. Cunningham to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I also would like to join with  

other members in the Liberal caucus to welcome Mr. 
Cunningham to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Prairie Malt Expansion 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of 
pleasure today to congratulate Biggar Malt, one of the world’s 
leading maltsters, in the announcement of an expansion of 
about 30 per cent in their facility in the town of Biggar. They 
are doing this expansion in order to meet South American 
demand for their product. 
 
The expansion is worth about $20 million and will increase 
production from their facility from 180,000 tonnes a year to 
235,000 tonnes per year. Prairie Malt buys the production from 
about a half a million acres in Saskatchewan, a significant 
contributor to our expanding, diversified agricultural economy. 
 
The company’s breakthrough in South America is primarily 
because of the good work of the Canadian Wheat Board. And I 
want the members opposite to be aware, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Canadian Wheat Board is a strong agent for farmers and 
industry in Saskatchewan and a very good institution for the 
promotion of business and carry out international business. In 
fact in the words of the general manager of Prairie Malt: 
without the long-term vision of the Canadian Wheat Board, 
there is no way we could have had this success in South 
America. 
 
So I want to again thank Prairie Malt for their contribution to 
our agricultural economy and congratulate them on the 
development of this expansion in their facility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Team 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members of 
this House may or may not know, the trading deadline recently 
came and went, and I’m pleased to say that all 10 members of 
this team did not, and will not, be signing as free agents with 
any other team. As legendary coach Scotty Bowman would say, 
we’re standing pat; I like the chemistry of this team. 
 
The media states today that an offer has been made for 
members of our caucus to join another club  a third-place 
club I might add. When we heard this report we did our best to 
withhold our laughter because this, after all, is a very serious 
issue. But seriously, the fact that none of us can swim did have 
something to do with our decision. You see we’re not about to 
jump on a sinking ship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reports today, obviously fuelled by the coach 
of the third-place team, are based on the fact that he is without a 
50-goal scorer, a point man, or a play-off calibre goal tender. If 
I might say so, the coach doesn’t appear to have much direction 
either. 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

When a team is in third place, the play-offs are approaching and 
they are fading fast, what do they do? They simply wish. In this 
case they wish out loud for a Wayne Gretzky. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we have 10 Wayne Gretzkys over here and our team is 
set. Mr. Speaker, unfortunately for the third-place team there 
will be no additions. They are not ending the season on a roll or 
with any momentum, and in fact they are in a slide; one that 
will undoubtedly see them swept in the first round of the play-
offs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Cancer Month 
 
Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Across Canada April is 
cancer month. This is a very important month for the Canadian 
Cancer Society. It concentrates its fund-raising activities in 
April for cancer research. Among other efforts it sells daffodils 
as a sign of hope in the face of this dreadful and dreaded 
disease. 
 
We all hope that someday research will lead to the end of this 
scourge on modern society and we should all pledge to do what 
we can to both assist that research and to make the changes to 
our own environments and lifestyles which might contribute to 
the spread of cancer. 
 
Cancer has always been with us but increasingly it is becoming 
a plague, connected as it is with so much of the biological, 
chemical, environmental, and nutritional conditions of modern 
life. The Saskatchewan foundation informs us that one in three 
of us during our lifetime will be afflicted and that in all of 
Canada, cancer increases at a rate of two and a half to three per 
cent a year. 
 
Also during this month we should publicly show our thanks for 
the work of the Canadian and Saskatchewan cancer foundations 
and for the invaluable research they fund. Working with the 
government for instance, a nine and a half million dollar 
renovation and construction program is taking place at the Allan 
Blair cancer clinic in Regina which will double the size of the 
facility and we hope someday bring an end to this disease. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Party Loyalty 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
comment on a media story that ran this morning that I certainly 
view as a joke. Obviously some people are under the 
misconception that this is April Fool’s Week. 
 
Yesterday CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) radio 
proposed three outlandish scenarios as part of April Fool’s Day. 
Listeners had to pick the true one. I found each one of these to 
be quite humorous. At the same time the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders sent out a press release saying that the legendary 
NFL (National Football League) coach, Don Shula, was coming 
to work for the Riders. 
 

These pranks caused many a chuckle throughout the day and 
then this morning I looked out my window and found Mother 
Nature was still trying to fool everyone. Is this not spring? It 
isn’t funny. Unfortunately some people are trying to extend the 
trickery, and I would like to remind them that April Fool’s Day 
does not last all week long. 
 
I would like to inform the people of Saskatchewan, and 
particularly those in the Liberal constituencies, that we are 
continuing our loyalty and support to the cause of the Liberal 
Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition caucus, and to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have not approached the Conservative Party or any other 
party with the intention of crossing this floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. 
 

Z99’s Ninth Radiothon 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s time to visit the 
land of . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now I’ll ask all members to give to the 
member who’s making the member’s statement the courtesy of 
listening to the statement. 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps this will help. 
It’s time that we visited the land of Z. Z99’s zealous morning 
crew, C.C. and Lori Lindsay, reached their zenith Friday with 
the help of zephyr and the zip of great and generous people of 
Regina and the Regina zone. 
 
In their ninth annual radiothon to raise money for the new 
pediatric playroom at the Allan Blair cancer clinic, C.C. and 
Lori Lindsay were the morning crew, the afternoon crew, the 
evening crew, the night crew, then the morning crew, the 
afternoon crew all over again. 
 
They had set an ambitious goal to raise $40,000. Then they 
simply blew by that goal and they raised $46,768 for that 
pediatric playroom at the Allan Blair clinic. 
 
Z99’s C.C. and Lori Lindsay have given of themselves to make 
our city and our province a better place to call home. Clearly, 
Mr. Speaker, the best were at it again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1996 Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m about to explain 
why it is winter’s been hanging on so long. This Sunday and for 
the four days following, the Onion Lake First Nation in my 
constituency will host the 1996 Saskatchewan Indian Winter 
Games. 
 
After that, Mr. Speaker, spring will begin. 
 
  



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

The Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games have been played 
since 1974, and especially in the last five years they have grown 
in interest and participation, including as they do an emphasis 
on inter-relation of the mind, body, spirit, and emotions. 
 
At Onion Lake this next week, the 72 Saskatchewan first 
nations will be represented by over 1500 athletes. And if you 
throw in the coaches, chaperons, and visitors, they expect in 
excess of 2,000 visitors to their community. 
 
The teams will compete in sports such as hockey, volleyball, 
badminton, and broomball. I suspect there will be a social event 
or two as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these games are just one more sign of the growing 
confidence, self-awareness, and spirit of first nations people. 
 
I want to wish all the athletes, coaches, and visitors as well . . . I 
want to give my best wishes to all the athletes, coaches, and 
visitors as well. To Chief Wallace Fox and the organizers, my 
hat goes off to you. To the dozens of volunteers who have 
contributed their time  thank you. And finally to the band 
membership  be proud; this is a great event. 
 
For those of you still wondering when spring begins, it’s right 
after the closing ceremonies next week. 
 
Now let the games begin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Science Fair 
 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday my 
colleague, the member from Canora-Pelly, talked about the 
science fair in Foam Lake. I want to join him in commending 
these fairs by mentioning the one I was pleased to attend this 
weekend in Moose Jaw. The school districts of Buffalo Plains, 
Thunder Creek, and Borderland held their fair at the Palliser 
Institute. 
 
First, like the member from Canora-Pelly, I want to 
acknowledge the fair’s sponsors  SaskEnergy, Saskatchewan 
Education, and Kalium Chemicals. These sponsors know they 
will need scientists in the future and are making a wise 
investment today. 
 
I also mention Rhonda Phillips, a Lumsden teacher, writer, and 
environmentalist, who was one of the organizers. 
 
Most of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to praise the students and their 
projects, which showed a level of scientific sophistication and 
knowledge which frankly I don’t remember many of us 
possessing in our school days. There truly were some very 
high-quality projects. 
 
In particular, there was a project on fibre optics, which helped 
me to understand how vital this Saskatchewan product is to 
Saskatchewan communications. As well, there were 
demonstrations of flight, wind power, truth in advertising, and  

many more, all of which made my attendance very worthwhile. 
And I know others felt the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these young scientists are the Pasteurs, the 
Edisons, the Curies of tomorrow. It was a pleasure to see their 
initial work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Hospital Emergency Services 
 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to bring to the attention of this House an incident involving 
Alice Weber, a resident of Southey who was transported by 
ambulance to the Pasqua Hospital 10 days ago, after 
encountering severe pain and vomiting. 
 
Upon arriving at the Pasqua, she was quickly examined, given 
Demerol, and informed that there was a bed shortage, and she 
was sent back home. Two days later, Ms. Weber’s condition 
had not improved, so her family contacted the doctor at Fort 
Qu’Appelle who admitted her to the hospital in that community 
where she is currently recovering while undergoing tests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there was little or no bed space to treat these 
kind of emergency cases, will the Premier explain what will 
happen if the Plains is closed and access to emergency services 
are further reduced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Minister of Health, I would say to the member opposite, the 
first thing we’re going to do when that particular member raises 
issues is check the facts. 
 
We’ll do that, and when we do, we will bring back an answer to 
you, either when the minister returns or when I have an 
opportunity to check the facts, because as we have seen in past 
instances . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Is he taking notice? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No, I’m not taking notice. I’m 
giving you an answer, is that your facts, sir, are often very, very 
incorrect. And so the first thing we will do is we’ll check the 
facts and then we’ll get back to you. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 
the minister did not know the answer and tried to bluff his way 
through it. But, Mr. Speaker, Ms. Weber and her husband 
believe that the health care system let them down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what health care comes down to: people 
want to know that they have a system in place that is safe and 
reliable. The people in rural Saskatchewan have known this for 
awhile and urban residents are now finding the same thing. 
 
Will the Premier explain why people like Ms. Weber have to  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

shop around for health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I say again . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I say again, we will 
check the facts because that member is well known for having 
inaccurate information when he comes to the House. 
 
The second thing I would say, though, it’s a serious accusation 
to accuse a professional, either a doctor or the medical 
community, of early release of a patient that then leads to some 
complication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would challenge that member, if he believes that, 
to say it outside, to name the individual he’s referring to. 
Because hiding behind, hiding behind the rules of the House to 
play your political game . . . Well the member opposite is not 
serious about this question because he continually yells from his 
seat as I try to answer. 
 
If you are serious about this and believe that you’re on solid 
ground, step outside of the House and make that accusation 
against this individual and the hospital involved. Because I can 
say to you that in the past your information you bring here is 
very inaccurate and is done simply to grandstand to try to gain 
political points. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
minister answering the question forgot who it was that had to 
apologize to this House for incorrect facts, and it was the Health 
minister only days ago. And perhaps he’ll be up again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout the so-called health care reform 
process, this government has spoken of the development of an 
efficient and responsive health care system. However, the 
Minister of Health and his government refuse to acknowledge 
that this government’s health care funding decisions are 
impacting the quality of care the people of Saskatchewan need 
and deserve. 
 
Will the Premier explain why he and his government have 
chosen to put a gun to the head of the Regina Health District 
Board, forcing them to close the Plains Health Centre, when 
people like Ms. Weber are being turned away from proper and 
responsible health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to take up the 
member . . . take issue with the member’s statement that 
somehow there is pressure being put on the Regina Health 
Board to make the decision. Obviously your own member  
previous member of the Liberal Party . . . if the member would 
listen, he might be able to pick up the response and then 
wouldn’t have to repeat the question over and over again. 

But the issue here is that there is an elected board in place in 
Regina. One of the members of that board is a former member 
of your caucus. And I remember when Anita was in the House, 
saying that if she had an opportunity to make the decision, she 
would keep the Plains hospital open. But you will know, sir, 
clearly, that when she was in a position of looking at the books, 
looking at the books and what is best for the health care in 
Regina, she chose to vote to close the Plains hospital. 
 
So I say to you, sir, you should talk to your own caucus. And I 
think this is more about keeping your caucus . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order. I want to 
remind hon. members, when asking questions, it’s most 
appropriate to extend the courtesy to listen to the answer and to 
let it be heard. I want to ask for the cooperation of the members 
and I’ll ask the Deputy Premier if he’d like to complete his 
response. If not, the next question. 
 

Drug Treatment Services 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government made many choices in last 
week’s budget, some of which the Minister of Finance claims 
have been dictated by finances. The opposition agrees that there 
are occasions when finances must be a factor, but not at the 
expense of the well-being of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Yet this is exactly what the NDP have done by eliminating 
funding and closing the White Spruce Treatment Centre, a 
facility which treats our young people who have drug and 
alcohol dependencies. Will the Minister of Health explain why 
economics is more important to this government than the 
physical, emotional, and psychological well-being and 
ultimately the saving of the lives of our young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 
question from the member opposite. What is taking place as 
it would relate to the services provided by Whitespruce at 
the present time is, negotiations are going on between the 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union), the 
union affected, as well as the Department of Health, Calder 
place in Saskatoon, and Whitespruce, to find what 
efficiencies can be made in that system. And when a 
decision is finally made, there will be an announcement and 
the minister will have comments to make on the decision 
that is made. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with all 
due respect to the minister and the member making the 
comments, relocating this program to Saskatoon will not 
result in the same level of service. 
 
Whitespruce provides an excellent atmosphere for healing, 
with a variety of outdoor activities and an isolated location 
that enables these young people to face and to deal with 
their problems. In the last two years alone, more than 500 
young people of every background imaginable have 
undergone treatment. The same atmosphere will not exist if  
  



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

the program is amalgamated into an adult facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good indication of the kind of treatment 
youngsters receive at Whitespruce is evident in the fact that 
many of these young people do not want to leave the centre 
at the end of their stay. What better validation could there 
be for a drug and alcohol treatment facility? 
 
Will the minister explain when his government intends to 
get its priorities in order so that lives, and not economics, 
dictate how health care dollars are spent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, when you talk about 
getting priorities straight, I think it would help and also help the 
popularity of the Liberal Party if they were consistent in their 
view of whether they wanted cuts, as the member from Thunder 
Creek continues to talk about, and balanced budget  which I 
think he’s onside with, with that side of the formula  or the 
member from Humboldt and Wood River who say we should be 
spending more and therefore running deficits. 
 
And I think one thing that you’re causing in the public is a great 
deal of dismay and concern, even among your own members, 
because nobody quite knows where you’re at on this issue of 
spending versus taxes and balancing the budget. 
 
On the specific issue that you raise, you will know that there are 
many professional people in the Department of Health and in 
the community working on this project. Now it may be the 
decision they end up with is not the one that coincides with 
your view of the world. But all things being equal, I will accept 
the advice from the department officials and the officials at the 
local level, and I think we’ll arrive at a situation where the 
needs of the community are taken care of in a system that is 
rationalized in the best interest of the patient as well as the 
taxpayers of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Arts Board Film Festival 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Arts Board. 
 
Madam Minister, later this month the Dunlop Art Gallery at the 
Regina Public Library is going to be running a film and video 
program called Queer City Cinema. The ad says Queer City 
Cinema will feature lesbian and gay film and video coming out 
to a theatre near you. The ad also says this show is presented 
with the financial assistance of the Canada Council and the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board. 
 
Madam Minister, how much taxpayer money has the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board given to Queer City Cinema, and do 
you consider this an appropriate use of taxpayers’ money? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I am astonished that the 
member from Rosthern would be asking this question. The  

member from Rosthern should know better than anyone else in 
this province that beauty is in the eye of the beholder. 
 
And he comes, the member, Mr. Speaker, comes from 
Rosthern, the home of the Rosthern Junior College, with a 
notable history of music and drama. Some distinguished 
members . . . alumni from that college indeed reside on this side 
of the House. 
 
There is the Station Arts Centre in Rosthern. Just down the road 
from the member’s town of Rosthern is the Northcote gallery, 
the Scrimshaw gallery, which is part of the old north-west and it 
attracts many visitors. The Barn Playhouse attracts many 
visitors, run by the family of Vicky Dyck who also is a graduate 
of the RJC (Rosthern Junior College). 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I am astonished at the lack of tolerance and 
the kind of attitude that the member from Rosthern would have 
towards the arts in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
Madam Minister, I would hope that Madam Minister is not 
trying to equate Queer City Cinema with RJC and some of the 
other functions that you are referring to, or some other criteria 
of beauty. 
 
The curator of Queer City video is an individual by the name of 
Gary Varro, who knows how to milk the old Arts Board quite 
well. Two years ago he got $9,000 to produce Gaynada  I 
think you’re aware of that  about a fictitious nation whose 
citizens are gay. Now he’s got more taxpayers’ money to put on 
a homosexual film festival. 
 
Madam Minister, when are you going to stop wasting 
taxpayers’ money on this type of activity and maybe give it to 
our RJC? How can you be funding homosexual film festivals 
when there are so many vital government services being cut? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I would like for the hon. 
member opposite’s information to tell him that the Dunlop Art 
Gallery is one of the galleries that is partially supported by 
funding from the Arts Board  one of 27 agencies. The 
funding that the Arts Board donates to the Dunlop Gallery on an 
annual basis, last year it was $45,000. 
 
The cost of this particular show which he refers to, which has 
toured the province several times, been sponsored by several 
galleries, the cost is estimated at about $2,000. But that’s not to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that this is $2,000 taxpayers’ dollars. The 
Dunlop Gallery has many sources of revenue of which the Arts 
Board contribution is only part. And so I think that the member 
should be sure to get his facts straight before he makes 
allegations in the House. 
 
He is quoted as saying on CBC radio this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, that politicians indeed should not be dictating the 
specifics of the arts and that the board is supposed to operate 
free of political interference, Mr. Speaker. His words. 
 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, during your budget 
consultation around the province you asked Saskatchewan 
people to identify the most important and least important 
services provided by government. According to your final 
report, one of the least important areas is the arts funding. 
 
Now look at the priorities you choose. Municipalities already 
have been cut. They’re going to be cut another 25 per cent. The 
Arts Board gets cut by 2.7 per cent. Madam Minister, why did 
you ignore your own consultation processes? Why did you 
make the Arts Board funding a priority at the same time you’re 
offloading to municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that there are 
many people in Saskatchewan who would agree that artistic 
expression is a very important element of what we are in 
Saskatchewan, and the Arts Board supports that. We support 
that. 
 
I think it’s important to know in the consultations that people 
were asked to priorize the issues that were of importance to 
them. Let me point out that in all the arts and culture activities 
in this province, the government supports to the extent of less 
than one-tenth of one per cent of the total budget, Mr. Speaker. 
I think that is already a reflection of the wishes of some of the 
people in this province and we need not do more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drug Treatment Services 
 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, today’s 
paper confirms what we have said since 1992  that your 
government plans to close Whitespruce Youth Treatment 
Centre in Yorkton. In fact, Mr. Minister, your government has 
denied for years that Whitespruce will be closed or converted. 
Your budget hit list dated January ’94, leaked not long ago, had 
Whitespruce slated for possible closure. 
 
Mr. Minister, this has obviously been part of your plan for 
years. Why have you been trying to pretend that you haven’t 
planned to hit yet another rural Saskatchewan when the 
opposite is true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, this will be repetitious 
because I answered this question previously to the member 
from Humboldt. But we have had a great deal of consultation 
with the people at Whitespruce as well as Calder Centre in 
Saskatoon. And at the present time there are discussions going 
on with SGEU, the employees involved, I believe, at both 
centres and also the staff at the two centres, as well as the 
Department of Health, are involved in discussions. 
 
What we will see coming from those discussions, I would 
believe, is a rationalization of the system that would accomplish 
two things: one, meet the needs of the community in terms of 
providing service that is being provided at those centres now; 
and secondly, deal with it in a way that the taxpayers of  

Saskatchewan . . . which is important, and I think the member 
will admit is important, that we achieve proper finance results 
that will help us meet the needs that your party, sir, without 
putting too fine a point on it, put us in; that is, $15 billion in 
debt. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I find that very interesting. I find it 
interesting that the minister continually feels that 15 billion is 
appropriate when even his own audited statements show the 
debt at only about 7 billion in 1991, now risen to over 10 
billion. 
 
And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, coming back to the debt, that as 
the auditor was pointing out this morning, has been increasing, 
one of the things that the government could do is continue to 
operate this facility at Whitespruce. We’ve talked to employees 
there who tell us that this facility is running at capacity, is 
providing a very good service, that there is no need to move it. 
 
Now one would wonder why this minister, answering for the 
Minister of Health, would suggest that it’s imperative that they 
move it. Is this, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, not another hit on 
rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? Why not allow the facility to 
continue to operate and provide the good service rather than 
spending all the extra dollars to move the people to Calder. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, if the member from 
Moosomin is being fair and looks at the changes that are 
occurring in the budget as it would relate to government 
spending and employment within government, you will know 
that the budget I think was very fair to rural Saskatchewan. And 
I’m sure that if you look at the numbers, you would readily 
admit that. 
 
But in terms of your question, I think what was more important 
than your question was the heckling from the member from 
Maple Creek, who said, we don’t want to put drug addicts back 
on the street. Now this tells you something about the 
Conservatives and where they’re coming from on this whole 
issue. Calder Centre and Whitespruce are not detention centres, 
as the member from Maple Creek would try to indicate. They 
are rehabilitation centres. And I think I would start from that 
point, that before you’re critical of the amalgamation and 
changes that are taking place, try to understand what 
rehabilitation is all about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Forced Institutional Care 
 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the Minister of Social Service or his designate. 
 
Is it acceptable to your government that any individual capable 
of living on their own with attendant care be forced into an 
institution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social 
Services is not in the House at the moment and perhaps before  
  



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

we designate an appropriate minister for response, we need a 
little more elaboration as to the question. I must say, with the 
greatest respect for the member from Greystone, I’m not quite 
sure what she’s getting at. 
 
Obviously the general answer would be no, but I don’t know 
the details of what the question is. 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. What 
I will do is pass to the Premier a copy of a letter, which is the 
second letter to the Minister of Social Services on this matter. 
 
Mr. Premier, a specific case has been brought to the attention of 
your Minister of Social Services and to the attention of public 
servants paid to exercise compassion and paid to exercise 
common sense. And I quote from the letter that I pass to you 
today, and it’s dated March 25, 1996. And it is a final plea, Mr. 
Premier, in a long-standing wrangle over this issue. And I 
quote: 
 

Carol is currently staying with her sister as she attempts to 
organize attendant care so she can go back to her own 
home. Staff at Social Services have made it clear that 
Carol’s file will be reviewed again in May and if she is not 
living in her own home, the house will be considered an 
asset and her benefits will be cut off. However, she cannot 
live in her own home without attendant care which . . . 

 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the member has had a long 
preamble and I’ll ask her to go directly to her question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to 
you, Mr. Premier. This woman has been placed in a catch-22 
situation which in fact is going to force her to sell her home and 
move to an institutional type of arrangement. I ask again: is it 
the policy of your government to force individuals with 
disabilities into institutional care against their will? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve just been given a 
copy of the letter dated March 25, 1996, directed to the Minister 
of Social Services. I thank the member for doing so. 
 
The obvious answer to the member’s question is that it’s not a 
policy to force people into institutional care. There are some 
circumstances, based upon the nature of the health condition, 
financial condition, and other circumstances, socially and 
economically, where there may be no other option available. 
 
In this particular case, what I will do is ask the Minister of 
Social Services to look at this file again very carefully from top 
to bottom and to get back to the member as quickly as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank you, Mr. Premier. 
 
In the long run I’m hoping that the consideration of your 
government will be that it would be much better use of  

taxpayers’ dollars to help an individual maintain independence, 
and it’ll be far more cost effective than paying for institutional 
care that’s neither wanted nor needed. 
 
This woman is prepared to do absolutely anything to save her 
home and to save her dignity. I would appreciate as well, Mr. 
Premier, when you’re looking into this matter, if you would 
look to the policies of your own government that are preventing 
the Saskatchewan Social Services Appeal Board to even carry 
out its own decisions. 
 
Will your government today tell me if indeed that will be the 
case, not only looking into this case but understanding that the 
Saskatchewan social assistance appeal board has had its hands 
tied. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to say to 
the hon. member yes, when I said to her in her last question that 
the minister has been . . . I don’t know if he has the letter or not 
but certainly I’ll forward it to him today. The letter contains 
questions pertaining to the appeal board and the whole 
functioning of the board and the particular case that is here. 
 
And the answer is we will have them look into it, the 
department people, and get a response back. As a general policy 
the answer obviously is we don’t like to institutionalize people. 
Our wellness reform and other reforms which are the leaders in 
the nation are designed to that. We pumped extra monies in, as 
the former minister of Social Services has indicated to me, in 
Aids to Independent Living. That’s the general thrust and 
approach. 
 
This particular case however, may be one which cannot be 
fitted into the available circumstances and the available 
facilities for the people of Saskatchewan. All I can do is to say 
as Premier, I’ll ask the department and the minister to look at 
this matter with as much dispatch as possible and as much 
compassion as possible, keeping in mind what the 
circumstances are and we’ll get to the member as quickly as 
possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Renewable Energy Options 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Preparing for the 
next century was the theme of last Thursday’s provincial 
budget, and of course when one thinks about the next century 
and future needs, renewable energy options is obviously one of 
the issues that we must consider and think about very carefully. 
 
The NDP government have spoken at length about how this 
province and its people must be visionary. Yet in the budget 
this government has chosen to eliminate the Energy 
Conservation and Development Authority. Will the minister 
explain why his government has decided to take a back seat 
instead of a visionary, lead role in developing renewable energy 
options? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  On behalf of the minister, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to answer the question. The entire government went 
through some very difficult processes in coming up with the 
budget, the very difficult circumstances of the federal 
government leaving us in the fiscal position as they did. And we 
wanted to protect the important programs of health care, 
education, social services, that the people of the province have 
come to appreciate. 
 
In order to do that we had to, instead of raising taxes, we had to 
make some tough decisions. And part of those tough decisions 
was to look at the role of SECDA (Saskatchewan Energy 
Conservation and Development Authority). It’s performed a 
very valuable role. But the functions of SECDA will be moved 
from the Authority into the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
Some of those positions will be transferred there. We have a 
very high priority on energy efficiency and conservation. That 
role will now be performed adequately and very well by the 
Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, this government’s commitment 
to renewable energy options has been clearly demonstrated in 
its less than honourable handling of two proposals: one dealing 
with co-generation and, most recently, a wind-power 
demonstration project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of taking a leadership role and developing 
an area of expertise in this province, the NDP government 
chose to abandon any opportunity that would demonstrate 
leadership and vision. They chose to allow other jurisdictions to 
take the lead. 
 
Can the minister explain how this government can claim to be 
committed to energy conservation when it is clear they are 
demonstrating a lack of vision and merely paying lip-service to 
this important issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well contraire, Mr. Speaker. The 
government has paid a very high regard and emphasis on 
energy conservation. 
 
I’d point to the rink initiative program where we’ve touched 
many, many rural communities by going in and working in 
partnership with the local rink, the local recreation authority, 
the experts, in terms of providing energy conservation 
expertise. There have been thousands and thousands of dollars 
saved by rural communities. And that’s just one example of the 
emphasis that we’ve put on energy conservation and developing 
the efficiencies that we have. 
 
We have expertise within the province, both in the energy 
sector and the energy conservation sector. We will continue to 
use that expertise to the benefit of Saskatchewan people in 
preparing a plan, not only one that we can afford into the next 
century but one that will work well and serve the people well 
into the next century as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Don Ching Named New Head of SaskTel 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to make an important announcement with respect to 
a decision reached by the board of directors of SaskTel. 
 
As you will know, just over two months ago the board accepted 
the resignation of Mr. Fred Van Parys as president and CEO 
(chief executive officer) at SaskTel. We were successful in 
getting Mr. Van Parys to stay on board with us over the next 
year to retain his expertise on a consulting basis and to help 
with transition to new leadership. 
 
Although Dan Baldwin agreed to fill the role on an interim 
basis, and did so very ably, Mr. Van Parys’s resignation left an 
important void that we moved very quickly to fill. Immediately 
following Mr. Van Parys’s resignation, the SaskTel board 
struck a committee which retained Deloitte & Touche to 
conduct an executive search. 
 
A total of 23 candidates were considered, six were interviewed, 
and a final short list of three was interviewed a second time. On 
the basis of those extensive evaluations, a recommendation was 
brought to the board for approval. 
 
Before I go on, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind everyone that we 
live in challenging times in this province, and SaskTel is 
certainly not exempt from this reality. In fact SaskTel finds 
itself at a very important crossroads, and competent leadership 
is absolutely crucial to the future of this corporation. 
 
Long-distance competition has arrived, Mr. Speaker, and will 
be full-blown by September of this year. Ongoing evaluations 
and reviews of the Crown sector continue. Labour issues are at 
the forefront, and technological advances are the norm. For the 
past 89 years, SaskTel has played an important social and 
economic role in this province. 
 
It was incumbent on the SaskTel board to ensure that our new 
president not only has the competence and experience to deal 
with the complex and challenging issues that are before us, but 
also to understand and be sensitive to our province, our 
customers, and the role of the Crown sector in the 
telecommunications arena. 
 
On the basis of those very important considerations and 
evaluations, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that the 
board has named Don Ching to the position of president and 
CEO of SaskTel effective April 15, 1996. 
 
As you will know, Don Ching brings a wealth of experience . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order! Order, order, order. Order. I’m going 
to ask all members to come to order and to allow the minister to 
make her ministerial statement. There will be opportunity 
provided to others to respond to that, and that’s the appropriate 
time to make comments. Order. Order. 
  



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you will 
know, Don Ching brings a wealth of experience, commitment 
and competence to the table, and I invite all members of the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming our new president to 
SaskTel. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess this 
government continues to shock the people of Saskatchewan 
each and every day. This, though, has come to a new low. In 
fact when a government for as many years as you people 
opposite stood up and slammed the Conservatives for the kind 
of patronage that they had . . . and then they did have it. It was 
ridiculous. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now it is equally appropriate 
that when the opposition is responding to the ministerial 
statement that the member responding on behalf of the 
opposition has the attention of the Assembly. Order. And I will 
ask all members to cooperate and to allow the member to make 
his statement. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, 
the people of Saskatchewan are obviously shocked today at 
such a statement coming from a government that for years 
chastised the former Conservative government, and rightfully 
so, for the amount of patronage, the open . . . the way they 
abused the patronage in this province, but now we’ve come to a 
new low where in fact we have ministerial statements where we 
get up and we’re proud as a government that we can take former 
law partners and friends and New Democrat Party workers, on 
and on, and that in fact they’re proud to stick them in some of 
the most highly paid jobs at the taxpayers’ expense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is shameful. I think this is shameful. I 
think it really shows why this minister did not send an advance 
copy to the opposition party today, knowing full well of course 
that the people would not be accepting this. And if you think 
this is some cute way . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order! Order! Order. Now I want to 
remind the members of the government caucus that the minister 
was allowed to make the statement, and I want to remind the 
members of the third party that they will have an opportunity if 
they wish to bring comment. But it is the opposition caucus 
which has the floor and should be entitled to make that response 
to the Assembly. Now I ask all members to cooperate. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for bringing 
them to order. I know . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now the hon. member from Wood 
River knows exactly what the Speaker is going to say, and so 
the Speaker will say it. And that’s that a comment on the 
Speaker’s ruling is certainly not in order, and I’ll ask the hon. 
member to proceed directly to conclude his remarks in his 
response to the ministerial statement. Order. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that 
given probably the sad state of affairs of this statement day, I  

think the Liberal caucus can safely make an announcement here 
today also, and that is that we will be reviewing each and every 
one of your political patronage appointments. And I say, shame 
on you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly is nice 
to have the opportunity to comment on so momentous an 
occasion as we have before us this afternoon. 
 
We want you to know, Mr. Speaker, and members opposite, 
that we are not shocked nor are we surprised by this 
appointment because we predicted it for a long time. It was 
clearly obvious that Mr. Cha-Ching was going to have to have 
some kind of reward, and it was pretty obvious that public 
pressure was against this reward when such trial balloons were 
floated by the government to attempt to ascertain and determine 
whether or not there was acceptance of big patronage payments 
to Mr. Ching in the way of being appointed to the new 
organization that was just sold to the British when he was of 
course offered a severance package as a trial balloon through 
the media and that sort of thing. 
 
Obviously that sort of thing didn’t work, and so it became 
plainly clear to us that he would be appointed as the head of 
SaskTel. 
 
I do believe that the opposition has made a good point when 
they say that keeping on the other leader of this organization in 
a role of consulting is wrong. I think probably the people of 
Saskatchewan will be just as upset by seeing that we now in 
effect have two leaders of SaskTel, two presidents; one is a 
consultant and one is the man doing the job. If the man can’t do 
the job on his own, why are we hiring a consultant to help him 
to do it. 
 
I mean surely you must have to have some qualifications for 
this job. Surely you must have to have more qualifications than 
to be the best buddy of the Premier who happens to have shared 
an apartment for a long time with him. 
 
And certainly it’s too far past Christmas for this to be classified 
as a Christmas present. Oh, I forgot, it is Easter. Well this is 
pretty big for an Easter present as well. And like the members 
opposite here told us earlier this morning, it’s too late for April 
Fool’s, so it can’t be a sad joke that’s going to be changed 
tomorrow, I don’t suppose. Although that would certainly be 
the best way for the Premier to handle this whole catastrophe, 
would be to simply call it a bad April’s joke that got out of 
control and we’re going to step back, reconsider, and it really 
isn’t going to happen after all. 
 
That would be the best news for the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, 
because Mr. Cha-Ching has no business . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The hon. member knows that 
the reference to the individual’s name and to make fun of it is 
certainly not in order. Order, order. And I would ask the hon. 
member to withdraw that unparliamentary reference and to 
wrap up his response to the ministerial statement. 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

Mr. Goohsen:  I certainly comply with your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to apologize for my stuttering as well. 
 
I do believe though that the people of Saskatchewan will be 
terribly shocked to see an injustice of this nature happen in such 
a clear and unacceptable way of defying the people’s message 
to this government. 
 
They have told this government loud and clear in their 
consultation process that they did not want political patronage 
as the foremost reason for people to get jobs. And they have 
said clearly that they want people to have some kind of 
qualificational merit, is the term we want to use, rather than 
simply knowing the Premier. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  To request leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery, 
I would like to introduce to you and to members of the 
Assembly a special individual and a couple of people with him. 
 
Seated in your gallery is the Premier of the Northwest 
Territories, Don Morin. Mr. Premier is here today to observe 
the House and meet with individuals in the city of Regina. And 
I’d like to welcome you here today, and we arranged the 
weather to be just perfect for you, so you wouldn’t feel out of 
place. 
 
But with the Premier is Ferne Babiuk who is executive assistant 
to the Premier  Ferne, if you’d stand up  as well as Don 
Avison who is principal secretary to the Premier. 
 
We wish you enjoyable stay in Regina and look forward to 
meeting with you later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could while I’m on my feet, as well I would 
like to join others who have introduced my friend, Colin 
Maxwell, who is with the Canadian Wildlife Federation. Mr. 
Maxwell, obviously a well known minister of the Environment 
I believe in the 1980s, who served in this Assembly with a 
number of us. I just want to welcome you back to Saskatchewan 
and pretty soon, hopefully, making your home back here in the 
prairie province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also join 
the Deputy Premier in welcoming our very special guests from 
the Territories. On behalf of the Liberal caucus, we certainly 
enjoy having you here today. And the only bad part of your visit 
is bringing all your bad weather with you. We thought we were 
in spring, but any way I’d like to also, on behalf of my 
colleagues here, welcome you to the Legislative Assembly and 
also ask my colleagues to welcome you as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1430) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 30 is converted to 
motions for return (debatable). 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might be 
permitted a bit of latitude to deal with the next 34 questions. 
The member from Melfort-Tisdale asked some questions with 
respect to Crown tendering in the only fashion he could because 
you cannot ask a question touching more than one fiscal year 
and no more than one Crown corporation. So it was divided. 
What was really a single question wound up being divided into 
34 questions. Rather than go through them individually, it has 
been our policy to answer what question we can, convert those 
we can’t. In this case, the government is able to answer about 
two-thirds of them, and we will be converting about a third of 
them. 
 
What I’d like to do is have members, if they have their blues in 
front of them, I will go through the list of those we tabled; I’ll 
table them as a package. And then I’ll go through the list of 
those we’re going to convert, and members can mark it off on 
their blues. If that’s acceptable, it’ll save us a lot of time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker:  I’ll ask the Government House Leader then 
first of all; will you identify to the Assembly those numbers of 
questions which you are providing the answers for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I am tabling the answers to questions 
no. 31, 32, 33, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 43, 46, 47, 48, 51, 52, 53, 56, 
57, 58, 61, 62, and 63. 
 
The Speaker:  The answers are tabled for questions 31, 32, 
33, 36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 43, 46, 47, 48, 51, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58, 61, 
62 and 63. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  And then the members can also mark 
on their blues, we will be converting questions no. 34, 35, 39, 
40, 44, 45, 49, 50, 54, 55, 59, 60, 64, and 65. 
 
The Speaker:  Questions, the response . . . or the questions 
for the . . . excuse me. Questions 34, 35, 39, 40, 44, 45, 49, 50, 
54, 55, 59, 64 and 65 are converted to motions for return 
(debatable). 
 
  



682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, and 60 as well. Did you read 
60? 
 
The Speaker:  And 60? And 60. Thank you very much. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
join in the budget debate, Mr. Speaker. I listened to the 
opposition for the last . . . since session started. They talked a 
lot about health care, like they were really interested in doing 
something for the people. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, you 
look back at the Liberal opposition background, you look to the 
Thatcher years, Mr. Speaker, to the Liberal Thatcher years, and 
now you look to the federal Liberals that are cutting $47 million 
from our health care systems. Shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, is back-filling the federal 
government cuts. This government is committed to the health 
care system. This government, Mr. Speaker, is working for . . . 
the NDP government is working for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and they are committed to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order! Order, order. Now I’ll ask 
members of the House to allow the hon. member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers to proceed in his debate on the budget 
address and I will ask members to refrain from conversations 
across the floor from their seats. 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for bringing the 
opposition back . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order! Now the hon. member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers knows that it’s inappropriate to comment 
on the rulings of the Speaker, and I’ll ask him to simply proceed 
with his debate, and if he fails to do that, I’ll go to another 
speaker. 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll withdraw that. 
 
The federal government also, Mr. Speaker, cut $52 million to 
social programs. And if you look, Mr. Speaker, they are cutting 
to the people less fortunate. This government, Mr. Speaker, is 
committed to the poor. They are committed to putting the $52 
million back into social programs. They are committed to the 
Saskatchewan people; the Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government again had replaced or back-filled 
money that the federal government had taken away from this 
province — the NDP commitment and the Saskatchewan way. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, once again the federal government had cut 
$15 million to post-secondary education. This government, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP government, is committed to post-secondary 
education and to the Saskatchewan people and they are 
replacing $11 million back into post-secondary education  the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the federal government had to reduce 
their deficit but, Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t the federal 
government look at their own spending first? The federal 
Liberals took 70 per cent to social programs, while cutting their 
own expenditure by less than 9 per cent. Maybe a good place 
for the federal government is to start by cutting their Senate and 
giving less tax breaks to the corporate companies and the banks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget provides tax relief for individuals and 
families. Also, Mr. Speaker, this government is using targeted 
tax incentives, cutting red tape, to encourage businesses and 
growth, and, Mr. Speaker, 9 per cent investment to tax credit in 
support of manufacturing and processing; a reduction in small 
business income tax rate to 8 per cent; retaining a reduction in 
the aviation fuel tax rate from 7 per cent to 3.5 per cent a litre; 
beginning January 1, 1997, improved tax treatments for 
Saskatchewan-based truckers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is investing up to $238 million 
over four years to strengthen and diversify agriculture and food 
industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people asked for smaller government  so this 
government reduced and streamlined. Covering for the 
misplaced federal Liberals in order to maintain social programs, 
this does come with a price. The province is forced to make up 
for the difference elsewhere. This is being done by 
restructuring, cutting administration, eliminating duplications 
and overlaps, and finding ways to deliver existing services more 
effective. 
 
This savings found in these areas are being redirected to the 
essential services. By making internal changes, the cost to the 
government will be reduced by $50 million this year. 
 
Areas of saving are Department of Highways, $6.3 million; 
Department of Health, 7 million; student loans, 6 million; 
Agriculture Credit Corporation, 3 million; Crop Insurance, 5 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, downsizing comes with lost jobs, but this 
government, with SGEU, working together to ensure the actual 
people affected will be very low. Overall, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is working for the interests of the taxpayers by 
reducing the cost of government and still providing services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing and giving other members a chance to 
debate the budget, I will be supporting this budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to begin on a personal note and offer a personal perspective on  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

one facet of the budget before I make my larger remarks. And 
that facet of the budget has to do with the elimination of 
funding provincially for the Saskatchewan Conservation and 
Energy Development Authority.  
 
And I want to say that I very much regret that funding for 
SECDA was cut in this budget. I was one who hoped that we 
might have been able to spare SECDA and keep that important 
work moving forward to put Saskatchewan in a leadership 
position in terms of energy conservation and development in 
North America. 
 
And I think of the Allan Blakeney government, now more than 
a decade past, and of the wonderful work that that government 
did toward energy sustainability. And at that time, 
Saskatchewan was really in the forefront of energy conservation 
measures in all of Canada. And then the Devine government 
came in and those energy conservations were some of the first 
casualties to go. 
 
I’m very pleased to say that this government didn’t sacrifice 
SECDA in its first term when it very easily could have, given 
the enormous financial constraints that we faced. But I also 
need to say that I’m very saddened that we have been forced to 
sacrifice it at this juncture in our history. 
 
I want to say to those individuals who worked at SECDA, they 
should not take this as a sign that their work wasn’t valued and 
wasn’t important — I know I speak for large numbers of my 
colleagues on this side of the House — that the work done at 
SECDA was very, very valued and very important and had a lot 
of support in the caucus.  
 
At the end of the day, the decision was made that, given the 
financial constraints we were under, we could not continue to 
fund SECDA. But they should not interpret that as a lack of 
appreciation for the work that they were doing. 
 
I want to say also to the board members of SECDA that their 
work was very well done. They provided excellent guidance 
over the last four years for the work that was done by SECDA 
employees. And I particularly want to commend the board 
members for their efforts and for their partnership working with 
Mr. John Mitchell who was head of SECDA. 
 
This leads me then to my larger budget remarks because I 
believe that had the province not been forced to pick up the 
$114 million in federal cuts, we would still have a SECDA 
today. And I think that’s unfortunate that the province was put 
in a position where it had to back-fill those $114 million worth 
of federal cuts. 
 
And I call this budget of 1996 the back-fill budget because that, 
in a word, is what this budget is all about  back-filling the 
federal cuts to health, education, and social services, and taking 
the necessary steps to still bring in a balanced budget for this 
province. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will know, after more than a 
decade of deficit budgets and the terrible legacy of the Devine 
years, that this government made a solemn pledge in the last  

election that it would bring in balanced budgets  that it would 
bring in balanced budgets, not just for one year, but for four 
years. There was a four-year plan put before Saskatchewan 
people last year to balance the budgets. 
 
(1445) 
 
And we stuck to that commitment during the provincial 
election. Indeed before the provincial election and last year in 
this House we brought forth balanced budget legislation to say 
that never again should Saskatchewan people have to go 
through the agony and the despair and the destruction of deficit 
financing. And that we were putting this province’s finances on 
a stable footing. 
 
And this year for the second year in a row, Saskatchewan has a 
balanced budget. But at a cost to civil servants, such as 
employees at SECDA, and certainly at a cost to other 
programing in government. This was a question of priorities 
and priorizing things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a bone to pick with the federal government 
in terms of their priorizing. Because had they priorized their 
affairs more judiciously, Saskatchewan and other provinces 
wouldn’t be in the position of having to cut social services, 
education, post-secondary education, health care, in the way 
that they’re doing, or to back-fill as the alternative. 
 
What kind of choices or alternatives did the federal government 
have? I don’t think there’s any question, there’s no argument, 
knowing the cost of deficit financing  from this side of the 
House, at least  that the federal government really had little 
option but to deal with its financial affairs and put its financial 
house in order. 
 
My beef with the federal government, however, Mr. Speaker, 
has to do with the fact that in 1994 nearly $40 billion of 
uncollected corporate taxes sat uncollected. And this last year, 
in 1995, a similar amount of corporate taxes went uncollected. 
 
The Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, in their April, 
1996 Monitor, their publication, notes that The Globe and 
Mail’s corporate database lists 244 publicly traded corporations 
with deferred taxes of more than 25 million. Five of them 
enjoyed tax deferrals of more than $1 billion each. 
 
An Hon. Member:  How much? 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Five of the large corporations enjoyed tax 
deferrals of more than $1 billion each. 
 
Now I would say, Mr. Speaker, if the federal government had 
their priorities right, they would do something about the 
uncollected corporate taxes, and bring those into the federal 
treasury so that they wouldn’t have to cut health, education, and 
social services to the provinces. 
 
Canadian Pacific, for example, has almost $2 billion worth of 
uncollected corporate taxes  deferred. What would that mean 
to the province of Saskatchewan and to other Canadian 
provinces when they’re struggling to maintain their human  
  



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

services? It would mean a whole lot, Mr. Speaker. That’s $2 
billion in deferred taxes from one corporate citizen. 
 
And the cuts to the Saskatchewan health, education, and social 
services, was 114 million. Imagine what those $2 billion worth 
of uncollected corporate taxes for Canadian Pacific alone would 
mean for all of Canada’s provinces. It’s no wonder though that 
the federal government doesn’t have these priorities straight. 
 
This same issue, the April ’96 issue of the Canadian Centre for 
Policy Alternatives’ Monitor, indicates that the Liberals 
federally got $6 million from corporations in ’94 as political 
contributions, even though 1994 was not an election year. And 
we all know the old adage that he or she who pays the piper 
calls the tune. 
 
It’s little wonder then that the Centre for Canadian Policy 
Alternatives indicates that the Liberal Party, quote: is the party 
of big business. The Liberal Party is the party most dependent 
on corporate financing. Even though it wasn’t an election year, 
almost $6 million worth of corporate contributions into their 
political fund-raising efforts. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this means, because the federal 
government, the federal Liberal Party, has made very conscious 
and deliberate decisions not to collect corporate taxes, that 
Saskatchewan people must back-fill health, education, and 
social services in this budget. And that programs like SECDA 
must be cut. 
 
In spite of this quandary or this dilemma that we find ourselves 
in, Mr. Speaker, this budget is a budget that meets the needs of 
Saskatchewan people and, more than that, honours the promises 
that the New Democratic Party made last June 21 when it was 
elected by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In that election, Mr. Speaker, my party put out an election 
platform card that indicated that budget surpluses would be 
invested in three different ways. One-third would go for debt 
reduction; one-third would go for tax reduction; and one-third 
of any budget surplus would go for jobs, training, health care, 
and other services. And we called this a balanced approach to 
the surpluses that we pledged to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in spite of federal offloading, I say that this budget honours 
that commitment; brings a balanced perspective to government 
financing and to the working of government; honours the 
election pledge we made; and brings the Saskatchewan people 
not great tax relief or tax reductions, but modest tax reductions 
to the deficit reduction surtax, for example. Also to aviation 
fuel and some tax concessions targeted to the interprovincial 
truckers. 
 
It’s not great shakes, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a beginning. It’s a 
studious, careful, measured program of tax reductions, not 
across the board, but targeted in such a way as not to jeopardize 
our financial stability, but also, on the positive side, to increase 
job creation. And incidentally, there are no tax increases in this 
budget for individuals, families, or small businesses. An 
honouring of the election commitment for tax reduction in 
modest, responsible fashion. 

Now I think of a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and the election 
promise that was made by the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan — 
a promise that the sales tax would be reduced to 5 per cent. And 
I quote from their election program paper: 
 

This strategy will start by reducing sales tax from the NDP 
9 per cent to 5 per cent in the first term of a Liberal 
government. This requires a replacement for up to $340 
million in lost revenues. 
 

Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan didn’t 
believe this promise. It was patently absurd that the province 
could have its cake and eat it too; that we could sustain a 4 per 
cent reduction in the provincial sales tax at a cost of $340 
million in lost revenues, when it was difficult enough this year 
to sustain a loss of $114 million from the federal government. 
 
I say that the election promises that we made last year for 
modest tax reduction, for debt reduction, and for improved jobs 
training and health care services, were responsible and 
believable promises, and those are the promises we continue to 
act on in this budget. 
 
This budget keeps jobs and economic growth a top priority. It 
protects the province’s core services from the detrimental 
effects of federal transfer payments. It streamlines government; 
it insists on delivering government services more economically 
and better  efficiently. And it also continues sound financial 
management by being a balanced budget and by paying down 
debt. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to spend a moment talking about 
this budget’s commitment to health care. We have a strong 
commitment to health care in the New Democratic Party, as 
evidenced by this budget and by the back-filling of $47 million 
in federal cuts to health care. Health spending is now at one and 
a half billion in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s the same that 
it was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last year; it’s not an increase in 
funding for health care. 
 
But we did manage to back-fill $47 million worth of federal 
cuts to preserve the level of funding that we have for health care 
in our province. And we made up for the full reduction in 
federal funding for health care. Funding for health care districts 
is maintained at its current level for ‘96-97 and for ‘97-98. 
 
One of the reasons we’re able to do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
because we are moving away from past, inefficient funding 
patterns based on bricks and mortar and facilities, to funding 
based on people  population characteristics and the services 
that people need. Health renewal is working on this principle of 
putting people first. 
 
Since 1991 and ’92, spending on home care and community 
services has been expanded by $47 million  that’s the amount 
that was cut by the federal government this year  $47 million 
over the last four years for home care and for community 
services, and this is saving millions of dollars in hospital costs 
annually. And people are getting better care because of it. 
 
In 1991, prior to health renewal, Saskatchewan’s health system  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

was focused far too much on institutions and not the needs of 
real people. We had in the province of Saskatchewan more 
hospitals than any other province in Canada except Ontario, and 
more hospital beds per person than any other province. Today 
we have 77 hospitals. 
 
In 1991 over 13 per cent of all residents over the age of 75 were 
living in nursing homes, a higher percentage or proportion than 
all but two provinces in Canada. In 1991 we had over 400  
400  health boards, resulting in fragmented delivery of health 
care services. Today we have 30 health districts which have 
improved coordination and planning for health services and 
reduced administrative costs. And these reduced administrative 
costs are savings that are going directly into the funding of 
home care and community care programs. 
 
In 1991, because of the 400 health boards, we had high 
administration and facility costs that were growing out of 
control. Today we have a new system of funding for health 
services, which is being phased in across the province, to 
allocate resources among health districts in a way that is 
equitable and fair and based on the services they provide to the 
people of the districts and the demographics of the districts and 
health needs in the districts. 
 
(1500) 
 
Spending, in a word, has been stabilized. We’ve cut the 
unnecessary expenditures from the health care system and 
we’ve been able to provide better service at the same time. 
Procedures in high demand such as cataract removal, knee and 
hip replacements, coronary bypasses, have increased from 
1991-92 to the present time. Cataract surgeries have increased 
by 25 per cent; hip and knee replacements by 12 per cent; 
coronary bypass surgery has increased by 9 per cent. And we’ve 
been able to meet that high demand because of the re-allocation 
of resources, and not introduce prolonged waiting-lists at the 
same time. 
 
A number of other procedures have seen decreases in the last 
four years. Caesarean sections have been decreased by 16 per 
cent and tonsillectomies by 27 per cent. And research done by 
the Saskatchewan health utilization board has shown that our 
utilization of these services in Saskatchewan was higher than in 
other provinces. We’ve done something about that. We’re 
saving money and putting money into services that people 
really need. 
 
I’m talking about services that people really need. Home care 
services have increased by 38 per cent in the last four years. 
And believe it or not, Saskatchewan now spends slightly more 
per person on health care today than it did in 1991. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch just for a moment on 
post-secondary funding since this is so important to my 
constituency which includes the University of Saskatchewan. A 
$15 million cut from the federal government to post-secondary 
education in Saskatchewan, and $11 million of that cut 
back-filled by provincial taxpayers. What about the $4 million 
that wasn’t back-filled? That was for capital expenditures, Mr. 
Speaker. And the decision was made that we can defer those  

capital costs at the university level and at the SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
level, but we cannot defer funding for the operational costs of 
our institutions, and that operational funding will stay at the 
present level, given the present budget. 
 
Social Services  a $52 million hit or cut from the federal 
government. But the Minister of Social Services has indicated 
that that $52 million cut will be back-filled by this budget so 
that the most vulnerable in our society will be protected. And 
part of this will be done by redesigning our social services 
system. 
 
It was a former vice-president, Hubert Humphrey, in the United 
States who said, quote: 
 

. . . the moral test of government is how . . . (it) treats those 
who are in the dawn of life, the children; those who are in 
the twilight of life, the . . . (aged); and those who are in the 
shadows of life  the sick, the needy and the handicapped. 

 
That is the moral test of government, says Hubert Humphrey: 
how it treats those who are most vulnerable, how it honours its 
social responsibility to all of its citizens. 
 
Two days ago the Canada Health and Social Transfer program 
became a moral test for the federal Government of Canada. The 
Canada Health and Social Transfer yesterday replaced the 
former Canada assistance program, and with the end of the 
Canada assistance program goes all national standards on social 
assistance. We took a giant step backward in Canada with the 
end of the Canada Assistance Plan. 
 
The new Canada Health and Social Transfer program that came 
into effect yesterday will not protect the social assistance and 
social services portion of transfers from being swallowed up by 
provincial governments whose spending priorities are health 
and education or other areas other than social services. 
 
This change will not make provincial governments accountable 
any longer for how they spend federal funding under the 
Canada Health and Social Transfer program. Neither will it 
make them accountable for what social service and social 
assistance standards they set in their jurisdictions. Neither will 
it compel provinces to do anything. Effectively the federal 
government is getting out of setting national standards for 
provinces in health and social services and leaving the door 
wide open for right-wing reactionaries or reformers to cut from 
social assistance and from those who need the support of 
society. 
 
This transfer of responsibility ignores the different capacities 
and financial circumstances of individual provinces and does 
nothing to promote equality in social services across the 
country. It does nothing to contribute to a national framework 
of agreed-upon economic and social objectives. And it does not 
protect or safeguard or promote national social values by even 
articulating them or attempting to articulate them. 
 
This is a sad day, Mr. Speaker, for poor people in our country  
  



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

 the day after this transfer of federal responsibility to the 
provinces. I’m pleased though to say that in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and with this provincial budget, we are 
honouring our commitment to pass the moral test of 
government, as Hubert Humphrey called it, to protect those who 
are in the dawn of life or in the twilight of life or in the shadows 
of life. 
 
And we are doing that with this back-fill budget, targeting the 
scarce resources that we have to those programs that are most 
important to the people of Saskatchewan. And if the federal 
government won’t uphold its responsibility to national 
standards and if the federal government won’t engage in tax 
reform and tax the corporate sector for their deferred $40 billion 
in uncollected corporate taxes and if the federal government 
won’t protect the Canada Assistance Plan, this Government of 
Saskatchewan will do those things in our jurisdiction. 
 
And not only will we protect those programs, Mr. Speaker, we 
will balance our budgets as we do them. And that is why I will 
support this budget even though I have some problems with 
some of the facets of it in particular. I have a far bigger problem 
with the priorities of the federal government and what it’s 
doing, forcing us to make these difficult decisions. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed my 
pleasure to rise today to make some comments with respect to 
the budget address of Thursday last and of course the contents 
of the Minister of Finance’s budget which apply to the fiscal 
year 1996-1997. 
 
On budget day, Mr. Speaker, we watched as the minister and 
the members opposite, along with their spin doctors, attempting 
to sell the people of Saskatchewan another bill of goods. My 
colleague, the hon. member for Thunder Creek, referred to the 
budget as the blaming budget. And that, Mr. Speaker, is what 
we have heard from the Premier on down through the ranks to 
the most junior members of the back benches on the members 
opposite. 
 
For months we have heard them blame Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
For years while in opposition and since they came to power in 
1991, these masters of illusion have blamed others, including 
the previous Conservatives, for the difficulties and the pain that 
they have inflicted upon the Saskatchewan people. And yes, 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the third party, no matter how you 
cut it, have to continue to accept responsibility for the way in 
which they plundered the provincial treasury and now have the 
unmitigated gall to sit in this Chamber and preach fiscal 
responsibility. It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that those 
members are not in the Assembly today to hear some of these 
remarks . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the member will be aware 
I believe, that the rules of the Assembly do not permit him to 
refer to either the presence or the absence of members of the 
Assembly. I’ll ask him to withdraw that unparliamentary 
remark and to continue his debate. 

Mr. McLane:  I’ll adhere to that ruling, Mr. Speaker, and 
will do that. 
 
I will just repeat that the members of the third party must accept 
responsibility for some of the things that they have done to the 
provincial treasury and to the people of this province and then 
again to sit in this Chamber and preach fiscal responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was amazed to see the comments of the Leader 
of the Third Party, the hon. member from Kindersley, that the 
budget was, and I quote: better than a kick in the head. And 
they praised the government for its fiscal responsibility. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it isn’t surprising, coming from that member, who 
isn’t able to decide whether he is an engineer or a welder, that 
he would make such a comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan were not 
particularly happy to see that member of the legislature for 
Kindersley, the Leader of the Third Party, fail to stand up for 
the people of rural Saskatchewan again. The fact is, Mr. 
Speaker, the people I have spoken with over the past number of 
days from all across this province have been appalled at the 
Leader of the Third Party in his comments, that while rural 
areas will suffer job loses as a result of the budget, they are not 
large enough to put rural Saskatchewan, and I quote, a 
significant peril. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today in the news we heard some quotes regarding 
this Liberal caucus and the third party. And I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, to the members here today that the members of the 
third party are flattering themselves in thinking that there would 
be anybody from this side that would join them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, as you’ve heard from a number of 
our caucus colleagues today, that I will not be entertaining any 
discussions with the third party  and I have not, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want the people of Arm River to be aware of that. I was 
elected as a Liberal, Mr. Speaker, and I will continue to 
represent them and be part of the official opposition from Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one has to ask a couple of questions. Are the 
comments of the Leader of the Third Party an expression of 
gratitude to the Premier and his party for propping up the 
Conservative leader and his party in the provincial election? Or 
is he and his party so out of touch with reality, which I think is 
the truth, that they just don’t see what is happening in rural 
Saskatchewan? In fact they don’t see what is happening 
throughout our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I are not surprised at comments 
like this coming from a welder who purports to be an engineer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the anger that rural people have for the lack of 
support in the Leader of the Third Party is only surpassed by the 
anger and the sense of betrayal that Saskatchewan people feel at 
the hands of the members opposite, particularly the Premier and 
his right hand, the Minister of Finance. 
 
A few short months ago, Mr. Speaker, the voters were treated to 
a glitzy Phoenix Advertising program that featured the Premier  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

longingly looking out his office window at the dawning of a 
new day; after subjecting the people of this province to an 
unprecedented hacking and slashing of our health programs, 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; to 
unprecedented cuts in services; to unprecedented offloading to 
the municipalities; to unprecedented increases in utility rates 
that would provide part of the revenue to balance the books; to 
unprecedented increases in both staffing and salaries to the 
Premier’s Executive Council staff. And, Mr. Speaker, the list 
could go on and on. 
 
We continually watched and listened to the Premier declaring 
the pain is now over. We now begin to start the building and 
money will be available to build, going into the new century. 
We keep talking about going into the new century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I recall during the election campaign, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
candidate in our riding, that I ran against  who ran a good 
campaign  in Hanley, Saskatchewan, when we had an 
all-candidates’ meeting, Mr. Speaker; he talked about, the pain 
is over. He talked about his Premier and what they were going 
to do, how the hurt was over, how there would be no more cuts. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the pain is not over. And of 
course it’s just another broken promise, a series of broken 
promises, Mr. Speaker, much as happened back in 1992 with 
the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program. 
 
The pain is now over; we will begin to build, he said over and 
over again. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has always talked 
about flip-flopping. Now let’s look at the record of this 
government in the past nine months. 
 
Balancing the budget for farmers, $188 million of GRIP money 
before the election. Reneging on the promise not to collect the 
GRIP overpayments. Reneging on revenue sharing with the 
municipalities of the VLT (video lottery terminal) revenue. 
Secret contract for casino operations. And contracts when we 
were promised open government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now know that the Premier was not looking 
longingly to the future. He was in fact looking out the window 
at growing line-ups at the food banks that he and his 
government promised to eradicate. Another broken promise, 
Mr. Speaker, simply rolling the dice. 
 
He was looking out the window at the growing number of 
people seeking hospital and nursing home care, which we now 
see will only be further aggravated by the cuts in funding to 
institutional care in this budget. Mr. Speaker, another broken 
promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look to an article in the Leader-Post of 
weeks past with the headline, “Democracy or dictatorship”, Mr. 
Speaker, we see an issue of the Plains Health Centre where we 
are going to be closing an institution in Regina and 
consolidating to two, Mr. Speaker; where we cannot possibly 
provide the services and the access to our people of southern  

Saskatchewan, in particular our seniors, Mr. Speaker, who will 
have an extreme difficulty in driving to access services at either 
one of the two existing hospitals in downtown Regina. Mr. 
Speaker, one of the advantages of the Plains Health Centre is its 
location and its accessibility to the people of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland 
mentioned that he who pays the piper plays the tune. Well 
exactly, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what has happened here. 
The provincial government pays the piper, and they dictate to 
the districts what they should do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote just a couple of items from this 
article if I might where they talk about, the question is, is the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre based on sound economic 
analysis. And the answer is no: on this issue there has never 
been an independent benefit/cost study done. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re just wondering if we’re moving into a new era into the 
year 2000 in the dark or if the Premier really did shed some 
light through his open window. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier was looking out the window in search 
of a new spin doctor to elegantly present bad news with sugar 
coating. And as reported by the Leader-Post, found a radio-talk 
host, a friend, to add to his already overinflated staff at another 
70,000-plus. A promise to cut at the top? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
another broken promise. 
 
Another broken promise, Mr. Speaker, as he was looking out 
the window at the growing list of welfare recipients who, 
because their government has failed in job creation, must now 
look unfortunately to the state for their sustenance. Eradication 
of poverty with thousands of new jobs? Well, Mr. Speaker, that 
too is another broken promise.  
 
Where is the dignity for these people that want to find a job, 
Mr. Speaker, and unable to because of wasteful spending such 
as Crown tendering projects and contracts in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that relate to hundreds of millions of dollars every 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he was looking out the window at a new casino 
that would serve as another source of taxation to balance his 
budget and all the while thinking, what would Tommy Douglas 
think. What would Tommy Douglas think? Good question for 
the members opposite to ask. Well, Mr. Speaker, I call this 
budget “rolling the dice” in the theme with the government’s 
casinos and gambling role in the last two or three years. Why do 
I call it that? Because it rolls the dice with respect to our 
financial future, Mr. Speaker, our financial abilities to sustain 
those social programs that are so near and dear to all our hearts, 
and the ones that Tommy Douglas talked about and initiated. 
And it rolls the dice with respect to the lives of our people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Before the Minister of Finance and the members opposite 
damage their arms any further from patting themselves on the 
back, let me remind the members opposite how the roll of the 
dice will affect this budget and our financial future. For those 
members opposite, indeed for all of us, I want to draw your  
  



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

attention to an article by Dale Eisler entitled “Gambling 
revenues now a major factor.” Mr. Eisler writes: 
 

If the Romanow government says it isn’t addicted to 
gambling money, you have to assume it’s probably, as they 
say at Gamblers Anonymous, because it’s in a state of 
denial (Mr. Speaker). 

 
I think that the government is in a state of denial, and if you 
look back to the history of some of the members opposite in 
their former lives when the discussion of gambling and casinos 
in the province was at the forefront, we know full well that 
many of them certainly did not support this concept. And I’m 
just wondering today if their mind is changed or if they’ve been 
coerced into doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Eisler goes on to say: 
 

Gambling revenue is now more than twice the 50 million 
the provincial treasury will receive as a dividend payment 
from all the province’s Crown corporations. 
 

An extreme amount of money, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Eisler goes on 
to say: 

 
The spectacular growth in gambling revenues began two 
years ago with the introduction of VLTs which brought in 
a breathtaking 95 million in its first year, well ahead of the 
75 million estimated in the ‘94-95 budget. Last year VLT 
money added 95 million to provincial coffers. 
 

Just think, Mr. Speaker. The millions of dollars that are being 
dragged out of rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, small towns 
where people are pounding their money into VLT machines, 
people in many cases that cannot afford it. Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Eastview knows full well what happens to the 
social impact, to people, when they’re wasting their money on 
gambling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our small communities services are suffering, 
Mr. Speaker. Recreational services are suffering. There is only 
so much money, Mr. Speaker, to go around in the form of 
recreation. And when the people have used that up by pounding 
it through the VLT machines, there’s little left for the local 
bingos, for the local fowl suppers, for all those activities that are 
so near and dear to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Eisler concludes by saying: 
 

Of that total, the government expects 110 million to come 
from the approximately 4,000 VLTs in the province, an 
additional 8.4 million in profits from the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation realized on the first year of casino 
operation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, an extremely large amount of money that’s going 
through our gambling operations in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t take any fiscal ingenuity to collect 
gambling money, renege on sharing, and use it to balance the 
budget  very simple. The windfall gambling of $120 million  

this year more than offsets the $114 million those members 
opposite have cried about for so long that they’re losing from 
the federal government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Is this government rolling the dice? I’m afraid 
so. 
 
And they don’t even blink. That’s the amazing part, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re dealing with people’s lives from across the 
province. We’re talking about people being addicted to 
gambling; we’re talking about people losing their jobs, their 
livelihoods, and nobody seems to care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Maybe the mice are blind mice. 
 
Mr. McLane:  That’s a possibility. As the hon. member 
points out from Wood River, that sometimes people turn a blind 
eye to things that they’re not too fussy about, as I mentioned 
earlier, as many of these members certainly were not in days 
gone by in favour of gambling and casinos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we began to plan the future of our social 
programs based on gambling revenues, we are really seeing this 
government roll the dice. And they’re rolling the dice, Mr. 
Speaker, with our lives and the sustainability of these very 
programs that we’re so concerned about  our social programs, 
our health, education, our . . . the lives of our families, the lives 
of all the members’ children as we move into the future of 
Saskatchewan. I’m a little afraid that as we look into the new 
century, Mr. Speaker, that we will be a shrinking population in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have witnessed a shameful approach in the 
government’s handling of budget news leading up to the budget 
speech. The fearmongering by this government that our leader 
made reference to the other day was certainly a classic example 
of rolling the dice. 
 
You roll the dice with the lives of the front-line people  
front-line workers, Mr. Speaker. These very people who 
provide services to our citizens, whether it be in health care, 
whether it be in educational services, whether it be in highways, 
whether it’s municipal services, Mr. Speaker. And the list, 
again, could go on and on. 
 
Front-line hospital workers, nurses, technicians, teachers, 
highway workers, the people who make government work, have 
endured a hell on earth with the taunting by their government. 
Morale and pride have been so damaged by the contradictory 
message these members opposite, and their spin doctors, that 
they have spread, that one has to wonder if we will ever be able 
to restore confidence in not only our programs . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Ward:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you and to the members of the Assembly, two 
distinguished gentlemen in your gallery up here, Mr. Lindsay 
Clark and Fred Strelieff of CEP (Communications, Energy and 
Paperworkers Union). They’re in the House today watching the 
proceedings and making contact with members. So I’d like 
everyone to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just so we get the 
full effect of my last thought, I’ll go back to the beginning of 
the paragraph. So we don’t want the members opposite to miss 
out on that. Or I could go back further if the members opposite 
would like me to. 
 
An Hon. Member:  I think they wanted you to start over. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Start over? Front-line workers is what we 
were talking about, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s nurses, 
technicians, teachers, the highway workers, the people who 
make government work, have endured a hell on earth with the 
taunting by their government. Morale and pride have been so 
damaged by the contradictory messages that these members 
opposite and their spin doctors have spread, that one has to 
wonder if we will ever be able to restore confidence in not only 
our programs but in the thousands of fine, dedicated people that 
this government appears not to worry a hoot about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Premier and the Minister of Finance to 
quit rolling the dice with the lives of our people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
For months we heard the Premier whine and cry about federal 
government offloading, as if they had just learned about the 
changes in revenue sharing, and once again, Mr. Speaker, we 
heard it again today from the members opposite. All of us 
know, Mr. Speaker, that while the Premier was longingly 
gazing out that window and was promising no more cuts and 
that the pain was over, that he knew well what he had to do and 
what had to be done. And if he didn’t, well that raises a whole 
new dimension, Mr. Speaker. Again this Premier and those 
members opposite were rolling the dice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while creating an atmosphere of fear and tension 
leading up to the budget, the Premier and the minister knew that 
they could not deliver the bad news to hospitals, to the 
universities, to the municipalities in this budget, for after all the 
Premier, the member from Riversdale, had promised no more 
pain  no more pain — in fact a promise of building. So roll 
the dice, bring down the budget in a manner which would have  

our people say, thank goodness it wasn’t so bad as we thought, 
Mr. Premier. 
 
Well it had the effect on the Leader of the Third Party, that’s for 
sure, Mr. Speaker. Again, he said, it was better than a kick in 
the head, but we could expect that from someone who doesn’t 
quite know the difference between a welder and an engineer, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government rolled the dice in a manner that reminds me of 
the story of a question being directed to a fellow who had been 
banging his head on a concrete wall. When asked why he 
continued to bang his head on the wall, he replied, because it 
feels so good when I quit. Mr. Speaker, I think that’s an analogy 
of this budget. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, continued to bang their heads 
on the fearful fiscal wall so that when they quit it would feel so 
good for us. I think the members opposite have felt that 
somewhat themselves when they look at some of the things that 
have happened in their constituencies as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people haven’t been fooled by the smoke and 
mirror approach. The masters of illusion, Mr. Speaker, haven’t 
fooled the people of Saskatchewan. Members will have heard 
me say a number of times as we move through the legislation 
process that the devil is in the detail, when referring to the 
regulations. Well the devil is in the detail and the pain of this 
budget is only beginning to start. 
 
In what detail? What will be worse? Well, Mr. Speaker, I would 
predict, when in rolling the dice, this government will have to 
defend its offloading in answering to the individual 
departmental budgets that we will be pursuing in the days ahead 
with a fine-toothed comb. 
 
As I look over this whole budget, Mr. Minister, not even the 
government’s over-inflated, over-paid communication spin 
doctors will be able to fool Saskatchewan citizens much longer. 
The Minister of Finance and her colleagues seem to take great 
pride in announcing that funding would be maintained for our 
social programing in health, education, and social services. 
 
(1530) 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a minute here and have a look 
at health, Mr. Speaker. Stable funding at today’s level just 
doesn’t cut it. And the members opposite and the current 
funding has seen district board difficulties virtually across the 
piece. The members opposite, particularly the member from the 
Regina constituencies and particularly the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains, who as the Chair of the government caucus 
committee on health had a hand in leading up to the decimation 
in health services in Regina, well she will know full well that 
the Regina board has a $1.6 million deficit and has virtually no 
reserves left to draw on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, stable funding means another $1.6 million deficit 
coupled with an inflation factor of 3 per cent in yet unsettled 
contracts. Mr. Speaker, we have no idea what the government 
will be offering to the unions, the health unions, in their  
  



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

contract talks that were delayed some months before the budget 
was brought down. 
 
One can only expect, Mr. Speaker, that the reasoning for these 
delays was simply to delay those costs in the budget, and that 
the health districts will have to pick up these costs down the 
road, Mr. Speaker. The net result, Mr. Speaker, could well 
mean an 8 to 10 per cent cut to health care spending over all. 
Mr. Speaker, no small feat. That’s a new word. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that the health districts are ill 
equipped to pick up any further costs within their budget. Mr. 
Speaker, we all know that the health districts are to the max. 
They’re all in a deficit position; they all have massive deficits, 
Mr. Speaker, and yet we continue to pile it on. One would 
wonder where it’s going to stop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Madam Finance Minister and the Health minister 
apply that across the province, and you have a prescription for 
disaster. And you have the courage to suggest that you plan to 
maintain this stable funding over the next two years? Well 
thank God you didn’t admit to cutting, because with this kind of 
math, our health system couldn’t afford it. Just think if we 
would have had it increased, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The front-line workers in our hospitals, long-term care 
facilities, and rehab centres will not be pleased with your 
ongoing assault on beds and those services, as we see yet 
another significant cut to funding coming in this areas. 
 
You decrease home-based services . . . you increase 
home-based services by a mere $4.2 million, Mr. Speaker, but 
you are a long way from being able to provide home care 
services to offset the horrendous cuts to hospital service, in 
particularly in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m just wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Health has 
looked at the vast expanses in rural Saskatchewan where 
services are needed  where home care services are needed for 
the people in the country. I wonder if the Minister of Health 
knows, Mr. Speaker, what it costs to send workers two and 
three and four times a day to rural residents living on farms 
some 10 or 15 miles from an urban centre, and as far as 30 or 
40 miles from the people that provide the service. Mr. Speaker, 
when we look at $4.2 million, I don’t think it will go very far in 
providing those services to our rural residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is only another example of a broken promise, 
and yes, rolling the dice again. This government will have to 
answer for the closing of more beds in rural Saskatchewan. It 
will have to answer for the closing of the Plains Health Centre 
which will, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the Minister of Health’s 
claims, result in fewer beds crammed into two inaccessible 
hospitals for our rural people, two hospitals that will not be able 
to be accessed by our elderly seniors from rural Saskatchewan 
who can barely drive to the Plains hospital, which is convenient 
for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they continue to roll the dice. But, Mr. Minister, 
let me warn you. This member and this caucus will stand up for 
rural Saskatchewan as we have in the past month and hold you  

accountable for any further erosion to our health services in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we can, let us look at education. The Minister of 
Education has promised a 2 per cent increase, but of course that 
was election rhetoric. And what do we see? A .6 increase or $2 
million with a promise for a further increase or $900,000 or a 
.25 per cent in the next year  another broken promise, Mr. 
Speaker. And I ask the question, can education profit from this 
generosity? And what about inflation and the cost of new 
salaries, as I mentioned with health, Mr. Speaker? Another 
burden on the back of our education boards in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, simply rolling the dice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the education system is told it will benefit from 
the government’s kindness by 2.9 million over two years. But 
whoops, if I have to take back 7 million in school 
administration in 1998-1999, I guess it’s welcome to the 
dawning of a new day, Mr. Speaker, another broken promise, 
another rolling of the dice. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that our member from Canora-Pelly will 
have more to say in his approach to the budget, and I won’t take 
up much more time on education, Mr. Speaker, except that you 
would wonder that the Premier took . . . we all wondered why 
the Premier took post-secondary education away from the 
former minister. We thought it was to create a job for a friend, 
but now perhaps we have the real reason. 
 
I would also at this time, Mr. Speaker, like to congratulate the 
Minister for Post-Secondary Education, in the budget debate 
last night in his speech where he kind of laid out and explained 
the process of post-secondary education, what’s happening with 
the universities, and with post-secondary education, and I very 
much appreciate that. And I hope that the minister realizes that. 
 
I’d also like to point out to the minister that we are concerned 
about our post-secondary, our SIAST, where our people are 
finding schooling that puts them in touch with jobs that the 
province has, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes our educational system, 
I think, is wrapped up in tradition and history and fails to 
recognize the changes that occur in the province in the areas of 
jobs; that we must remember that we have to educate our young 
people so that they come out of school, whether it’s from the 
institutes or from the universities, that they’re in the position 
that there’s jobs for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just speaking of post-secondary education once again, Mr. 
Speaker, the smoke and the mirrors, the masters of illusion try 
to tell us that all is well by maintained current levels of funding, 
but I think that the government is promising to cut another 10 
million from the operating budgets in ‘98-99. And you know, 
we’ll have to find out of that as well, the patronage 
appointments again of the $11,000 a month, Mr. Speaker, which 
could have well gone toward educating a student to get them 
ready for the workforce. 
 
What about the capital costs cuts of $4.6 million, Mr. Speaker? 
What about the leaking roofs and the inability to maintain the 
building infrastructure at our universities  something else, 
Mr. Speaker, that we’re not considering. 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

And while the new Minister of Post-Secondary Education has 
little more money to administer and justify his new department, 
he at least admits that SIAST still has a problem. I was happy to 
hear that again last night, Mr. Speaker, that the minister does 
recognize there is a problem. 
 
And we will want assurances that the programs that create these 
job opportunities will not be axed, as I earlier talked about, and 
that will be made more accessible. And with their government 
record of broken promises, we won’t be holding our breath 
while the government rolls the dice once again, Mr. Speaker, 
but we will be after the government and the minister opposite to 
ensure that those programs are not axed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have become very 
aware of the devastation of our highway infrastructure. This all 
began by the former Tory administration of course, and is 
accelerated by the lack of concern and the lack of action of this 
new Romanow government and the Romanow government of 
the past four years. 
 
We all remember the days when the former Minister of 
Highways. . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now I think it may have 
just slipped out, and the hon. member may not have realized, 
but he knows that the rule of the Assembly does not provide the 
use of proper names of members who are currently seated in the 
Assembly, and I’ll simply ask him to honour that rule of the 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly was a slip 
there, Mr. Speaker, and I’m glad that we picked up on that. 
 
Very well, Mr. Speaker, we all remember the day when the 
former minister of Highways, the hon. member for Rosetown, 
promised to turn our highways back to upgraded gravel. Public 
pressure, of course, forced a recanting, or should I say another 
flip-flop by the minister of the day in the NDP government . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  That was only Arm River though. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Yes, I believe the member opposite is right. 
That did happen in the constituency of Arm River last summer, 
Mr. Speaker, where Highway No. 44 began to be turned back to 
gravel and for a period of time of about a week the road was 
impassable, Mr. Speaker, and was closed. So we all know what 
happens when the government’s commitment to highways is 
not there. And I thank the member opposite for reminding me 
of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what they said they wouldn’t do, they have 
done by way of the back door one more time. All of us 
remember, all of us remember well, the howling of the NDP 
opposition when a Tory Highway minister, the hon. member 
from Wilkie  who members of the third party will remember, 
of course, but wish they could forget, I might add  said he 
was transferring some 500 highway workers to the private 
sector. 
 
We saw our highways equipment sold off at bargain prices to  

Tory friends and out-of-province contractors, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
sure we all remember that. Well, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, 
the Minister of Finance, aided and abetted by her colleague, the 
Minister of Highways, has continued that transfer of workers to 
the private sector  some 170 employees to be precise. 
 
The Minister of Finance tells us that this will save us about 5.6 
million, and this, with a paltry $700,000 added to this year’s 
operation budget, will be used to pay for what the Minister of 
Highways terms a variety of construction and resurfacing 
projects. 
 
The Minister of Highways proudly boasted the other day that  
and I quote: 
 

This budget reflects the government’s commitment to 
preserving our highways and to streamlining our 
operations. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan really 
believe in the streamlining process and I’d like to quote from a 
letter from the community of Elbow. The letter is addressed to 
the Minister of Highways and is copied to the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Tourism Authority and is also 
copied to the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Arm River. 
 
The letter, Mr. Speaker, is from the mayor of Elbow. The letter 
starts out, and I quote: 
 

The municipal council in the village of Elbow is very 
concerned with the continuing deterioration of Highway 
No. 19 from our town north to the junction of Highway 
No. 15. 
 

The mayor goes on to say . . . and I might add, Mr. Speaker, 
that the highway is in a deplorable state. And we all know the 
resort area of Elbow and Lake Diefenbaker, and I know full 
well that many of the members opposite travel there to golf and 
to partake in the surroundings and the lake as well. 
 
So they know full well what the condition of Highway No. 19 is 
like. And I hope the Minister of Highways will take note of this 
and put some thought and effort into what the people of Elbow 
and area are asking. 
 
The mayor of Elbow, Mr. Speaker, goes on to say: 
 

In these difficult economic times, there are more and more 
services being relocated from rural areas to urban centres. 
Each time this happens, it makes rural residents more 
dependent on our highways. They are an essential service 
acting as our connection to health, to education, and every 
service that Saskatchewan residents are proud to claim as 
our right to have. Action in this matter is necessary 
immediately. 

 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have met with these people from the Elbow and 
surrounding areas, and they have talked to me about their plight  
  



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

and the phone calls that they’re getting from disgruntled tourists 
in the summertime. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s imperative 
that action is taken. 
 
And I’ll just sum up with the last paragraph of the request from 
the people of Elbow and surrounding area: 
 

On behalf of the residents of the village of Elbow, I 
respectfully request that you instruct your department to 
upgrade Highway No. 19 from Elbow north to the No. 15 
junction. 

 
And it’s signed by the mayor of Elbow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that we’ve heard now for some number of weeks leading 
up to the budget, Mr. Speaker, this government talking about 
their consultation process and talking to the people. Here’s the 
people asking if the government is interested in listening to a 
major problem out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would respectfully ask that the members opposite, 
including the Minister of Highways, that they take seriously 
some of these concerns that are coming in from rural 
Saskatchewan. I know the minister will be happy to look after 
that highway for us. 
 
That’s only one indication, Mr. Speaker, of the plight of the 
people in rural Saskatchewan from within my constituency. I 
know it doesn’t vary a great deal from across the province. The 
roads are in horrendous condition almost everywhere you go. 
I’m sure the members opposite that live in the rural areas are 
hearing much the same thought and comments from their 
constituents. And it’s a problem that I think the government 
neglected in their budget, budget consultations, and in their 
budget thoughts and the budget itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really wonder how this minister and this 
government can streamline a department that has already been 
decimated and has faced an undaunting task of trying to simply 
keep up with the gravelling and the maintenance of our 
highways. Hundreds and hundreds of kilometres of highway 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, is deteriorating almost as we stand 
here and with no long-term plan or thought of how to address 
this problem. 
 
I’ve heard the members opposite talk for the last six or seven 
months again about the federal downloading and, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve raised the issue of the demise of the Crow. I have 
consistently stated in this House, as well as outside it, that we 
need a long-term plan, and that the roads were in a deplorable 
state long before July 31, 1995 when the Crow was 
discontinued. 
 
And yet we still do not have a long-term plan, Mr. Speaker, to 
address this. I wonder how the government and the minister 
opposite can not address it in a budget when we know full well 
that the situation on our highways is going to deteriorate daily 
with increased traffic on it. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask what this streamlining involves. I 
guess, in my view, it involves the closure of about 26  

maintenance depots  of course all of them in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And you know, it’s another hit on 
rural Saskatchewan and the safety of the people of rural 
Saskatchewan who, I mentioned earlier, have to use these roads 
for almost everything, whether it’s health, education services, 
Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s recreation or what have you. 
 
As these depots are closed, of course, we see the highway 
workers, the maintenance workers, having to drive further and 
further to work to get to the places to maintain the roads. And 
especially in the winter-time, Mr. Speaker, that does cause a 
peril for the people travelling these roads if the workers aren’t 
at hand to ensure that the safety aspect of our highways is 
looked after. 
 
Also involved in the closure of these offices, Mr. Speaker . . . 
and I asked in the House yesterday of the members opposite and 
the Minister of Highways if there had been any study done to 
see what the cost and the significant savings on this would 
actually be. Because you have to realize that as we’re closing 
more offices, these workers are further and further from their 
work. The time involved for them to get work, of course, is 
eating away at the already slim budget that the Highways 
department has. And I just wonder if the Minister of Finance, in 
consultation with the Minister of Highways, really looked at 
that aspect of it and realizes the amount of dollars that will be 
wasted in actual closing of those offices. 
 
The minister says that these savings will help the department 
re-pave 209 kilometres of existing road. I guess that begs the 
question as well, Mr. Speaker, are we saying that we’re 
throwing safety out the window for the people using those 
highways in order that we can build some roads somewhere 
else, Mr. Speaker, in light of the disastrous situation that our 
highways are in. I don’t think that’s what the people of the 
province want to see  the safety put in jeopardy just because 
we need to build some roads otherwise. The government again 
of course has made a choice, and in my estimation a poor 
choice and the wrong one. 
 
I guess I’d have to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that I think it was 
the same minister that mocked and made light of the federal 
government’s grant from the Crow rate, the transition 
payments, I think when he said that it would only re-pave you 
about 150 kilometres of highway. I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, 
how quickly the minister changes his tune. And we’ll be 
watching, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that this government and 
the Minister of Highways doesn’t simply try and take that 
federal money and use it to patch up highways that they should 
have looked after over the last four or five years and try and use 
it for that. 
 
We need new highways. The municipalities of course need this 
money to upgrade their infrastructure. We all know what 
happens, Mr. Speaker, when our highways are to a point where 
our truckers are reluctant to travel on them any more; that they 
move on to the municipalities’ sections of the road that they 
have to maintain and of course pound those out and just really 
transfer the cost from the province to the individual 
municipalities. 
 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

As the Highways critic, I guess I raise the concern about getting 
the SaskPower employees to repair the lines in stormy weather. 
Now we find out that it will take another 30 minutes to an hour, 
I guess, to get some roads in winter storms cleared off, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m just wondering, out today, what would 
happen if some our ministers were out on the roads today, Mr. 
Speaker, looking at them and seeing the deplorable state that 
they’re probably in because of the lack of commitment by this 
government to look after our provincial highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the rural people are put at a great 
risk, to say nothing of the travelling public. We’ve talked about 
the rural people who need to use these highways, but what 
about the people who are travelling through, our visitors 
coming from neighbouring provinces or from south of the 
border or what have you, or from the North, as we saw earlier 
today, Mr. Speaker. If they were subjected to travelling on some 
of these highways, how is their safety affected? I think, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s just another matter of rolling the dice with the 
lives of the people and not only the ones in rural Saskatchewan, 
but all throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to remind the minister and the government in his office 
about the condition of our roads, the conditions that they would 
readily understand if the cabinet ministers didn’t use the 
executive aircraft for their travels and chose to drive instead, I 
think would be a real challenge, Mr. Speaker, for some of the 
ministers to actually use those, and maybe the Minister of 
Highways. I’m not sure how much time he spends in the air but 
maybe he needs to spend a little bit more of it on the ground, 
and would realize some of the problems that we have. 
 
Yes, one of the problems of course that we have today, with the 
Leader of the Official Opposition not being here, is that he is 
stranded in the North, in the snow in the northern part of the 
province. And because the crews aren’t out there to get him 
here, unfortunately he’s not able to partake in this, and I hope 
that the Minister of Highways will take some responsibility for 
that as well, for him not being here today. 
 
If we look at a number of our highways, Mr. Speaker, we talk 
about whether it’s Highway No. 19, or whether it’s Highway 
15, or whether it’s Highway 44 we talked about was impassable 
last summer, or whether it’s Highway No. 2, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that the members opposite know full well that our 
highways are in a deplorable state, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We talked about our safety aspects, Mr. Speaker. It wouldn’t be 
right if I didn’t mention two of our main highways, No. 1 
Highway, which has proved to be a safety . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Is that a main highway? 
 
Mr. McLane:  Well, it should be a main highway; it’s the 
Trans-Canada Highway. But the lack of commitment by the 
provincial government to highways, certainly you would never 
know that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, we see many problems on Highway No. 16, Mr. 
Speaker, and the safety aspects in regards to that. We get many, 
many calls from people living up in that area that would like to  

see something done to Highway No. 16 as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we could talk about closed hospitals for a 
minute, and a growing number of course are senior citizens in 
rural Saskatchewan. We have a crumbling highway system. We 
have depleted job opportunities, Mr. Speaker. We have closures 
of other services. And we’re just wondering, what kind of a 
commitment is this to rural Saskatchewan? I don’t believe that 
there is a commitment, but I would ask the members opposite, 
you know, what commitment is it? It seems to be aided by, 
again, the Leader of the Third Party, who said that this budget 
doesn’t put Saskatchewan, or rural Saskatchewan, at significant 
peril. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, is this the dawning of the new day? Maybe 
that yearnful looking that the Premier had out the window was 
intended to see the return of the member for Kindersley  who 
either is a welder or an engineer; we’re not sure  that supports 
this government in saying that this budget isn’t that bad. I don’t 
know, Mr. Speaker, how someone in rural Saskatchewan can 
make those kind of comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my maiden speech, I spoke of the need to 
maintain a strong agricultural community, and I said as the rural 
areas go, so go the urban areas. And that’s a long-time saying, 
Mr. Speaker  so goes rural, so goes urban. 
 
Agriculture of course is the mainstay of the economy of this 
province, and what do we see in this budget, Mr. Speaker? Yes, 
that’s exactly right. You’re thinking what I am  just another 
attack on rural Saskatchewan, just another rolling of the dice, 
Mr. Speaker. And the members opposite realize that, as does the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
A quick look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, will point that out, as 
we see about $50 million slashed from agriculture in this 
budget, $50 million, Mr. Speaker, slashed from agriculture . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  When you slash, you make sure you give 
an opportunity for the Tories to respond. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thanks to the members opposite for 
recognizing the problem that we have with the third party. 
 
With the loss of about 50 million, Mr. Speaker, in the 
agriculture budget, I just want to say that, you know, as part of 
that, we’ve seen the death of the Ag Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, the loss of about 86 jobs. And I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, how the member in this House, from Swift Current, 
explains that to his constituency. I would be interested in 
knowing if he went home on the past weekend to face the 
music, and I guess I know it would be a little tough for him to 
do that. But if the members fail to stand up and speak for rural 
Saskatchewan and on behalf of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, we 
will continue to see the hits on rural Saskatchewan in 
agriculture. 
 
What is even more interesting is this government’s sudden 
love-in with the banks, Mr. Speaker. For years, including the 
past few months, we have heard federal NDP members of 
parliament  and yes, of course, the members opposite   
  



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

decry the huge profits being made by the banks. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, a policy of this NDP Party is to accept no 
contributions from the banks, and I just maybe would wonder 
now in light of this if that policy has changed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in a change of heart, these same people turn 
over student loan administration a week and a half ago to a 
large bank in the province. And now we have the agricultural 
loan policies and the administration to the very banking 
industry that they despise. It seems to me to be pretty 
hypocritical, but then again I guess let us remember that a New 
Democrat is a New Democrat is a New Democrat. 
 
And so let’s not hear, you know, their federal cousins crying in 
Ottawa about the banking industry and all the evils associated 
with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1600) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government here continues to criticize the 
federal government, but it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. They 
criticize the federal government on wherever they’re making 
cuts. Many of the cuts that people across Canada are asking 
them to do, but many of the things that the federal is doing for 
Saskatchewan goes unnoticed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d just like to quote, Mr. Speaker, from an article, if I 
could, Mr. Speaker, in regards to Macklin. And it talks about 
Macklin. The headline of the article, Mr. Speaker, is “Macklin 
is the big winner.” 
 

The town of Macklin is the big winner in a 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works announcement 
on health care funding. About $4.1 million will be spent 
there to construct a new facility that will house 22 
long-term care beds, two for respite, palliative care, and 
two beds for observation, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Also in Vanguard, it goes on to say that there’s over half a 
million being spent to expand and renovate the existing health 
centre. Neilburg got a new $808,000 health centre, Mr. Speaker. 
In Norquay, they’ll be spending about $600,000 to upgrade, all 
under the Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program, 
Mr. Speaker, something that the federal government has 
initiated. The members opposite fail to speak about all of those 
dollars that the federal government is pumping into 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To go on to add, Mr. Speaker, we talked about agriculture, as I 
sometimes do. And I’d just like to mention some of the 
contributions that have been put into Saskatchewan from our 
federal counterparts who this government continues to run 
down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we could just look at NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) for a minute and the federal 
contributions that they’ve put into Saskatchewan. If we look in 
1994-1995, we see about just a little under $24 million, Mr. 
Speaker. In ‘95-96, we’ve seen a whopping $51.6 million, Mr. 
Speaker. And in 1996-97, we’re going to see $66.6 million, Mr. 
Speaker  no small amount of money going into our  

agriculture sector, a commitment by the federal government to 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
If we talk about NISA enhanced program, Mr. Speaker, in 
‘94-95 where we had $36 million injected into our economy, 
Mr. Speaker; in ‘95-96, we’ve got 42 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we talk about NISA kick-start, Mr. Speaker, in ‘94-95, an 
additional 40 million; in ‘95-96, $60 million. A lot of money, 
Mr. Speaker  a commitment from our federal government. 
 
We talk about our crop sector companion program in 1995-96 
of $54.7 million; in 1996-97, $104 million, Mr. Speaker. An 
enormous amount of money. 
 
We’ve heard the government opposite talk about the agri-food 
innovation fund, Mr. Speaker. In ‘95-96, there was about $4 
million injected; in ‘96-97, 20 million; and in ‘97-98, Mr. 
Speaker, there will be $40 million. This is a government that’s 
willing to invest in the future of rural Saskatchewan and 
agriculture, something that our members opposite could learn a 
lesson from  a commitment to agriculture. 
 
We look at crop insurance, Mr. Speaker. In ‘94-95, a little over 
$67 million injected; ‘95-96, they had $68 million on the table, 
and in ‘96-97, there will be some $74 million, Mr. Speaker. A 
lot of money for rural Saskatchewan and agriculture. 
 
Let’s look at our cash advances for a minute, Mr. Speaker, that 
the federal government has seen fit to give to rural 
Saskatchewan and agriculture as well. In ‘94-95, we had about 
$8 million, Mr. Speaker; and in ‘95-96, another 8.6; and in 
‘96-97 projected, $12.5 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A lot of money, Mr. Speaker, injected into the rural economy 
and agriculture. A far cry from the provincial government who 
would rather ask for some $12 million back from our already 
struggling farm economy, Mr. Speaker. That’s what I call a 
commitment. 
 
We look at our agricultural programs for this year, Mr. Speaker. 
Farmers are a little miffed out there as to what we will actually 
have for a crop insurance program, let alone another support 
program. Crop insurance, of course, has moved to the point 
where the farmers can’t afford the premiums any longer and the 
return on their dollars is not worth having, so we have a 
program that is of little use, if any. 
 
We have a crop sector program which has not been finalized 
yet, I understand, which the farmers will have no idea as to 
what kind of support they will be looking for or will be able to 
have. And given some of the perils that can happen in this 
province  hail-storms, drought, bug infections, grasshoppers, 
what have you  anything can happen, Mr. Speaker, and the 
people of this province that are involved in agriculture have no 
support whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Thunder Creek, 
the other day in the House said, and I quote: rural people should 
be outraged that economics rates above their well-being. And 
he is so right, Mr. Speaker. 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 695 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it has been economics that has driven 
health; it has driven the health reform from the start. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s economics that now drives highway deterioration. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s economics that begins to strangle agriculture, 
the backbone of Saskatchewan enterprise. It’s economics that 
will see the horrendous cut-backs that will hit education in the 
next couple of years. And yes, it’s economics that will erode 
our municipal governments, the closest to the people, the most 
sensitive to the people. And all in the name of what this 
government calls greater efficiency. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether we’ve heard it all, but 
we’ve heard a lot of it. We’ve got a provincial government 
that’s talking about streamlining a local government that has 
proven without a shadow of a doubt over the last decades that 
they are an efficient government, Mr. Speaker. And as I get 
many calls on this subject and they all kind of end up with the 
same tone, that the provincial government should be looking to 
these local governments for some advice in following their 
example in balancing their budgets and doing what the people 
out there must do  hold the line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Even in this area, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the minister, and 
the members are once again rolling the dice. The government 
has done its best in attempting to lull the municipalities into a 
sense of calm and complacency. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 
for a while I kind of thought they were maybe succeeding at it, 
given the quietness that was out there with both the rural and 
urban municipalities associations, and their members. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, with the devil in the detail, municipal 
leaders are beginning to speak out. Sinclair Harrison, Mr. 
Speaker, the president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities), said taxpayers in many communities will 
face, and again let me quote, a drastic millrate increase that 
could be as high as 20 per cent in some instances, Mr. Speaker. 
Harrison goes on to say that if the government thinks 
municipalities can save $20 million in amalgamation, and I 
quote, they’re dreaming technicolor. 
 
Murray Westby, the president of the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association and a member of the Watrous 
constituency  and as well the John Deere dealer there who I 
do frequent once in awhile do some business with  labelled 
the reduction in the revenue-sharing gross as, and I quote : 
totally unacceptable. Mr. Westby went on to say it would be 
devastating, and that the budget is just the latest chapter in the 
story of senior governments passing their financial woes down 
onto other governments. 
 
It all means, says Westby . . all it means, says Westby, is that 
the province has dumped it on us. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Westby 
also slammed the government’s decision to break its promise to 
provide a portion of VLT revenues to the municipal 
governments and other local agencies. Just another broken 
promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Most important, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Westby said, and I quote: we 
are even more worried about loss of trust than the loss of 
money. Loss of trust, Mr. Speaker, that’s what they’re talking 
about here, is a lack of trust for the provincial government.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, once again rolling the dice. 
 
And on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Municipal 
Government has the audacity to declare  with a straight face I 
might add  it is significant the government has kept its 
commitment to municipalities that there would be no reduction 
in revenue sharing. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, as Winston 
Churchill would say, some commitment; some promise. 
 
I asked that minister, what about inflation? We talked about the 
inflationary factor, Mr. Speaker, for health and for education; 
that certainly applies to municipalities as well. What about 
collective bargaining agreements that government has put on 
hold? And of course the ultimate cost of those settlements, Mr. 
Speaker, were not known yet. But not the same levels, Mr. 
Speaker, but a cut of at least 8 per cent in real dollars. Just 
another broken promise. 
 
These institutions and these agencies in the health sector and 
education sector cannot take it, Mr. Speaker. Another broken 
promise; just rolling the dice once again with the people of 
Saskatchewan, who will see their property taxes increase 
because of their budget and because of reassessment. 
 
The minister says, no new taxes. Well shake your heads and 
think again, folks, because there’s lots of new taxes. But they’re 
picked out of our pockets by other tax collectors because the 
provincial government legislates it to be so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen our utilities go up, and over the last 
two years, Mr. Speaker, and of course since the election, Mr. 
Speaker. And finally, last . . . I guess it was this week, the 
member had the courage to come back, and because of extreme 
pressure from the people of the province, relax some of the rates 
in natural gas, Mr. Speaker. Much overdue, I might add. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipal leaders like the mayor of Regina, who 
incidentally are ardent supporters of this government, should 
surely be re-evaluating their support of this government. The 
mayor of Regina has indicated Regina’s taxes will increase by 3 
per cent because of his friends’ actions  some friends, I guess, 
some assistance. The mayor decrees the lay-off which he 
predicts will take 10 million out of Regina’s economy while 
throwing more and more money into Saskatoon, which is 
incidentally the home of the Premier and the Minister of 
Finance  conflict of interest maybe, favouritism. I believe the 
people will see this. And I think the mayor of Regina indicates 
that very well. 
 
The minister, Mr. Speaker, boasts that there are no new taxes 
and can even say it with a straight face, almost. The tax 
increases are there falling from last year’s budget, some $400 
million in total through all manners of smoke and mirrors  the 
masters of disguise again, Mr. Speaker. Utility increases — we 
seen Crown corporation dividend payments from these utility 
rate increases, indirect taxes from gambling, and taxes and the 
passing on of other expenditures to other agencies. Smoke and 
mirrors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what about the downloading to municipalities? What about 
the massive debt load that was downloaded to the health  
  



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

boards, Mr. Speaker? What about the forestry companies who 
are trying to create jobs? And again the list goes on. And let’s 
not forget the 3 per cent inflation, current health board deficits, 
and salary increases yet to be completed, and the further 
postponement of painful cuts to come next year  Mr. Speaker, 
where will it end? Where will it end? 
 
The government’s lack of action on tax reduction doesn’t 
impress anyone, Mr. Speaker, not a soul. And the people of the 
province realize that and are going to be speaking out, as they 
are now. 
 
And as reported by the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ association 
and confirmed by the government’s own figures, Saskatchewan 
families face the highest personal tax burdens west of Quebec, 
Mr. Speaker. Provincial taxpayers, on even the lowest income 
earners, are 34 per cent higher in Saskatchewan than Alberta, 
and with the disparity growing much greater at these levels, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the Canadian Federation of Independent Business points 
out how bad our tax system is when compared to Alberta’s. 
Alberta has a lower flat tax, half the high income tax surtax, and 
a marginal income tax rate several percentage points below 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The Alberta tax advantage is still 
very real, Mr. Speaker. And as soon as the government wakes 
up and the Minister of Finance and realizes that, the better off 
we will be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time that the government woke up and 
smelled the coffee. Mr. Speaker, the growing disparity between 
Saskatchewan and Alberta is very real and the members 
opposite — to get their hands out of the sand would be 
appropriate. 
 
The Alberta advantage is a real factor in where business will 
decide to locate their new businesses, Mr. Speaker. And with 
those locations, they will provide real jobs, not the temporary, 
six weeks’ experiences the Minister of Economic Development 
and Minister of Social Services use to bolster their unfounded 
claims of job creation. 
 
Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, any business wanting to come 
to Saskatchewan with the provincial sales tax that we have 
when they can cross the border to the west and settle there with 
none? It’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, that the government can’t 
recognize that simple solution. 
 
Talk to our businesses on the west side of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Go to Swift Current; go to Maple Creek; talk to the 
businesses. Talk to the businesses around Lloydminster. Talk to 
those people up there when they’re deciding where they’re 
going to set up new business or expand. It’s not going to be in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite hasn’t begun to address 
these issues. We cannot, with our current high tax system, 
stimulate growth and economic development no matter what the 
member for Elphinstone says. His junkets around the world on  

almost a monthly basis will bear little success if he cannot 
persuade his government to address fundamental tax change 
and relief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I give the Minister of Finance some credit in trying to 
move in this direction, I don’t think you would be able to get 
there quick enough before the damage is done. And the damage 
will last for ever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget will not pass the test of careful 
scrutiny. It has not dealt with the cuts to the top, starting at the 
cabinet level. And when the Premier promised that, why hasn’t 
he delivered? I guess maybe the Premier doesn’t want to roll the 
dice on this issue, Mr. Speaker. I think you should. 
 
This budget continues to penalize people, Mr. Speaker. It 
creates an environment of fear and mistrust and leaves the 
ordinary people asking the questions, what next? I hear it daily, 
Mr. Speaker; what next? 
 
The Premier challenged someone on this side of the House  
perhaps it was the engineer from the riding of Kindersley  to 
support a decrease in the number of MLAs. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
if a decrease in MLAs means less MLAs for Regina and 
Saskatoon, then, Mr. Speaker, I could support that challenge 
from the Premier. I challenge the Premier to cut some of the 
members from Regina and Saskatoon by at least half. And you 
know, I think what would happen, we’d have a better system, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the member from Saskatoon Eastview would probably 
support this as well, as he recognizes that he could most easily 
look after more of his people up there and do a much better job 
on behalf of them while saving the taxpayers thousands and 
thousands of dollars. Even half as many, Mr. Speaker, would be 
more than enough to do the job for Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked the Minister of Finance, and I asked the 
minister, who the minister admitted the other day had the final 
say in the budget. And I challenge the members opposite to quit 
rolling the dice. Why don’t you just be honest and open and try 
and restore confidence in democracy and confidence in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to reinforce this opportunity to show true 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, to reinforce this opportunity to show 
true leadership I have a gift to remind the minister and the 
Premier and the members opposite of the need to quit rolling 
the dice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the gift that I’d like to present across, Mr. Speaker, to the 
government, it’s a beautiful pottery piece which you will see on 
it with Saskatchewan 1996 inscribed, Mr. Speaker. On it there’s 
the only two well-known dice symbolizing the gamble that the 
government takes with our lives when they’re setting the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. Around this is a circle of healing, Mr. 
Speaker, such an important symbol to our first nations citizens, 
Mr. Speaker, that those people that use and believe in, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that we need all the 
healing possible to help the people of Saskatchewan from the 
hurtful consequences of this government’s actions. 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

I’d ask, Mr. Speaker, that they hang it in their cabinet room to 
remind themselves that there are better ways to serve the people 
who have placed their trust in the government, and probably 
maybe more appropriately, Mr. Speaker, misplaced their trust in 
them. 
 
And I’d ask that the members opposite look at it from time to 
time and remind themselves what this province is all about. And 
in doing so, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this rolling-the-dice 
budget. And I’d like to send this across to the member. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The hon. member will 
recognize that this is not a parliamentary item and falls under 
the category of an exhibit, and I’ll ask that the page remove it 
from the Assembly. It’s not permitted  order  not permitted 
to use it as part of his debate in the Assembly. 
 
That member has taken his seat. Debate continues. 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
take part in the budget debate this afternoon and I’m pleased to 
rise in support of the 1996-97 budget. This is a budget that 
responds to the priorities of Saskatchewan people. This is a 
budget which prepares the province to meet the challenges and 
the opportunities of the new century. With people’s input, we 
are setting out to build a new Saskatchewan; one that is fiscally 
sound, socially responsible, and economically vibrant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now this is a big agenda. Change is never easy. 
But we have every reason to be confident and optimistic. Our 
economy is growing. We’re diversifying. We’re improving 
training and education to better prepare our young people for 
jobs in the new economy.  
 
We’re leading the way in health care renewal to ensure that our 
excellent health system meets the needs of generations to come. 
We’re looking at efficient and effective delivery of all of our 
services. And most important, we’re doing all of this together. 
In this respect, our province is truly unique. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan our ability to work together to achieve 
common goals is our greatest asset, and therein lies the recipe 
for strong families and neighbourhoods, strong communities, 
and ultimately, a strong province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I did not have an opportunity to address 
the throne speech, I wish to congratulate you on your election 
as Speaker of our legislature. Your commitment to fairness, 
democratic principles, and the British parliamentary system, 
will serve you well in your role as Speaker, and will in turn 
serve all of us as members of this legislature and, in turn, the 
people of Saskatchewan, well. And yes, it must be quite a 
challenge to serve as a referee in such a unique uniform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support a budget which does meet 
the priorities of Saskatchewan people and the priorities of the 
constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy. I represent a constituency 
where farming, entrepreneurship, oil and gas, small and 
medium-sized business are all integral parts of the economy. 
 
I represent people who are hard-working, creative, adaptive,  

and resilient — people who believe in strong families, in strong 
communities, in cooperation and compassion. There is a 
tremendous spirit of pride and volunteerism in my constituency, 
in my communities. 
 
The constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy has a rich heritage, 
politically and historically, and it truly is an honour to be an 
elected representative of this area. When our government 
reduced the number of constituencies from 68 to 58, I was faced 
with change  66 to 58  and as I said earlier, change is not 
always easy. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know that I’m not prone to worry. But I 
did worry. I worried about the new boundaries. I worried about 
the impact of a new area to serve. But I am proud and honoured 
to be representing this new riding of Weyburn-Big Muddy, and 
I’m committed to work hard for all of the constituents in my 
riding. 
 
One of the fundamental reasons I ran for elected office in the 
very first place was based on strengthening representation, more 
accountability of government to the people, in other words, 
bringing government closer to the people. And I still believe 
strongly in strengthening the two-way-communication process 
between the people of Saskatchewan and my constituents to the 
government, bringing the views of my constituents to the 
government and bringing and explaining the role and initiatives 
of government to my constituents. 
 
Our recent consultation process, preparing for the 21st century, 
is an important part of keeping our government responsive and 
accountable to the people of our province. I held nine 
consultation meetings in Weyburn-Big Muddy and had 
excellent participation, and I want to thank the constituents who 
took part in this process. 
 
And what did we hear from the people of Saskatchewan? What 
did I hear from the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy through 
consultation? And how did our government respond? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I am proud to report that we did listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and our budget did respond to their priorities. 
 
We heard from the people of Saskatchewan, and we listened. 
They wanted continued balanced budgets; no new taxes; health, 
education, and social programs to be protected from federal 
cut-backs. They wanted jobs set as a priority. They want 
government at all levels to be effective, efficient, and 
accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to report that we have listened to the 
people and that our budget has positively responded to the 
priorities set by the people of Saskatchewan. Consultation is an 
important part of building a stronger province. We only 
succeeded in meeting the challenges of our first term because 
we worked together with all Saskatchewan people. 
Saskatchewan people made sacrifices in order to secure a better 
tomorrow. 
 
Saskatchewan people are again willing to work together to 
prepare our province for the new century. Yes, Mr. Speaker, our 
1996-97 budget responds to the priorities of the people of  
  



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

Saskatchewan, prepares the province for the challenges and 
opportunities of the new century by building prosperity and jobs 
for the new century. Saskatchewan people want the security that 
comes with jobs and opportunity. 
 
The budget builds on Saskatchewan’s strong and growing 
economy by continuing the reduction in the debt reduction 
surtax, to provide tax release for individuals and families, tax 
relief of $150 per individual, an extra $55 million in the pockets 
of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan which will help our economy. 
 
Using targeted tax incentives and cutting red tape to encourage 
business growth is another part of our budget and investing up 
to $238 million over four years to strengthen the agriculture and 
food industry. Just this past month, the south-east REDA 
(regional economic development authorities) was formed in my 
area of the province. And I’m pleased that our budget continues 
to support the development and programs of REDAs. The 
businesses, the workers, the organizations of my area have been 
happy to participate in the consultation process in preparing 
Partnership For Growth. 
 
They will also be pleased that this budget has supported the 
strategies in Partnership For Growth. The funding support for 
STEP, the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, helps 
business take advantage of the new global market-place, has 
been applauded by the business community. 
 
Yes, securing jobs for the new century is a priority of 
Saskatchewan people, and we have responded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people also told us they want to know that the 
vital services will always be there for them. Health care, 
education, and social programs are a priority for Saskatchewan 
people. And the Saskatchewan government listened and agreed 
with the people of this province. 
 
It’s too bad that the federal Liberals would not listen, as they 
chose not to cut their own government structures  not to cut 
the Senate, not to cut the tax breaks and the grants to their 
friends in big business and the banks. But they decided to do 75 
per cent of their cuts to Canadian people on the essential 
services of health care, education, and social programs. This is 
not the Saskatchewan way. It may be the Liberal, Tory way, but 
not the social democratic way, not the Saskatchewan way. 
 
The Saskatchewan way is preserving the cornerstones of our 
quality of life. Saskatchewan people want to know that vital 
services will always be there for them. Our four-year plan in the 
1996-97 budget safeguards health, education, and social 
services by providing $110 million in new provincial funding to 
replace federal cuts in the ‘96-97 budget, replacing 96 percent 
of the 252 million federal dollars cut to the core services in our 
province by 1999-2000 . . . and by working with Saskatchewan 
people to continue renewing health care, education, and social 
services for the 21st century. 
 
I am pleased that we have announced funding for 
implementation of 911, an important and essential service to 
help meet the needs of all Saskatchewan residents  a system, 
no matter where you live, that will help you be secure and safe,  

to all our residents, to all our communities right across this 
province. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan wanted the 
cornerstones of our quality of life preserved, and we have 
delivered. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan also 
wanted a streamlined, effective, and efficient government, less 
administration, more service. 
 
The 1996-97 budget reduces administration costs, improves 
service delivery, and redirects savings to essential services.  
with actions like streamlining operations in the Department of 
Highways and Transportation to free up $6.3 million for road 
construction and preservation; finding $7 million in 
administrative savings in the Department of Health to help 
maintain funding for health districts and pay for expanded 
health services; consolidating the delivery and marketing 
function of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance to save $5 million a 
year; and consolidating small vehicle safety and registration in 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance, which will generate 
savings of $1.4 million a year. 
 
Our strategy to reduce government costs by cutting 
administration, eliminating duplication and overlap, and by 
delivering services better will result in savings of more than $50 
million in 1996-97. These savings will be used to protect our 
health, post-secondary education, and social programs from 
federal Liberal cut-backs. 
 
People of Saskatchewan want sound financial management. 
They want balanced budgets, debt reduction and tax reduction. 
Sound financial management gives Saskatchewan people the 
freedom to choose their future, and the 1996-97 budget delivers 
on that. It provides a plan for four more balanced budgets; no 
tax increases for individuals, families or small business; a plan 
to reduce the provincial debt by $2.4 billion from 1994 to 2000; 
and with that, annual interest savings of $100 million by 
1999-2000. 
 
These increased savings can then go back into either further tax 
reductions or further services to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, our budget delivers on the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people the Saskatchewan way, with common 
sense, cooperation, and compassion. 
 
But what do we hear from the opposition parties? We hear 
support of the federal Liberal Party by our provincial Liberals, 
as the federal Liberals slash money to health care, education, 
and social programs  over $100 million this year and an 
additional 100 million the next year. 
 
We hear support of the federal Liberals by our provincial 
Liberals to the slashing of the Crow rate benefit; decreased to 
zero  a $320 million loss to our farmers each and every year 
from now on. We hear nothing in criticism of the federal 
government by the provincial Liberals in how they’re 
deregulating and abandoning the rail line system in this 
province. 
 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

But what we do hear from the provincial Liberals is saying we 
need more money on roads or maybe on GRIP or on health 
care. I hear about . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the hon. member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy is participating in debate and deserves the 
attention of the House. And I’ll ask hon. members on both sides 
of the House to refrain from their personal debates. They both 
have opportunity, if I recognize the members correctly. Both 
will have opportunity if they choose to participate in debate, 
and we’ll all look forward to hearing their remarks on the 
record. 
 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But we do hear from 
the provincial Liberals is they say spend more money on roads. 
Spend more money on health care. We need more money on an 
institution or a building called the Plains Hospital, but that 
doesn’t mean that we need more money for services. This 
means less money for services. 
 
They say reduce taxes, bring down the debt quicker. Now even 
in my background as a teacher, elementary students would 
know that this does not add up. This may explain why they had 
such a low or no turn-out to their public consultation process. I 
think that the people of Saskatchewan know that these Liberals 
don’t listen. They don’t listen at the provincial level or the 
federal level. 
 
But who do these federal Liberals listen to? What I have here 
today  reporting on business, labour, and government  may 
be some clues on who the Liberals do listen to. The party of big 
business, Liberals get $6 million from corporations in 1994. Is 
this who they consult with? There’s another list of companies 
that gave 10,000 or more to Liberals in 1994. Uncollected 
corporate taxes of over $40 billion . . . Maybe this is who the 
Liberal Party of Saskatchewan listens to. But they don’t listen 
to the Saskatchewan people. 
 
What do the Tories have to offer? Well they have a record. 
They offered irresponsible government, outrageous debt, and a 
mortgage on the future of our children. They try to remove 
themselves from their record, but when the Cameco shares were 
sold, their solution was to spend the profits. It sounds like the 
same old Tories to me. 
 
No, we have listened to the people of Saskatchewan. People of 
Saskatchewan want a common-sense approach to government. 
Saskatchewan people want to look forward to the 21st century 
with a sense of confidence and security. Our budget has 
delivered a future that promises more jobs; balanced budgets; 
reduced taxes; declining public debt; secures the cornerstones 
of our quality of life, our health, education, and social 
programs. Our budget has delivered on securing a future of 
optimism and hope for the people of Saskatchewan, our 
children, and our grandchildren. 
 
I am proud to support The Saskatchewan Way, as our budget 
prepares Saskatchewan for the new century. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to spend a short time to talk about the budget that was 
presented last week by the Minister of Finance. 
 
I want to first say that I don’t understand the member from Arm 
River. As I live on the east shore of Last Mountain Lake, very 
close to Last Mountain Lake, and he lives on the west shore of 
Last Mountain Lake, we only have a mile of water between us. 
How we can see things so much differently . . . I don’t know 
whether it’s we get the sun earlier in the morning, and he stays 
in the dark longer or because most of the dust storms come 
from the west, and he’s got his vision clogged up or what. But I 
think his vision on this budget, as I listened to him deliver his 
speech now, is very fogged. 
 
The budget, Mr. Speaker, is about preparing Saskatchewan for 
the 21st century. It’s about planning today for prosperity and 
security tomorrow. The budget responds to the priorities of the 
people of Saskatchewan, prepares the province for the 
challenges and the opportunities of the new century by doing 
four major things. 
 
Number one, building prosperity and jobs for the new century. 
As the minister said in her address last Thursday, people have 
told us that grants to businesses are the wrong way to promote 
growth. Now we agree with that. Rather than direct grants, 
we’ve instead used targeted tax incentives proven to stimulate 
new investment and to create jobs. 
 
Targeted tax incentives work. In our first term, we reduced the 
small business corporate income tax rate by 20 per cent. Last 
year, we introduced the 9 per cent investment tax credit on 
capital purchases to support manufacturing and processing. We 
also reduced the corporate income tax from 17 per cent to, in 
some cases, as low as 10 per cent on manufacturing and 
processing profits, depending on the level of business activity 
and the new jobs that were located in Saskatchewan. These 
targeted incentives are working, and I’m pleased to say that 
they will continue. The incentives have already contributed to 
an overall increase of 3,300 jobs in the manufacturing and 
processing sector in 1995 in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, beginning in January 1997, the government will 
improve the tax treatment for Saskatchewan-based truckers by 
ensuring that all interprovincial truckers follow the same tax 
rules. This will also help stimulate repairs and equipment sales 
within the province. 
 
The budget provides funding to support the existing 15 REDAs 
and to encourage the establishment of new ones. In fact we 
expect to see nine new REDAs formed in the coming months. 
These REDAs create and establish industry in their own 
localities, thus jobs in rural Saskatchewan for rural people. We 
are also keeping our promise to invest in our youth. We will 
promote funding for 2,500 summer jobs to assist young people 
in furthering their education. In the whole budget there is no tax 
increases. 
 
Number two, we are preserving the cornerstones of our quality 
of life. Saskatchewan people want security of knowing that 
essential public services will always be there for them. They  
  



700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

want to know that if they become sick, they can receive medical 
services. They want to know that their children will have access 
to primary education and secondary or advanced education 
regardless of their financial situation. They want to know that if 
they fall on troubled times, a social safety net will be there to 
catch them. 
 
These vital cornerstones of our quality of life are being attacked 
in great vigour by the federal Liberals. In their 1996-97 budget, 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government made three-quarters of 
their cuts to health, post-secondary education, and social 
programs. Health care, $47 million they cut; social services of 
$52 million; post-secondary education, $15 million; for a grand 
total of cuts to the social services or social programs of $114 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that we as a provincial 
government are not going to pass these cuts on to the public, but 
we are in fact going to back-fill the entire losses from the 
federal to the tune of 100 per cent. The new four-year financial 
plan presented on budget day provides with $240 million of 
new provincial funding to back-fill a total of 96 per cent of the 
announced federal transfer payments that were announced until 
1999-2000. In other words this government is committed to 
shielding the people of Saskatchewan from the full impact of 
the federal cuts. 
 
Number three was restructuring and streamlining government. 
We’ve heard in our consultation processes as we go around the 
country, people are saying if you want us to cut back, if you 
want us to reduce, you do it; so we have done that. 
 
We have consolidated the small vehicle safety and registration 
in Saskatchewan Government Insurance, a saving of $1.4 
million a year. Winding down of Ag Credit Corporation will 
save another $3 million a year. Saskatchewan Crop Insurance is 
consolidating its delivery and marketing systems to save $5 
million a year. 
 
But restructuring and streamlining of any corporation, whether 
it be corporation or government, means that there are always 
job losses or office closures. And our restructuring and 
streamlining is no different.  
 
But it will not be done as Mr. Black did when he took over the 
newspapers in Saskatchewan. We will manage the job losses 
with sensitivity and compassion through the use of early 
retirement, job sharing, and other measures that we can use. Our 
strategy to reduce government costs by cutting administration, 
eliminating duplication and overlap, and by delivering services 
better, will save $50 million a year. 
 
And the fourth pillar is providing the freedom to choose and 
control our own future. As a result of measures that we as a 
government have taken to pay down the debt and to reduce 
spending, the annual interest costs on government on the 
proposed debt will be $100 million a year less in 1999-2000 
than they are this year. 
 
By the year 2000, the province’s debt will be $2.4 billion lower 
than it was in 1994. This will bring down the total debt load  

from 68 per cent of the province’s gross domestic product down 
to 44 per cent of the gross domestic product over the same 
period. 
 
By cutting government spending, by balancing the budget, and 
by paying down the debt, we ensure security and prosperity 
now and into the new century for the people of Saskatchewan. 
Most importantly, it gives us and it gives our children a unique 
privilege  the financial freedom to decide and to control our 
own future. 
 
There is no better place to live in the world than in 
Saskatchewan. We have built a society where people and 
government work together to maintain our shared values of 
community, cooperation, and compassion. 
 
With this budget, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can look 
forward to the 21st century with a sense of confidence and 
security. And for that reason, I will be standing in my place and 
supporting the budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My response as the 
member from Athabasca on the budget really isn’t going to 
reflect on the budget but rather what the budget missed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I want to say when it comes to northern Saskatchewan, I 
think many members in this House are aware that if you’re 
going to pick an area that has been forgotten and basically 
ignored, I guess we can say, you can pick a card. You can pick 
any card, be it in housing, be it in roads, be it in health, be it in 
economic or social development  there’s a wide variety of 
problems in northern Saskatchewan. And we all know they 
exist and I cannot see why we continue to ignore them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is nothing exciting in the budget for the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. Again, I am so frustrated in 
this process, and we look at the facts, we look at the North, we 
look at what we haven’t done in northern Saskatchewan as 
opposed as to what we should be cutting back. We can see 
where the treatment of northern Saskatchewan leaves a lot more 
to be desired. 
 
I guess the big thing that we have to re-emphasize in this budget 
and in the future budgets to come, Mr. Speaker, is really where 
is our compassion and where is our focus. We have to stop 
looking at northern Saskatchewan as a problem area when we 
design future budgets. Northern Saskatchewan certainly has a 
high unemployment rate. They have severe housing shortages 
and housing problems. Health care is a problem. Social and 
economic development is a problem. And again I can go on and 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The North is not a problem area and we have to get away from 
that ideology and that thinking. The North is part of this great 
province of Saskatchewan. These are Saskatchewan people 
we’re speaking about, Mr. Speaker. We’re not talking of a  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

problem area within the context of it being way in the heck in 
the far reaches of our province. 
 
The question that we ask the government and the question that 
we ask any budget is, what is our strategy when it comes to 
northern Saskatchewan people? Is that strategy and is that 
budget clear, and is it what people want, Mr. Speaker? And 
these questions we didn’t have to ask, Mr. Speaker, because 
they weren’t addressed in the budget. They weren’t discussed in 
the budget. They weren’t pointed out in the budget. 
 
So my focus, Mr. Speaker, is really on what has not been said 
and done in the budget as opposed to what has been said. 
 
I go back to a 1991 document here regarding this current 
government’s phrase of, our commitment to northern 
communities. I’d like to read the document for the record, and 
also for the members opposite. 
 

The New Democrats are committed to a positive vision for 
northern people and communities. We offer a government 
committed to working closely with northern people in 
order to improve the economic opportunities and quality of 
life in northern communities. The first job will be to open 
the books of the province to determine the resources 
available for our priority commitments. 
 
As financial resources are available, the New Democrats 
will: (1) work with northern people to develop new 
revenue-sharing arrangements for northern communities; 
(2) work with northern communities to implement a 
sustainable economic development plan to benefit all 
northern people; (3) work with northern communities to 
improve the accessibility and quality of important 
community-based services like health care and education; 
(4) to establish appropriate northern transportation 
subsidies for food, health care products and other basic 
necessities. 

 
These are what were promised in 1991 to the northern 
communities, Mr. Speaker, and if members wish to have a copy 
of that, I’m sure  if they haven’t seen it  I’ll be glad to 
present them a copy of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about also a letter I received from 
one of my constituents from the community of Stony Rapids. 
The reason why I bring that up, Mr. Speaker, is one of the 
promises made, of course, goes back to the northern 
transportation subsidies for food. And this gentleman from 
Stony Rapids sends me a fax, and if people want to see the fax I 
can certainly give them a copy of this as well. But it says: 
 

A quick price check on groceries at the store in town 
reveals the following: one loaf of bread, $2.60; one two 
litre of 2 per cent milk, $4.50; one pound of butter, $4; and 
one pack of Kraft dinner, $1.50. 

 
These are basic items that this person bought in Stony Rapids. 
Now I don’t know what subsidy was mentioned here in terms of 
the transportation subsidies for food, but obviously these 
subsidies are not being impacted on prices of food in northern  

Saskatchewan communities. 
 
The cost of living is extremely high in places like Stony Rapids, 
Uranium City, and especially the far northern communities and 
as well as the core area of the Athabasca constituency, which of 
course is communities like La Loche and Buffalo Narrows. 
 
Now the cost of living in Stony Rapids, a general breakdown is 
as follows: rent, the guy pays 450 per month; power, he pays 
$100, soon to be climbing is what he indicates; telephone, again 
he indicates that some of it’s his personal use, but it’s roughly 
$100 each month; the heat, because of the extreme cold and 
extreme temperature of the far North, is $750 a month; the food 
is roughly $1,000  and we’re talking about a family, we’re 
not talking about one individual  sewer is 120 and water is 
160. Of course because Stony Rapids hasn’t got water and 
sewer, they’ve got to do the hauling. 
 
That roughly ranges to about $2,680 for a family, and they 
haven’t included things like clothing, school supplies for 
children, recreation, trips south, vehicle expense; so really, you 
know, the $2,680 that they spend each month living in Stony 
Rapids doesn’t take into account the total cost of doing 
business, as a family is in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
If they were fortunate to get a job that paid $10 per hour, they 
worked 40 hours per week, and of course, they would still only 
receive $1,600 per month, Mr. Speaker. And that, of course, is 
before all the CPP (Canada Pension Plan) and UIC 
(Unemployment Insurance Commission). 
 
If both members are working, it still would not equal to the 
amount needed to survive in northern Saskatchewan. And then 
if both members are working, then you’ve got to have a 
babysitter to watch the children. So of course, that also goes up. 
 
And is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker  and the member of the 
constituent asks me in this letter  is it any wonder that 80 per 
cent of the population of northern Saskatchewan require some 
sort of social assistance? Now if one were to receive freight 
subsidies, where are they? Were they announced in the budget, 
Mr. Speaker? No, they were not. 
 
And I think, you know, again I want to share this with the 
Assembly. If they want to see the facts for themselves, I’m 
more than prepared to present that letter to the members if they 
wish. 
 
I’ve got several points I want to raise here, when we talk about 
northern Saskatchewan being the problem area as perceived by 
a number of people. Again I go back to the point, northern 
Saskatchewan is part of Saskatchewan. It’s not a problem area. 
 
We talk about the food prices, Mr. Speaker. But you can buy a 
bottle of 40-ounce whisky, same price in Regina, that you can 
in La Loche. The liquor is subsidized. I know, Mr. Speaker, 
because I’ve bought a few. 
 
So in essence, you have to look at the situation of the priority. 
And it would be nice to see a freight subsidy in this budget for 
the people of the far northern communities. It would’ve been  
  



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

nice to see some effort being made in the water and sewer 
department for communities like Stony Rapids. But they 
weren’t mentioned. And again I want to share that with the 
House. 
 
Again I go back to the Indian and Metis aboriginal people in the 
workforce. We talk about unemployment, Mr. Speaker. The 
huge percentage of northern Saskatchewan communities consist 
primarily of Indian and Metis people. In my particular riding of 
25 communities, there’s roughly 8 that are treaty band 
members, and the other 17 are Metis communities. 
 
I share some national stats again for the sake of the House. The 
national unemployment rate for aboriginal people is 70 per cent 
living on reserves and 50 per cent living in urban areas. That’s 
for the Indian population. Current unemployment rates for the 
aboriginal is double that of the national average, Mr. Speaker. 
Income levels of the aboriginal people are one-half to 
two-thirds that of non-aboriginal peoples. Social assistance 
rates of aboriginal people are more than twice the national 
average. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we can see the trends continuing. The 
aboriginal population is much younger than the mainstream 
Canadian population. The 1986 census showed that 37 per cent 
of all status Indians have less than a grade 9 education. It is 
estimated that 45 per cent of Indians that are on reserve are 
functionally illiterate. 
 
Now that’s not to say, Mr. Speaker, that we haven’t got very 
intelligent people out there. That is to say that we haven’t been 
committed hard enough and strong enough, Mr. Speaker, not 
only to the northern part of this province but to the Indian and 
the Metis people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The unemployment and training barriers faced by the aboriginal 
people and northern people, Mr. Speaker, is: number one, the 
aboriginal labour force is lower skilled and sometimes possess 
lower educational levels than a non-aboriginal; the need for 
adequate life skills and career training for the aboriginal youth; 
the need to increase an aboriginal career-counselling service. In 
order for employment and training programs to be effective, 
non-aboriginal people must understand that distinct cultural 
differences exist between aboriginal peoples. 
 
There’s a need for private sector and the government to 
establish cooperative work programs for aboriginal high school 
students to develop in the partnerships with the aboriginal 
community. 
 
And last, Mr. Speaker, is we need to create both internal and 
external mechanisms which incorporate and utilize aboriginal 
input in implementing employment equity. Equity programs 
that recruit aboriginal people simply to fill minority quotas are 
not effective, and are demoralizing to aboriginal employees. 
 
So we see the stats, Mr. Speaker. They speak for themselves. 
These are not stats we pluck out of the air for the sake of public 
relations. These are stats that are published all throughout 
various government documents. 
 

We see a letter here from a gentleman from the far north talking 
about the food prices. But again I go back to the budget  
nothing on subsidies for the far northern communities; nothing 
on improving and increasing the quality of opportunity that a 
northern aboriginal person may need to get a job. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, just from the initial comments I have 
here on the economic development strategy of northern 
Saskatchewan, we know that northern Saskatchewan possesses 
a tremendous amount of wealth  there’s tourism; there’s 
natural gas in northern Saskatchewan; there’s forestry; there’s 
mining; and if I’m not mistaken, Mr. Speaker, the second 
largest income-generating industry in the province, I believe, is 
mining. Now what portion of that comes from northern 
Saskatchewan is anybody’s guess. 
 
But the thing is, Mr. Speaker, is what I found kind of 
disheartening in this particular speech was that there’s nothing 
special about revenue sharing. Again I go back to the 
commitment to northern communities: work with northern 
people to develop new revenue-sharing arrangements for 
northern communities. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the good 
question we have, is where is it? 
 
The big problem in northern Saskatchewan when it comes to 
the government is that they cannot continue to base the 
economy of the North on purely developing the non-renewable 
resources such as mining for gold, uranium, diamonds, etc. 
These resources are non-renewable. They do not come back, 
Mr. Speaker. And the northern Saskatchewan people have for 
many years been talking about revenue sharing. And of course 
the northern Saskatchewan people, and I myself as an MLA, 
support the industry of northern Saskatchewan to continue. 
They believe the North should be developed. 
 
However, while we support northern development, Mr. 
Speaker, there has to be more emphasis on developing locally 
based businesses. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. It now being 5 o’clock, the House will 
stand recessed until 7 o’clock p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 671 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 671 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 671 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 
  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 671 
  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 672 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 
  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 681 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 681 
  Ward .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 689 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prairie Malt Expansion 
  Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 672 
 Liberal Team 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 672 
 Canadian Cancer Month 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 673 
 Liberal Party Loyalty 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 673 
 Z99’s Ninth Radiothon 
  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 673 
 1996 Saskatchewan Indian Winter Games 
  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 673 
 Moose Jaw Science Fair 
  Murray ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 674 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Hospital Emergency Services 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 674 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 674 
 Drug Treatment Services 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 675 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 675 
 Arts Board Film Festival 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 676 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 676 
 Drug Treatment Services 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 677 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................... 677 
 Forced Institutional Care 
  Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................. 677 
  Romanow ................................................................................................................................................................................... 677 
 Renewable Energy Options 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 678 
  Anguish ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 679 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Don Ching Named New Head of SaskTel 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 679 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 680 
  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 680 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Shillington.................................................................................................................................................................................. 681 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Langford .................................................................................................................................................................................... 682 
  Koenker ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 682 
  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 686 
  Bradley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 697 
  Flavel .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 699 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 700 
 
 


