













































May 13, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1533 

 May 13, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition on 

behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the closure 

of the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily from 

throughout the city of Regina. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise today to present petitions of names from Saskatchewan 

residents regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 

primarily from Arcola, but I note also that they are from Manor 

and Regina. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Signatures on this petition are from Regina and the community 

of Midale. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise today to present 

petitions of names from people throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Lampman, 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the communities of Vibank, White City, Milestone, and Regina. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Regina. And I so present. Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Wednesday next move: 

 

An order of the Assembly do issue a return showing all 

correspondence between the Department of Economic 

Development and the Minister of Economic Development 

regarding the Crown construction tendering proposal, 

including the analysis prepared by the department prior to 

this policy being introduced. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on day no. 55 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Economic Development, 

regarding the analysis prepared by the Economic 

Development department to the introduction of the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement: (1) was the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement proposal clearly 

identified to be a union preference policy; (2) according to 

the analysis, how much were costs of Crown projects 

expected to increase as a result of this policy; (3) did the 

analysis state that this proposal would force non-union 

contractors to subsidize union contractors; and (4) did the 

Department of Economic Development recommend against 

the proposed Crown Construction Tendering Agreement? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce  



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

to you and through you to the members of this House, 49 

students from Valley Manor School in Martensville. It’s a 

progressive school and an exciting school to be in. They’re 

grade 5 students. They’re here visiting our community of 

Regina as well as the legislature as well. 

 

The teachers that are with them are Jim Golding and Glenna 

Pellerin. I look forward to meeting them later on and asking 

some questions of them and answering some of their questions 

as well. Let’s welcome them to the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 

Jennifer Young who is in the Speaker’s gallery. She is a grade 

10 student at Bishop James Mahoney High School in 

Saskatoon. 

 

I understand that Jennifer is career-shadowing various people, 

including yourself today, Mr. Speaker. It’s part of her work to 

understand the Legislative Assembly. I understand that she’s 

not only involved in career-shadowing you in the Speaker’s 

office, but also she’s in the Clerk’s office, the Legislative 

Library, and the visitors’ services. 

 

I understand that Jennifer is accompanied by her friend, Megan 

Saum, and I would ask Megan and Jennifer to rise so that we 

can appropriately congratulate them for being in the Legislative 

Assembly today and welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 

and to you to the rest of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

Manley McLauchlan, sitting up in your gallery, the executive 

director for the Saskatchewan Construction Association. And I 

would ask everyone to welcome him to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 

you, and through you to all of the members of the Assembly, 

the grade 5 and 6 class from Davin School in Regina. There are 

18 students, along with their teacher, Mr. Terry Vargo, and 

they’re in the west gallery. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. It is a very 

real pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and to all 

members of the Assembly, the High Commissioner of 

Bangladesh, Mufleh Osmany, who is standing up in your 

gallery. 

 

I had a brief discussion  all too brief  with His Excellency 

this morning. We discussed our relations and lamented the fact 

that trade relations with the southern part of Asia are not as 

extensive as they should be, and we discussed ways that we 

might increase this. 

 

I’m sure all members will want to join me in extending a very  

warm welcome to this distinguished visitor from Bangladesh. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hagel:  If other members have completed 

introductions, the Speaker would like to introduce some guests 

of mine who are visiting from my home constituency. From 

Ross School in Moose Jaw, in the Speaker’s gallery today are 

seated 29 grade 7 and 8 students who are accompanied by their 

instructor, Diane Milton Smith, as well as chaperons, B.J. and 

Amy Booth. 

 

They are here to take in the proceedings of the Assembly and at 

2 o’clock they’ll be breaking for a tour of the building. And 

with the capable assistance of the Deputy Chair of Committees, 

I look forward to an opportunity to join them for a photograph 

and then a follow-up visit back home later on next month. 

 

Will the members of the Assembly please show a warm 

welcome to these visitors from Ross School in Moose Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Battered Women’s Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, May 12 to 

18, has been proclaimed Battered Women’s Awareness Week in 

Saskatchewan. Despite increased public awareness of the 

problem, violence against women continues to be widespread. 

Most of us know someone who has experienced violence. 

 

Violence can take many forms. It can be psychological, sexual, 

emotional, or physical. An abuser may constantly criticize or 

belittle his partner. He may forbid her to have her own money. 

He may isolate her from families and friends. 

 

Too often violence that begins with harsh words ends in 

physical abuse. It is impossible to truly measure the effects of 

violence in the lives of women and children. It is impossible to 

estimate the effect of the pain and suffering, the loss of 

self-esteem and personal security. We must eliminate violence 

because it robs its victims, mostly women and children, of the 

joy, confidence, and personal security that should be the 

birthright of all human beings. 

 

The more we know about this issue and the more we deal with 

it, the more likely we are to prevent it. We must begin by 

examining our own values, choices, and behaviours; then we 

must speak up and let others know that violence in any form is 

unacceptable. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Royal Bank Cup 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members of 

the Assembly are aware, I spent the last few days in my 

constituency enjoying the Royal Bank Cup. My congratulations 

to all the teams that participated, and in particular the Vernon  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

Vipers, who defeated our home town favourite, Mustangs, in 

the final game last night. 

 

Not only did I enjoy the hockey, I was proud to be one of the 

more than 700 volunteers that made this event the most 

successful ever. Fans from coast to coast praised the 

Saskatchewan hospitality that they found in Melfort this week. 

 

I want to commend the host committee Co-Chairs, Dale Frier 

and Randy Sorensen; the volunteers and the fans who made the 

entire event such a huge success. As well I ask the Assembly to 

recognize the achievements of the Melfort Mustang team, their 

head coach, Kevin Dickie, assistant coach, Blaine Fennell; you 

are true Saskatchewan champions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Osteoporosis Week 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 11 through 18 

is Osteoporosis Week in Canada. Their theme for that week is 

“Move your Bones”. The mission of the society is to educate, 

empower, and support individuals and communities in the 

prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. 

 

Nine communities in Saskatchewan chose to participate in this 

week in walkathons in their community. Four of those were 

cities, five were communities; one was the community of 

Rosthern and I had the opportunity this weekend to move my 

bones as well. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cooking for Literacy 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the third year in 

a row I have attended the annual “Cooking for Literacy” event 

in Lloydminster. They must like my cooking because they keep 

inviting me back year after year. 

 

I had the pleasure of participating in this event again on the 

weekend, but not because of my cooking skills. After serving as 

a teacher for 23 years in Saskatchewan, I have taken a personal 

interest in the campaign for literacy. 

 

“Cooking for Literacy” is an event held each year to raise 

money for literacy. In Lloydminster, it is a joint effort of CKSA 

TV and Radio, Lakeland College, and Superior Propane. Last 

year, Superior Propane raised $125,000 Canada-wide for 

literacy. CKSA broadcast live from this local event, helping to 

publicize the campaign for literacy. Lakeland College conducts 

a literacy program called “Learn”  an adult program to assist 

people in increasing their literacy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should not take literacy for granted in Canada; 

38 per cent of Canadians read at a very low level which makes 

them functionally illiterate. I would like to congratulate 

Superior Propane, CKSA Radio and TV, and Lakeland College 

for their efforts in promoting a good cause. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Battered Women’s Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to 

recognize Battered Women’s Awareness Week. Although it is 

not pleasant to think about, hundreds of Saskatchewan women 

are facing violence every day. This is an issue that cannot be 

ignored. I am sure everyone in this House personally knows a 

woman who is or has been abused. 

 

This violence tears families apart. We cannot forget the 

thousands of children who have also been scarred by this abuse. 

Domestic violence is not acceptable. It cannot be tolerated. 

Those convicted of assault must be duly punished. Funding for 

transition homes and crisis centres is vital because these women 

and children need a safe place to heal. 

 

Acknowledging that this terrible violence exists in some 

Saskatchewan homes is just the first step. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Expansion of St. Volodymyr Villa 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this past Saturday I had the pleasure of attending the 

expansion at St. Volodymyr Villa seniors’ complex in 

Saskatoon. Phases 1 and 2 are now completed, and the 

sod-turning ceremony was to kick off phase 3, and phase 4 is to 

be announced in the near future. This is independent but 

supportive housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was a very large crowd in attendance, and this is 

reflective of the fact that they saw this dream become a reality. 

And I say special thanks to the board who put in many hours of 

volunteer work; to the administrator, Mr. Lewchuk; to the 

former and previous bishops; to the Ukrainian community who 

have been behind the project; and especially to the residents, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s the residents who make a place a home, who 

make St. Volodymyr’s Villa a community. And it is a great 

home and a great community. 

 

So I appreciate the opportunity to have been invited. I felt very 

welcome over the last eight years, and I say to the residents, the 

best of all the health for many years to come. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Passing of Dennis O’Brien 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with deep 

sorrow that I rise in the House today to extend my condolences 

to the O’Brien family in Buffalo Narrows. Over the weekend 

their husband and father, Dennis O’Brien, tragically lost his life 

in a plane crash in British Columbia. Dennis loved to fly and 

had many years of experience. He worked for Buffalo Narrows 

Airways and provided a much needed service for people in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to express my heartfelt wishes to the O’Brien 

family and all of Dennis’s friends for their tragic loss. Dennis 

will be for ever remembered. Thank you. 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Navy Captain from Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Mr. Speaker, at first this may sound like a 

contradiction, though I assure you it is not. A surprisingly large 

number of Saskatchewan boys have had and are having very 

successful careers in the Canadian Navy. A distinguished case 

in point is a former resident of Cabana and of Meadow Lake. 

George Prudat  or should I say Commander George Prudat  

of the Canadian Navy has just been appointed commanding 

officer of Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship Nipigon. 

 

One of Canada’s destroyers, the Nipigon is a 2,925 ton 

helicopter-equipped ship with a crew of 243. It’s home port is 

Halifax. Commander Prudat has been at sea for 16 years with 

appointments at . . . on several ships, I should say. He has 

circumnavigated the globe and has been awarded the special 

service medal, the Canada 125 Medal, and the Canadian Forces 

decoration, all for distinguished service to Canada. Commander 

Prudat was born in Meadow Lake and joined the Canadian 

Forces in 1970. 

 

Mr. Speaker, back to my original point. It has been said that the 

limitless horizons of Saskatchewan are like those on the ocean; 

consequently, land-locked Saskatchewan boys are in fact quite 

at home at sea. The success of Commander Prudat would seem 

to bear out this theory, and I congratulate him for his deserved 

recognition. I know his parents, Paul and Marie, must be very, 

very proud. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hospital Auxiliaries 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, on Friday 

I had the privilege of attending a hospital auxiliary tea in the 

community of Moosomin. And I realize many communities 

throughout this province . . . hospital auxiliaries are getting 

together to celebrate the work they have done through the years 

to provide services and in many cases to provide fund-raising 

efforts to put equipment in our hospitals, and specifically our 

small hospitals. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly important that this 

Assembly take a moment to recognize the work of these many 

volunteers for their hard work and for the efforts they have put 

in to providing good health care and services and equipment in 

our small communities. Congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sea Buckthorn Development 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, Agriculture 2000 is this 

government’s strategy for development of the agriculture 

industry into the next century. A part of this strategy is to fund 

for research and development activities. The University of 

Saskatchewan will receive $111,000 from the Agriculture 

Development Fund for a project to develop and demonstrate the 

use of sea buckthorn as a fruit shrub for commercial cultivation  

and processing in Saskatchewan. 

 

The fruit is used extensively in Europe and parts of Asia in 

jams, jellies, and other fruit preparations. The project will 

investigate improvements in production technique and in 

varieties that are suitable for automatic harvesting. The project 

. . . No, work will also be conducted on potential health benefits 

of extracts from the fruit. This could result in value added 

marketing opportunities for producers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, funding of research projects such as this assist in 

the development of emerging opportunities in the production 

and value added processing and help diversify our province’s 

agriculture and food sector. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

media is reporting today that this NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government was warned in advance about problems associated 

with implementing its Crown construction tendering policy. 

The government’s own analysis concluded that the CCTA 

(Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) would give 

preference to unionized firms and would increase the cost of 

some projects by as much as 30 per cent. 

 

This substantiates what we’ve been saying all along; 30 per cent 

is not a figure we simply pulled from the air, as the Premier has 

stated, Mr. Speaker. Reports also indicate that Economic 

Development officials advised this government to scrap the 

policy. 

 

Will the Minister of Labour confirm that he was forewarned 

about the dangers of this policy  warnings which proved to be 

correct. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all that 

there are 18 or 19 cabinet ministers sitting around a table, all of 

whom get briefed before they go to meetings to discuss issues 

such as the one that’s being raised by the members of the 

opposition. At the end of the day we draw conclusions about 

what sort of future is likely, and I can say that any suggestions 

that the kind of future that’s being quoted opposite is a reality 

are false. 

 

We know that the only thing that the Crown Tendering 

Agreement was intended to do and has achieved is to establish a 

fair base of pay for people so that union contractors and 

non-union contractors are bidding on exactly the same basis as 

they compete for a small number of government contracts. In 

the first construction season that was about $15 million worth 

of contracting. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, the actions of this NDP 

government on this issue are nothing short of arrogant and  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

irresponsible. They proceeded with a policy that puts business 

at risk, discriminates against non-union firms, and robs the 

people of Saskatchewan of valuable tax dollars, all so that they 

could cater to their friends within the labour union movement. 

 

Given these facts and the reports that Economic Development 

advised this government to scrap the policy, will the minister 

explain why he failed to listen to this advice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the members opposite had a 

brief moment when one or two people from the labour 

movement gave them some support during the recent SaskTel 

strike, but I think that’s about the last time they’re going to get 

any recognition. 

 

I want to say that in 1982, Mr. Speaker, I remember the day 

when I heard that one of the basic rights of workers of any 

country that’s in the United Nations across the world was 

violated in Saskatchewan when the previous Tory government 

did away with the right of workers to be unionized in the 

construction industry; when they allowed companies to be 

double-breasted; when they allowed the companies which union 

members had legitimately unionized to take on another form for 

the purpose of bidding on contracts  an international right 

removed. So it’s clear that in the time when we came to 

government, there were obviously difficult circumstances in the 

construction industry. 

 

We have taken it upon ourselves to try to establish a fair and 

open dialogue, to try to establish some cooperation between the 

construction industry and the labourers of this province. And to 

continue in that, I’m pleased to say that Mr. McLauchlan from 

the construction industry and myself will be meeting on May 

23. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really pleased 

at last that you’re meeting with the people. And you don’t have 

to worry about Alabama North; what you have to worry about is 

Cuba North because what you’ve done is create an unfair set of 

labour standards in this province, and it’s killing jobs and it’s 

hurting business in this province. 

 

Will the minister agree to take the advice of Economic 

Development and scrap the CCTA policy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I will commit this 

government to continue to do what it has set out to do when we 

took office in 1991, and that is to establish a fair relationship 

between workers and the industry in this province for a healthy 

economy where our children can work in a decent economy and 

where our industry can flourish. And that’s what we commit to 

continue to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

NDP government has clearly displayed that they will do  

absolutely anything in order to get re-elected. I am completely 

appalled by the Minister of Economic Development’s actions. 

 

He knew very well that the CCTA was costing taxpayers 

millions of extra dollars and he said nothing. At the same time, 

he allowed his government to totally devastate rural 

Saskatchewan by cutting back funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has made a choice and his 

choice was to favour his union friends over the rest of this 

province. Now when the people in my constituency ask why are 

hospitals being closed, why are nursing homes being closed, 

why are schools being closed, I can tell them  I can tell them, 

Mr. Speaker  the minister has chosen to favour unions over 

the people of Saskatchewan. And I would say that he owes the 

people of this province an apology. 

 

Will the Deputy Premier please tell this Assembly and the 

people of the province why, when he knew what the CCTA was 

doing, did he sit back and say nothing and allow his 

government to continually gut rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I keep being amazed 

by that member and her negative approach about rural 

Saskatchewan. Now rural Saskatchewan is devastated, rural 

Saskatchewan is destroyed  all of these huge exaggerations 

that she makes in stark contrast to what is really happening in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I have here an article from her home newspaper, the Wadena 

times, dated May 8, and it says, the headline, and it’s written by 

an Ann Walter: “Saskatchewan soil yields jobs”. And it’s a 

wonderful story about rural Saskatchewan and the jobs that are 

being created at the present time. 

 

And I would just say to the member opposite, you should read 

this and get some ideas about what rural Saskatchewan is really 

about. I’ll send you a copy. But it talks about jobs coming from 

berry farms, small shops making chocolates, fish farming; 

potato farming is yielding jobs; meat packing plants and dairy 

plants. It talks about poultry eviscerating plants. It talks about 

greenhouses, large and small; cattle ranches, flour mills. This is 

one of your own constituents talking about economic 

development in rural Saskatchewan. I don’t know where . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not one of those 

examples had anything to do with CCTA; in fact it’s in spite of 

this. I am truly ashamed of the Deputy Premier. He had 

documentation confirming what we’ve been saying for months. 

He sat here and heard us plead with the Minister of Labour to 

tear up CCTA and he refused to do so. 

 

I say to the Deputy Premier, it was not just the opposition 

pleading with you but it was the people of Saskatchewan, the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business, the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association. The chamber of 

commerce pleaded with this government to tear up the CCTA,  



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

and there was still no action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this NDP government has no idea how 

much they have made the people of this province suffer . . . 

This is the second time in as many weeks that the people of this 

province have had to find out what the government is up to by a 

leak of a document. Three strikes and you’re out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is from the same government that calls 

themselves open and accountable. Will the Deputy Premier 

finally confess to the people of this province that he is 

responsible for wasting hundreds of taxpayers’ dollars and table 

the documents which clearly show that construction jobs are 

costing 30 per cent more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to quote as 

well from Friday’s newspaper . . . Saturday’s newspaper, about 

the new jobs being created in Saskatchewan which that member 

opposite just happened to forget about Friday when the job 

numbers were up by 5,000 year over year. She remembers them 

if the numbers are down but conveniently has selective amnesia 

when it comes to jobs being increased. 

 

But I want to tell you this — and maybe some day when you’re 

in government you will know how government works — when 

you are being briefed and when government’s being briefed, 

you get a myriad of ideas and concepts coming on particular 

issues. And at the end of the day, you make a decision based on 

the best intelligence and the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And that is what we did in this case. 

 

We have views that said we should have gone farther in terms 

of making positions more available to unions. We had other 

people who want to get rid of unions. At the end of the day, you 

do what is in the best interest of the majority of people. That’s 

what we did here, after consensus, after discussion. 

 

And I say to the member opposite, her attitude about economic 

development and jobs is very, very poor and I would urge her to 

read the document from . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions 

are also to the Deputy Premier, the Minister for Economic 

Development, and that minister seems to have a very selective 

reading problem because if he checked those job numbers he 

would see that there was 2,000 less jobs in construction than 

there was the year before. 

 

He seems to be part of a pact of a conspiracy of silence 

regarding the real costs and the consequences of his union 

tendering policy. And it now appears that he is responsible 

personally because his own officials recommended against this 

unfair policy. 

 

Mr. Minister, your department’s economic analysis says that the  

policy will give preference to unionized companies, that it does 

not represent a greater commitment to fair and open tendering, 

that it drives up costs by 30 per cent. And finally, your 

department officials said what we have been recommending all 

along  that you should scrap this agreement. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did you do this against the advice of your 

department? Why did you allow NDP political interests to take 

precedence over those of Saskatchewan’s workers and 

taxpayers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat for the member 

from that side of the opposition benches the answer I gave to 

this side of the opposition benches a few minutes ago. There are 

a number of points of view that are given to ministers that are 

preparing to make decisions and then we conclude from the 

debate what is likely in the best interests and what is likely the 

best information from which we work. 

 

I want to say that the information that the member opposite is 

quoting has not been borne out in fact, and the fact is that we 

have determined that we’re going to try create a fair and 

friendly environment between workers and the construction 

industry in this province, and we’re going to continue to do 

that. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that I am astounded 

that he’s willing to rear his head in this day and age, having 

been the party in power when they stripped workers of their 

rights to unionize in this province at a time when everybody 

else in the world believes that this is an important right for 

workers. That all we want is a fair opportunity for your children 

and mine to have a place in the workplace from which they can 

get reasonable returns, and so that companies, whether they be 

non . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Again to the Minister for Economic 

Development. Under the Tory regime of the ‘90s, at least there 

were jobs and the unions and non-union workers both had jobs 

in the construction industry. 

 

But to the Minister for Economic Development, Mr. Speaker: 

you knew the facts and you chose to ignore them. You covered 

them up. Let’s review your conspiracy of silence about the 

union preference agreement. 

 

You said this agreement creates a level playing-field. Your own 

 your own  officials say that it favours unionized 

companies. You said this agreement would not drive up costs. 

Your own officials say that it will drive up costs by as much as 

30 per cent. You said this was a good policy that needs to 

proceed. Your officials say that it’s a flawed policy and should 

be scrapped. 

 

I guess it came down to a choice between the good for the NDP 

and what’s good for the economy. And you chose NDP politics. 

Mr. Minister, won’t you listen to the opposition . . . if you  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

won’t listen to the opposition, you won’t listen to the 

construction . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. Now 

the hon. member has been quite lengthy in his preamble and I’ll 

ask him to go directly to his question. Directly to the question. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 

will you at least listen to your own officials and follow their 

advice and scrap this failed policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite well 

knows, that that policy has been in place now for a year and we 

are in the process of having consulted with the industry and are 

in the process of continuing discussions with the industry, and 

we will announce the results of that review in due time. 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite that the act of putting 

workers and putting unionized contractors and non-unionized 

contractors in the position where they both bid on a project on 

exactly the same basis doesn’t seem to me to be creating an un-

level playing-field. 

 

It seems to me to be giving equal opportunity  equal 

opportunity that the members opposite have clearly 

demonstrated that they did not believe in, with the devastating 

. . . with the devastating results in the economy that only 

Saskatchewan people know. These people spent billions of 

dollars creating . . . trying to create jobs. People fled this 

province in droves. 

 

I can say that Saskatchewan people believe in fairness; 

Saskatchewan people believe that our children should have a 

right to work under decent conditions, and we’re going to 

continue to work with the industry to achieve that. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Relations Board Decision 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Labour or his designate. Mr. 

Minister, businesses are very worried about how your 

government keeps intervening in their business. Your 

hand-picked Labour Board is now saying that a business cannot 

downsize even if there’s not enough work to support the jobs. 

In a recent case involving Acme Video, your Labour Board 

ruled this to be a technological change and ruled against the 

company. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can a business operate in a province where 

the government is overruling business decisions? Is this a 

problem with the board or is this a problem with the legislation? 

Which one of those two are you going to fix? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I believe, 

although the question wasn’t entirely clear, I believe the  

member is commenting on a decision of the Labour Relations 

Board. 

 

The Labour Relations Board is a semi-judicial body and the 

decisions which come from it are really in the nature of judicial 

decisions. This is a body which is interpreting the law. It really 

is not appropriate for members of this Assembly to comment on 

the decisions. You may comment on the statute if you wish, but 

it really is not appropriate to be trying to second-guess what is 

really a judicial body. They’ve made a pronouncement on a 

statute, and I’ll let it stand as that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  The question basically I’d asked, which the 

government was going to fix. Apparently they don’t want to fix 

anything. 

 

Mr. Minister, there seems to be a bit of a double standard 

working here. And soon, if this keeps on, that’ll be the only 

thing working in Saskatchewan. When the government decided 

to lay off hundreds of employees, that’s considered sound 

management decision. When a video store tries to reduce its 

staff due to lack of business, your government steps in and says 

no. 

 

You got rid of crop insurance agents because you said modern 

communications technology made it possible for farmers to deal 

with crop insurance over the phone. You laid off hundreds of 

highway employees because you made a technological change 

in repairing highways. We now have highways with holes 

instead of being smooth. That’s a technological change. 

 

Mr. Minister, why the double standard? How can business 

operate if they’re not allowed to make business decisions? Will 

you remove the Luddites out of your Labour Board and replace 

them with people that understand some business? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I will add to the 

comment I made previously by saying that this matter is under 

appeal. I believe it will be through the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

I suggest it is advisable for all members to wait till we get the 

decision of the Court of Queen’s Bench, then if there is a 

problem and if there’s no further appeal, then the legislature 

and the government could wrestle with it. At the moment the 

matter is in the hands of the judiciary and all members should 

leave it there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Potential Home Care Workers’ Strike 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, it’s been one week since the 

home care workers in this province voted overwhelmingly in 

favour of strike action. In spite of repeated requests by the 

opposition for you to explain what plan of action will be taken 

in the event of a strike, and in spite of these repeated requests, 

the minister has yet to give us any reply. As a result, our office 

has received a number of calls from those who depend on home  



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

care or family members of those who need this service. They’re 

asking, what will happen if home care workers walk off the 

job? 

 

Will the minister ease the anxiety and fears of these people and 

explain what contingency plan his government has in place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the member may or may not 

be aware that the workers indicated this morning, I believe, that 

they intended to continue bargaining with their employer, which 

is represented by SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations). 

 

The parties are entering into bargaining later this week, and I 

would suggest to the member that rather than talk about 

hypothetical situations and assume that the bargaining will not 

be successful, we should leave the matter where it properly 

should be and that is in collective bargaining between the 

parties. And I have every confidence that these people are 

reasonable people, people of good faith, and that they will come 

to a reasonable solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health District Boards Funding 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Well then, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of 

nurses that are picketing today in Weyburn and it’s not because 

of a labour dispute. It’s to send a message to this NDP 

government. The South Central Health District has had its 

budget slashed by $1.4 million this year, and the number of 

registered nurses in the Weyburn area has been cut from 63 to 

30. They want to tell this government that cut-backs and lay-

offs are making it extremely difficult to provide satisfactory 

health care. 

 

If health care professionals  the very people who deal with 

the sick and elderly on a day-to-day basis  see a major 

problem, why does the Minister of Health refuse to 

acknowledge these problems, a direct result of his 

government’s under-funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of respect 

for the nurses of this province. And I also respect that they are 

raising, for public discussion, the issue of health care funding 

and our health care system, and I commend them for that. I 

think that that’s a commendable thing to do. We should have 

intelligent discussion in the province as to the level of funding 

and the level of care we have in the province. And I welcome 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while we’re having the discussion, since the member from 

Regina talks about  I’m sorry, Thunder Creek  talks about 

cuts to health care, the member knows, as the people of the 

province know, that the provincial government has not cut 

funding for health care this year. Rather, Mr. Speaker, it was the 

federal government in Ottawa, the Liberals, who have cut health 

care spending dramatically. 

 

They are going to do the same thing next year. But for every 

dollar the Liberals take out, we put a dollar back in, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the South Country Health 

District in my constituency is another that has been hit hard by 

recent government funding cuts. In fact this district recently had 

its funding slashed by $315,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Lewis Draper, a member of that board and a 

former member of that government, says of this NDP 

government, and I quote 

 

The issue really isn’t one of not having enough money; it’s 

really an issue of getting too little to do what is necessary 

for health care in rural communities. 

 

Will the minister admit that what the former NDP member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is telling us is correct? And will the 

minister tell this House what he intends to do to correct this 

under-funding of rural health care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, the 

province of Saskatchewan has moved to a population-based, 

needs-based method of funding which allocates health care 

funding between the districts of the province based on 

population and utilization, which I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

is in fact a fair way of allocating health care funding. It’s really 

the first time in our history that we have applied some empirical 

evidence, looked at the facts, and actually allocated funding in a 

fair way. 

 

But I want to say the member that if the member is concerned 

about the level of health care funding, I would really suggest 

that he talk to his Liberal colleagues in Ottawa who are 

dramatically cutting back on the amount of health care funding 

that Saskatchewan is receiving. 

 

I know the member doesn’t like it when we say that, Mr. 

Speaker, but the simple fact of the matter is, that is the truth. 

We have not cut health care funding  the Liberals have cut 

health care funding. But for every dollar they take out, we put a 

dollar back in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Recovery of Government Funds 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 

stated in this House on Friday, the people of Saskatchewan felt 

betrayed and insulted by the actions of members of the 

Conservative Party before they were defeated in 1991. Now the 

people of Saskatchewan are being insulted again. 

 

We learn that one of the major players in this scheme has been 

scheduled for release from prison today. Lorne McLaren will 

also be collecting four different pensions including an MLA’s  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) pension of $1,200 a 

month. This is a slap in the face of the taxpayers of this 

province. 

 

My question to the Premier is whether now his government is 

willing to take action in order that some of this ill-gotten money 

is returned to the taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think, as 

I indicated to the Leader of the Opposition on Friday, we were 

certainly willing to look at this issue. I have spoken with his 

member on the Board of Internal Economy subsequent to 

Friday, as well as the member who sits on the board from the 

third party, to determine what action, if any, we may take to 

resolve this issue. 

 

I want to say to all members of the House that we regard this 

matter very seriously, and we will continue to work with the 

member of the . . . leader of the . . . or the opposition board as 

well as with the third party to determine a fair and reasonable 

way to resolve this. 

 

Northern Highway Maintenance 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Highways. Frustration is setting in as many of 

the northern communities are tired of waiting for improvements 

to their roads. Constant problems and a lack of respect is 

wearing down on people’s patience. These people are 

Saskatchewan people. These pay licence fees, taxes, and they 

pay repairs to automobiles and the cost of transportation of 

people and goods. 

 

Mr. Minister, I consider myself a responsible politician and 

would never promote civil disobedience. However, if you 

continue to ignore these roads and continue to ignore northern 

people and continue to hold the line on repairs to northern 

roads, the people of the north-west will eventually rise up and 

demand that these trails be replaced with decent roads. 

 

Will the minister, in light of this potentially serious problem 

and backlash in the North, prepare to commit to put more 

resources and finally repair the roads of northern Saskatchewan 

to an acceptable level? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for that 

question, especially today because you see, Mr. Speaker, last 

Thursday I had the opportunity to go to Meadow Lake and meet 

with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council and talk to the people of 

Turner Lake and Dillon and Waterhen about their road 

conditions and about their concerns about the road conditions. 

 

Certainly northern Saskatchewan is a priority for this 

government, as I explained to the member opposite. If he takes 

a look at what this government has done in its four years in 

office, the Cumberland bridge is one example. The road to 

Grandmother’s Bay, an area that had no access at all for the  

community of Grandmother’s Bay now have access to the rest 

of the province. We’re working with the federal government 

and INAC (Indian and Northern Affairs Canada) on the 

Athabasca road, giving access to the people in the Athabasca 

region. We are committed to the North, Mr. Speaker, but funds 

are limited, so we can only do so much at a time and our 

commitment remains that way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 91  An Act to amend 

The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 

move first reading of a Bill respecting Elections. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1996. The 

proposed amendment removes from the Act the list of the 

judicial centres in the province which are required to have a 

resident Queen’s Bench judge. The list will instead be set out in 

the regulations. 

 

The Department of Justice is always monitoring the case-loads 

at court offices in the province. In times of fiscal restraint, we 

must consider how best to provide access to court, and at the 

same time ensure effective and efficient use of resources. 

Several factors must be taken into account in determining where 

judicial and associated resources can best be utilized throughout 

the province. Some of these factors are: changes in the crime 

rate, usage of the court for civil cases, changing demographics, 

technology changes, modern practices in justice, and proximity 

and access to other justice services. 

 

If the list of court-houses is moved from the Act to the 

regulations, the government will have more flexibility in 

making these difficult decisions about the use of our courts in 

Saskatchewan. 

 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Queen’s Bench Act. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 

the opportunity to speak with respect to Bill 88 here this 

afternoon, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, readily recognizable, what this government’s 

modus operandi has become, is it comes providing necessary 

services to Saskatchewan residents living outside of our major 

urban centres. Virtually since it was sworn into power, this 

government has begun a strategic and continuous reduction in 

the vital services to our rural communities. 

 

I believe that Bill 88 is simply another step in the course this 

government has so clearly decided to adopt. Under the old Bill, 

it was specifically spelled out where Queen’s Bench judges 

were to reside; not coincidentally, the communities listed were 

those that had a Queen’s Bench court. Of course, the 

government in its wisdom has seen fit to begin closing 

court-houses in the province. Therefore those communities that 

will soon lose their court-houses are no longer listed in the Act. 

Instead this amendment simply states that wherever there is a 

Queen’s Bench court a judge must reside in that community. 

 

It’s obvious to see what the government’s intention is with this 

Bill. Obviously this piece of legislation makes it much easier 

for the government to close court-houses across the province, 

since the communities that have such services are no longer 

spelled out in the legislation. So far two of our communities in 

rural areas have been notified their court-houses are on this 

government’s busy chopping block. The citizens of Melville 

and Kerrobert will no longer have access to a Court of Queen’s 

Bench in their community as this government moves to limit yet 

another service outside of the city of Regina. 

 

Clearly it is the government’s intention with this amendment to 

close even more court-houses across the province. Our party 

has very serious concerns about this action. Our concerns are 

heightened ever further as we see other government offices 

closed in these communities. 

 

According to our numbers the Melville court-house is not even 

close to being under-used when compared to other 

communities, yet it’s gone. And residents of Kerrobert will now 

have to drive great distances in order to access the legal system. 

How many more of these court-houses are going to be given 

death sentences? It’s anybody’s guess. But I would be willing to 

bet this government will not stop at just these two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we feel these closures are wrong but it fits very 

nicely into this government’s game plan. They don’t vote for 

the NDP so the government abandons them. We’ve come to be 

very used to the cynical, politically motivated tactics of the 

NDP government. 

 

And from the looks of this Bill it doesn’t appear they’re going 

to change their ways any time soon. Mr. Speaker, rural residents 

have had to suffer through the indignity of seeing their health 

care services gutted. More and more of our smaller 

communities are losing their schools. 

And because of the government’s lack of commitment to 

economic development in rural Saskatchewan our towns and 

villages are losing people and businesses on a greater scale 

every day. That of course doesn’t faze this government in the 

least. In fact they seem to welcome the depopulation of rural 

Saskatchewan because it makes it easier for them politically. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, is that the way to govern a province? Since 

coming to this House as a member I’ve constantly been alarmed 

by this government’s lack of compassion and understanding of 

anything that occurs beyond the borders of Regina or 

Saskatoon. And how I wish that were just political rhetoric. 

 

But it isn’t, Mr. Speaker. All the members on this side of the 

House are horrified by the constant drubbing rural 

Saskatchewan takes because of this government’s policies. This 

latest move to make it easier for the Minister of Justice to order 

the closure of court-houses is just another link in this unbroken 

chain  a chain that hits rural residents across the face daily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve tried over and over to wake this 

government up, to try and get this urban-centred cabinet to 

realize what they are doing and that they are wrong in doing it. 

Unfortunately Bill 88 shows quite strongly that they are not 

willing to listen to us or listen to the people who live in those 

communities most affected by the government’s cynical 

political moves. 

 

We’ll have much more to say on the Bill after we’ve discussed 

it with various stakeholders and have received various legal 

opinions. But, Mr. Speaker, before I move for adjournment on 

Bill 88, I once again beg all members on that side of the House 

to take a second look at rural Saskatchewan. There’s still a lot 

of vitality and life outside of the boundaries of this city. 

 

Please don’t give up on rural Saskatchewan and for goodness’ 

sake don’t hesitate. Don’t hasten its demise through your 

reckless actions. Please don’t let politics dictate every decision 

you make from here on in. 

 

The government is a government for all of the people of the 

province, not only those who have voted for you. And I hope all 

the members on that side of the House, especially those who 

represent rural areas, will keep that in mind when they stand in 

the House and blindly and silently vote in favour of the Bills 

this urban-centred cabinet puts in front of them. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would move the House adjourn debate 

on Bill 88. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Dependants’ Relief Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Under The Dependants’ Relief Act, applications may be made 

to challenge wills which make inadequate provision for 

dependants. If an application is successful, a judge may order 

that an allowance be paid to the dependant out of the estate.  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

The definition of dependant in the Act includes testators, 

dependent adult sons or daughters who are unable to earn their 

livelihoods because of mental or physical disabilities. 

 

Presently, except for a $1,500 exemption under the 

Saskatchewan assistance regulations, court-ordered allowances 

are offset against social assistance until they are consumed. The 

quality of life of the dependent adult is therefore not 

significantly enhanced by the dependants’ relief award. 

 

Inheritance money in excess of $1,500 is also offset against 

social assistance. However, to ensure that their dependent adult 

sons or daughters benefit from their inheritances, many parents 

now set up discretionary trusts in their wills. Such trusts give 

trustees discretion in making payments to dependent adult 

beneficiaries. By use of discretionary trusts, parents ensure that 

inheritances are used to enhance the quality of life of dependent 

adult sons or daughters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Dependants’ Relief Amendment Act, 1996 

will help to level the playing-field for dependent adults whose 

parents have not provided for them in their wills. It will allow a 

court to order the establishment of a trust for a dependent adult. 

This trust will not be offset against social assistance. 

 

The trust will be used to improve the adult’s life. It will allow 

him or her to enjoy benefits similar to those enjoyed by 

dependent adults whose parents have set up discretionary trusts 

in their wills. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, the trust will be used to help the 

dependant become more independent. It will be used to meet 

his or her special needs. It will provide occasional gifts to the 

dependant. 

 

The amendment provides that the Public Trustee may be 

appointed as trustee. The Public Trustee will be appointed only 

where there is no other suitable trustee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the circumstances of adults with disabilities who 

are unable to earn their livelihoods on a long-term basis are 

different from those of other members of society on assistance. 

These individuals will never be able, on their own, to improve 

their quality of life. The financial needs of these members of 

society are often great. Providing for those needs has come to 

be seen as a shared community and family responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Dependants’ Relief Amendment Act, 1996 

ensures that this joint family and community responsibility is 

fairly balanced. The amendment authorizes the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to limit the size of a trust by regulation. 

This will allow the use of some inheritance money to replace 

social assistance in some cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Dependants’ Relief Act 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Dependants’ 

Relief Amendment Act sets out new rules dealing with wills  

and estates. Now if I had a creative imagination, I could conjure 

up all sorts of situations not unlike a night-time soap opera. The 

parameters of the Bill create visions of rich kids fighting over 

their father’s estate which he willed to his young, new girlfriend 

who only married him for his money. It would make for a 

decent movie-of-the-week, although I admit it’s a bit of a 

cliché. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the fact is these battles aren’t just for the rich 

and famous. There are logical reasons that children may want to 

challenge a will and they don’t necessarily include rich fathers 

and young girlfriends. Sometimes children just don’t have the 

means to survive and they need the extra income for their basic 

needs. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the amendments the government has 

proposed in this Bill will have implications on everyday people 

who are forced to deal with the serious issue of estate 

settlement. Mr. Speaker, Bill 89 defines the guidelines for 

dependent children who disagree with the division of their 

parents’ estate. Although most children accept their parents’ 

wishes, there are some cases where the will is either not 

practical or unacceptable. 

 

In some instances, there is no will to work with. According to 

this legislation, if there is no will, the surviving spouse gets the 

first $100,000 clear, and then one-third of the rest. The 

remaining two-thirds is split equally among the children. If 

there is only one child, the spouse gets half of the rest, and the 

child gets the other half. 

 

(1430) 

 

This Bill deals with dependants who want more than the will 

provides. Current legislation allows dependent children to go to 

court to ask for a larger share and allows the courts to decide 

whether the child will receive more. 

 

If this Bill is passed, the courts will have another power open to 

them. They will be able to order an estate to pay an allowance 

to a trust fund for the dependent child for specified purposes 

such as helping the child to achieve independence; secondly, 

meeting special needs of the child; thirdly, allowing for 

occasional gifts to him or her; or finally, any combinations of 

the above. 

 

The court is also directed to consider any money the child is 

receiving from the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. However it 

clearly states that the capital and income of the trust fund is not 

to be taken into consideration when determining whether a 

dependent child is entitled to benefits under the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan. From my understanding, this means that this 

trust fund will not disentitle the person to a regular allowance 

under the assistance plan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Bill seems relatively straightforward. 

From my initial readings of the Bill, there seems to be little 

political involvement in the decisions. And that has me a little 

worried. Almost every piece of legislation that passes through 

this House is giving more authority to the NDP government. I 

have to wonder; am I missing something here? Where is the  



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

government control in the Bill? I’m sure it has to be there, but it 

is buried so deep that by the time I pick it out, it too will be too 

late. I certainly hope not. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would still like to gather a few 

opinions on the changes the government has brought forward in 

Bill No. 89. Still, as I just mentioned, it seems relatively 

straightforward. Although I do have some questions for the 

Minister of Justice, but I can wait until we have a chance to 

discuss them in committee. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 90  An Act to amend 

The Provincial Mediation Board Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Provincial Mediation Board Amendment 

Act, 1996. 

 

The federal Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act establishes 

provisions for the orderly payment of debts. These provisions 

enable a person facing personal debt problems to apply to the 

clerk of the appropriate court for a consolidation order. The 

court can make the order arranging for payments to each of the 

creditors. 

 

In some cases, because of the types of debts they have, it is not 

appropriate for debtors to participate in the orderly payment of 

debts process outlined in the federal legislation. In these cases, 

the Provincial Mediation Board is available to establish debt 

payment options. 

 

The debt mediation program offered by the board is completely 

voluntary for both debtors and creditors. In the past five years, 

this program has recovered more than $500,000 per year for 

creditors. Creditors that participate in orderly payment of debt 

plans administered through federal bankruptcy legislation are 

required to pay a fee of 10 per cent of the monies collected. 

 

This amendment will enable regulations to be made to establish 

and set fees for collection of debts through our provincial debt 

mediation program. The regulations will provide for a 10 per 

cent levy on creditors participating in payment plans 

administered through the program. Those creditors will pay 10 

per cent of monies collected when the service is rendered and 

the monies are collected. 

 

We believe the debt mediation program is viewed by both 

debtors and creditors as providing a useful and effective 

service. The 10 per cent fee will contribute to the cost of 

providing this service. The proposal is expected to result in 

additional revenue in 1996-97 of $20,000. It is estimated that 

these fees will eventually generate enough revenue to cover 

one-third of the estimated cost of the debt mediation program. 

 

Another amendment requires the Provincial Mediation Board to 

prepare and submit annual reports and financial statements to 

the Minister of Justice so that they can be tabled in the 

Legislative Assembly. As a matter of practice, this already  

occurs, thus this change simply makes the legislation consistent 

with the practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Provincial Mediation Board Act. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased to 

take some time today to discuss legislation that deals with the 

Provincial Mediation Board, a long-time Saskatchewan 

institution which has several roles in settling disputes between 

financial institutions and their clients. 

 

The role that is dealt with in the Bill deals with negotiation 

agreements between debtors and creditors. I understand that in 

situations where the board has successfully mediated a dispute, 

the board will now have the authority to charge for the 

mediation services that have been used in settling the dispute in 

question. The amount of the fees to be collected will be set out 

in regulations. I would like to know why an important part of an 

amendment will be left to be determined through the 

regulations. Why doesn’t the government give us some idea of 

the amount of the fees that will be charged? 

 

Once again it seems that the government is trying to avoid 

debate on a crucial part of an amendment. This is another 

example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of governing through regulation. 

This Bill lacks clarity with regards to these fees. It is not clear if 

creditors will be legally bound to pay the mediation fees. This 

Bill merely states that the board will have the power to request 

that the fees be paid by creditors. What is the purpose of this 

amendment if creditors do not have a legal obligation to pay the 

fees? 

 

The other change in the Bill concerns accountability of the 

Provincial Mediation Board. I am pleased to see that, through 

this amendment, the board will have to submit an annual report 

on its finances and business affairs for each fiscal year. Annual 

financial statements must also be submitted. Because the 

Mediation Board is a public office, it is in fact important that 

the public be allowed to scrutinize the board’s finances and 

affairs. It is also important to know what the Provincial 

Mediation Board is costing taxpayers and to see how that 

money is being used. I wish the government would consider 

making similar legislative changes to other publicly funded 

bodies. 

 

I’m hoping that the minister can address some of these 

questions, and others, concerning the regulations and the 

legality of the mediation fees in Committee of the Whole. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 47  An Act 

to amend The Agri-Food Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we’ve already raised several concerns, not 

only about this Bill itself but about agriculture in general. These 

concerns are still very valid. Agriculture is a key sector of our 

economy and of the culture of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can’t look at this Bill as an isolated piece of 

legislation. Instead, we must tie it to the overall picture of 

farming in our province. True, this Bill will have an impact on 

the thousands of grain farmers, livestock producers, and 

vegetable growers in this province, but it’ll also have an effect 

on the further processing and marketing industries. In other 

words, this Bill has the potential to affect a major industry and 

we cannot pass it off without some serious discussions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers deserve respect and 

recognition. They are innovative risk takers who have continued 

to adapt their farming and livestock practices to new 

technology. And it’s not easy. They deal with long winters, 

early frosts, disease, insects, and equipment failures. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the acts of God that frustrate 

farmers. Sometimes the Acts of government are just as bad, if 

not worse. Then again, what can we expect from a government 

that has no commitment to rural Saskatchewan or to 

agriculture? Why would we begin to hope that their 

commitment goes deeper than feel-good statements printed on 

glossy paper, like Agriculture 2000 and the Partnership for 

Growth? They’ve given farmers and livestock producers no 

reason to believe them in the past five years, so why start 

believing them now? 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say they want to help 

farmers. But what they say and what they mean are not 

necessarily one and the same. What about the oppressive taxes 

they slap on farmers, making it so much harder to compete with 

Alberta and Manitoba? 

 

For example, the government charges PST (provincial sales tax) 

on new equipment. When we’re talking about machines worth 

hundreds of thousands of dollars, that means producers are 

forced to tack on an extra 9 per cent out of their own pockets to 

cover the provincial sales tax. What kind of incentive is that for 

producers to stay in Saskatchewan? 

 

It’s an easy answer, Mr. Speaker. For some unknown reason 

this government either doesn’t understand or chooses to ignore 

the core relation between their poor economic planning and the 

economy of this province. We have gone from free-spending, 

self-serving policies of the Tories to the mixed-up, urban-based 

priorities of the NDP. Either way, the producers in this province 

have had to deal with bad government for many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s why I feel that we must go through the 

changes proposed in the agri-food amendment so carefully. We  

are particularly concerned about changes affecting 

producer-elected boards. Although we believe that boards must 

be held accountable for the way they spend research and 

development funds, we want to make sure that this Bill does not 

create more bureaucratic red tape. With this government, that’s 

almost a given. So we will be posing some questions about 

these changes and what it means for producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also noted that this Bill may be a way for 

the government to download responsibility while still holding 

the controlling power. What else could we think? So far it’s 

been this NDP government strategy with funding to 

municipalities, to boards of education, and to health boards. 

Pass the buck when it comes to responsibility, but don’t let go 

of the purse-strings. I wonder if this is what the Premier had in 

mind when he produced the government propaganda  it’s 

“The Saskatchewan Way”. It’s certainly the NDP way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have some concerns about this Bill, but we 

would like our answers addressed in the Committee of Whole 

and therefore we will not further delay the moving of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 48  An Act 

to amend The Animal Identification Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve 

already had a chance to speak on The Animal Identification 

Amendment Act. We’ve listed some of the positive aspects of 

the Bill and brought forward some of our concerns. Whether the 

government is willing to listen to these concerns is quite 

another matter, but we will continue to question them on behalf 

of the people that this Bill will affect. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, after talking with livestock producers, and 

particularly with cattle ranchers, we believe that this Bill does 

address some of the concerns they have with marks and brands. 

For example, current legislation limits a brand’s eligibility to a 

four-year period, and it would appear to be a more of a practical 

aspect of the Bill to allow for registration of brands for a longer 

period of time. 

 

This Bill proposes a change which would allow for lifetime 

brands as well as four-year brands. And in the case of 

corporations, a lifetime mark will expire on the 20th 

anniversary of the registration or when the corporation ceases to 

exist. 

 

We are happy to see that the government finally seems to be 

following through on at least one commitment to a family farm 

in the instance where many family farms do wish to continue 

the registration of their brands and pass these on to their next 

generations. And because a brand can be passed on in a family  



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

operation, it would save a bit of hassle. 

 

That is a pleasant surprise, because typically the government’s 

legislation creates more hassle for the people of this province. I 

just hope there’s no hidden bureaucracies to overcome if the 

Bill is passed into law. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, these changes seem to be beneficial to 

livestock producers. We’ll raise any questions or concerns we 

have about this section of the Bill when it reaches the 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Bill also revamps the procedure an 

inspector must follow when he or she wants to make an 

inspection. Unlike the Bill to amend The Power Corporation 

Act, at least in this Act the inspector must get the permission of 

the occupant. Maybe it was just an oversight on the part of the 

NDP government and they’ve actually missed an opportunity to 

grab further control. 

 

In fact the Bill even specifies that an inspector must now have a 

judge or a justice of the peace authorize the seizure of property. 

In the current legislation, the inspector is not bound by such 

guidelines. Hopefully we will be able to clarify this when the 

government answers our questions in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve just said, we approve of some of the 

changes brought forward in the Bill and we will continue to talk 

to our constituents and to others who may have some concerns. 

But at this time, I move that the Bill move forward to the 

Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 60  An Act 

to amend The Crop Insurance Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is no question 

that Saskatchewan’s crop insurance policies are in desperate 

need of change. The question is whether or not the amendment 

proposed within Bill 60 will help accomplish positive change. 

 

For years Saskatchewan farmers have complained about 

Saskatchewan crop insurance programs. They say that the 

current programs do not meet their needs, especially in these 

tough fiscal times. They say the premiums are too high and the 

pay-outs for claims are much too small. 

 

I don’t think the government has to look any further than last 

year’s statistics on crop insurance to see the farmers’ 

dissatisfaction with the program. During the peak years of 1991 

to 1992, Saskatchewan farmers insured about 28 million acres 

of crop. But during the last crop year, only about 18 million 

acres were insured. I think farmers were reluctant to sign up for 

a program that was so complicated and terribly confusing. 

 

This government’s fiasco over the administration of the gross 

revenue insurance plan is just one reason farmers were 

discouraged and continue to be. The confusion over GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) overpayments is another 

major reason. After all, farmers should be able to believe in 

their government’s promises. 

 

I am pleased to see that the government is finally taking some 

time to consult with farmers about the upcoming changes to the 

crop insurance plan. Now all I hope is that it listens to what 

farmers are suggesting. It’s too bad the government did not 

consult the farmers before it cut 154 crop insurance marketing 

positions. 

 

I would like to remind the government that the farmers are the 

clients of the crop insurance programs. If it plans to help turn 

around Saskatchewan Crop Insurance’s dismal financial record, 

it must make sure the new programs are accessible to producers 

across the province. 

 

Fortunately grain prices are once again on the rise. 

Saskatchewan farmers desperately need the income. But this 

also means that the premium structure of the crop insurance 

programs must be evaluated. 

 

The amendment outlined in section 11 of this Bill will give the 

Minister of Agriculture more control over the amount of 

funding the province will provide for the crop insurance 

program. The change proposed in this legislation says the 

minister will have to consider the premiums paid by farmers, 

the needs of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, and 

the appropriate share of the cost of providing the program. 

 

What does concern me a little bit about this amendment is that 

the amount of provincial funding allocated for the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance will not need to be published 

through an order in council. This government should be 

accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, so I am concerned 

about the amount of unchecked power the amendment will give 

the Minister of Agriculture and Food. 

 

As I have mentioned, farmers are pushing for changes to the 

structure of the program. But this amendment does not provide 

any indication about the government’s long-term plan for 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. It makes me wonder if the 

government does indeed have a long-term plan. Hopefully the 

minister and his aides will be able to answer some of the many 

questions we have on behalf of Saskatchewan farmers when we 

discuss Bill 60 in Committee of the Whole. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 

 

The Chair:  Before we get started, I’ll invite the minister to 

introduce his officials. 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right 

is Mr. Dave Abbey, manager of legislation and safety, 

Department of Highways; and Al Popoff, project director, 

transport safety. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, Mr. 

Minister, welcome to yourself and to your officials to this 

particular part of the estimates . . . or the Bill. 

 

I was going to ask you, just in terms of some of the consultation 

that you did have with the various groups, could you name the 

groups? I noticed you had trappers’ groups. You had 

snowmobile manufacturers. You’ve had aboriginal groups. 

What groups were all involved in the discussion on this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member for the 

question. The people that were represented on the committee 

were the snowmobile association, the RCMP (Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police), the Saskatchewan Safety Council, industry, 

the trappers’ association, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 

Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management, the 

Department of Highways, the Highway Traffic Board, the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. We had an 

individual that was a snowmobiler that was outside of the 

association; the Red Cross. And that were the groups that were 

involved in the committee consultation. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  In this committee that you spoke about, how 

often did this committee meet and where? I think that the key 

thing here I’m trying to get at is certainly, you know, the need 

for safety in any area is very apparent, especially when it comes 

to children and snowmobiles. 

 

But really, how long did you have your meetings? And the key 

thing is the groups, and I’m talking about aboriginal groups and 

trappers’ groups. You know, there’s a wide-ranging, you know, 

list of different aboriginal groups and trappers’ groups. I’m just 

curious as to which specific groups you discussed this with. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well to the member opposite, we had a 

member of the trappers association sit on the committee. The 

committee had three meetings: in Regina on March 27; Prince 

Albert May 4; and Melfort June 23. Most committee members 

were able to attend all the meetings but I can’t tell you exactly 

which one attended which meeting. 

 

And so the snowmobile association  very concerned about 

safety  played, you know, a major role in getting the group 

together and certainly is very interested in snowmobile safety, 

primarily I think because of the number of fatalities over the 

last couple of years. 

 

And I think the other thing to realize is that snowmobiling is 

becoming quite popular, more popular every year. There’s more 

snow toboggans now in the province. It’s becoming a great 

family sport. But not only that, its use in northern 

Saskatchewan, for an example, with trapping and fishing and 

hunting and just a mode of transportation is also very important. 

Mr. Belanger:  Part of the reasons I’ve asked for the amount 

of meetings and which groups that you’ve had, again going 

back to the point that safety is something that’s very  well as 

you know  is certainly needed. 

 

I’m just looking at a lot of these headlines here  the 

Star-Phoenix of January 30, “Snowmobile deaths sky-rocket.” 

Again on February 9, “Snowmobiling collision kills one,” and 

“Safety rules tightened for snowmobile riders.” Now it lists . . . 

goes on and on and on. And certainly snowmobile safety is 

needed. 

 

However, one of the problems that we have is under the Prince 

Albert Herald of January 30. The laws here do come under fire. 

And one of the people that’s with the Saskatchewan 

Snowmobile Association, and in fact I think is the chairperson, 

explained that they’re not strict enough; there should be tougher 

rules and more enforcement. Are you aware of what tougher 

rules and more enforcement that she is asking you to implement 

with this new Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  My understanding, Mr. Chairman, is that 

the person in question is asking for enforcement of existing 

regulations, and certainly supportive of the new Act, that young 

people under the age of 16 do receive mandatory training. 

 

This will eventually work through the system. It’s a lot like, I 

think, firearm safety in this province where young people 

receive firearm training. And it sort of builds through the 

system to now; I would say that the majority of Saskatchewan 

people that use firearms have indeed taken a firearm safety 

course. Well this is the hope of the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 

Association, that at some point in time everyone has taken a 

snowmobile safety course, and that’s the reason for mandatory 

training for people that are under 16 years of age. 

 

The other thing of course is helmets. Helmets are very 

important, and in most cases helmets are used. But in certain 

instances I think, whether it’s just something that’s forgotten 

about or what the case might be . . . but certainly mandatory 

helmets is another area that the snowmobile association 

promotes and believe very strongly that in fact it will reduce 

injury and indeed fatalities. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Was there a particular cost to these three 

meetings? And again, going back to numbers, how many people 

were at these meetings  10, 15, 20, 25? And was there any 

cost to the Saskatchewan government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member opposite. First 

of all, the department informs me that there are about a dozen 

people at each of these meetings. The cost included the space 

that would have been needed for the meeting, the travel for the 

department people, and of course meals for the committee 

members. But there was no per diem paid to any of the 

members on the committee. It was all volunteer from each of 

the groups that I had mentioned earlier. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, and I think that, you know, they 

should be commended for that effort because certainly every bit 

of volunteer help that any government can get in designing  



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

these type of Acts is certainly appreciated. 

 

The other question I have is when you look at the provision . . . 

and I’ll jump again going on to the stats. When somebody 

operates a snowmobile . . . Suppose I own a snowmobile and I 

lent it to my 12-year-old daughter who hasn’t got a licence, and 

then she runs into another snowmobiler that’s fully licensed and 

of course following all the rules. How does the liability 

coverage affect me and/or the other person? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member opposite. 

Section 38 of The Snowmobile Act reads: 

 

The owner of a snowmobile is liable for a contravention of 

any provision of this Act or the regulations or any order or 

bylaw made under this Act in connection with the 

operation of the snowmobile unless he proves that at the 

time of the offence the snowmobile was not being operated 

by him nor by any other person with his consent. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So again, the question . . . you know, I’m a 

bit confused by the answer. So if my daughter, whom I loan my 

ski-doo to, were to hit somebody, then the responsibility would 

be mine in terms of the costs or the damages incurred to the 

other vehicle or to the other snowmobile as well as mine. Is that 

how that works? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That’s right. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Again going back to the Act here, I’m a bit 

confused here when it talks about item no. (3), existing 

provision, subsection (4) where it talks about: 

 

. . . any person who has not attained the age of 16 years but 

is of the age of 12 years or more, if accompanied on a 

snowmobile by a person who is not less than 16 years of 

age and who holds a subsisting driver’s licence by the 

administrator, or is accompanied or supervised by such a 

person, who holds a drivers licence, on another 

snowmobile, may, subject to subsection (5) operate a 

snowmobile that is required to be registered by this Act. 

 

What that is saying to me is that a 12-year-old child can indeed 

drive a snowmobile if he or she has a person with him that has a 

driver’s licence or has completed his course. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, that’s correct under the existing 

provisions, but the new provisions will make it mandatory that 

the 12-year-old has a training course. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Is there a specific age in which your 

department has kind of drawn the line by saying, no, we’ll not 

let an 8-year-old or a 10-year-old drive or operate a snowmobile 

even if that 8- or 10-year-old has taken the necessary safety 

courses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  On public property the age limit is 12 

years old. On private property there is not a lot of control. We 

have no control on private property. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Again, going on this Bill, has there been any  

stats that would suggest that the younger people are creating 

most of the problem, or is it older people, or is it the poor safety 

rules, or is it the alcohol factor? Like what kind of stats do you 

have that would support this type of Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  In this last year, they tended . . . well 

actually the age where the fatalities occurred varied from 20 to 

63. So they tended to be, I guess, not the 12- to 16-year-olds. 

And I haven’t got last year’s statistics with me, but I would 

think that they may show a younger age. 

 

But that’s why it’s very important to start this training program 

when they’re young, so that when they are 20 and 30 and 40 

years old that they would have had some training on 

snowmobile use and hopefully that would stick with the 

operator of a snowmobile and indeed improve safety. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, at this point in time there are 

sometimes . . . I don’t know if it’s the case, but there are many 

people that do have . . . that maybe 15 . . . I think maybe even 

14 years of age that are allowed to have a class 7 driver’s 

licence, which is a learner’s licence. Would that qualify them to 

operate a snowmobile on their own, even if they’re only 15? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No, they are not. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, this takes us to the other thing about 

the northern part of the province. Again I commend the effort 

and the consultation of the groups involved. When you look at 

the particular challenges of northern Saskatchewan where the 

Bill doesn’t really clamp down in terms of, you know, the age 

factor because as you’re probably aware, Mr. Minister, in 

northern Saskatchewan there is a lot of young people, many as 

young as 10 years old, 11, 12 years old, that assist in their 

grandfather or father in trapping as well as fishing. 

 

And obviously with this type of Act, you know, we’re going to 

have to look at that particular problem, and I think the safety 

aspect  nobody’s arguing with it  I think safety is a 

necessary rule we all have to follow. But in terms of the cost of 

such a program and such a course, is there any costs involved, 

and if there is costs, who’s delivering the training and who 

covers these costs? 

 

And again I go back in my provision, back home you have some 

as young as 10, 11 years old that are helping their grandfather 

out. It’s just there’s nobody else to help them. So could you 

give me your input on some of those points.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well at this point in time the cost, the 

course cost, is $25 for non-members. And the course is given 

by the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association who have 78 

new and 25 previous certified instructors located in Fort 

Qu’Appelle, West Bend, Regina, Kelliher, Weyburn, Estevan, 

Flin Flon, Saskatoon, Choiceland, Foam Lake, Rocanville, 

Lumsden, Cupar, Stoughton, Ituna, Melville, Prince Albert, 

Kelvington, Hudson Bay, Nipawin, Codette, Christopher Lake, 

Fond-du-Lac, Candle Lake, Kamsack, Weyburn, and Glen 

Ewen at this point in time. 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

Mr. Belanger:  Are those at the places that have certified 

instructors in terms of safety? Is that what you’re just pointing 

out? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, as of the end of March of 1996, 

that’s the communities that have a certified instructor that lives 

within that community. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess over the communities in northern 

Saskatchewan, we’re talking about Camsell Portage, we’re 

talking about Patuanak; we’re talking about Fond-du-Lac and 

all these communities that are way out in the middle of 

nowhere. They’re isolated and certainly this could pose a major 

challenge for them. 

 

Again we’re not talking about the safety aspect but in terms of 

accessing the safety course and the necessary requirement. In 

particular the fact that many young kids help their grandparents 

and parents with fishing and trapping and generally just 

transporting them around the lakes and what not. This could 

pose a serious challenge for them. 

 

Are you prepared to commit to something in terms of ensuring 

that these communities that are in the middle of nowhere, that 

are far removed and isolated from the rest of Saskatchewan, 

have the same opportunity to participate in a course of this 

nature to ensure that they have proper coverage and proper 

safety? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The snowmobile association is certainly 

aware of the unique needs of the North and they have trained in 

Fond-du-Lac and Stony Rapids area and certainly are looking at 

the situation in all of the North  north-west, north-central, 

and north-east  and we’ll have to plan that. But their 

intentions certainly are to get up there, to have trained 

instructors in order to be able to complete this program. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  What plans are you planning on using to 

advise the people, because many of them of course . . . some of 

them only speak Cree, many of them speak Dene, and some of 

the young kids still aren’t fully aware of the law and all the 

requirements of law. I’m just trying to see how convenient it is 

for somebody say in Camsell Portage who has never had a 

licence, who’s driven a ski-doo for four or five years, and the 

person’s 15 years old. All of a sudden how will he become 

aware of the need to have his safety ticket and where would he 

go for training and how would all the costs be covered on this? 

These are some of the things that have to be particularly 

addressed pretty quick. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, it’s my 

understanding that the snowmobile association will be looking 

after that. They will be letting the communities know when 

courses are available in their particular community and certainly 

are taking the major responsibility in this Act in promoting 

safety and, for certain, looking after the training program. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Can I perhaps further suggest that you use 

the local radio stations in northern Saskatchewan and also the 

regional broadcasting corporation, which is the Missinipe  

Broadcasting Corporation, and they of course broadcast to most 

northern communities, both in Cree and in Dene, to explain to 

them the need for the changes; to explain to them the processes 

involved with being certified and also who will be responsible 

for making sure these young people do have licences and do 

have training and where they could contact or where they can 

phone if they do run into any particular problems. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I thank the member for that comment 

because certainly that’s very, very important. I know local and 

regional radio in the North is very, very important. And we will 

make recommendations and work with the snowmobile 

association to make sure that that happens. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Going back to the North versus the South  

not versus, but in comparison to  has there been many 

significant accidents as a result of the poor rules and the lax 

safety regulations in northern Saskatchewan versus southern 

Saskatchewan? I imagine the proportion in the South is a heck 

of a lot more. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The fatalities this year have been two in 

the North and five in the South; of the seven. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that recognition, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Minister, a couple of questions and concerns 

around the section 15 that you have proposed in the amended 

Bill. You refer to that: “. . . a snowmobile that is required by 

this Act to be registered . . .” and I note that the Act itself does 

not involve any changes to registration. Could you review what 

are the exemptions for being able to drive a non-registered 

snowmobile? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  A non-registered snowmobile can be 

driven on private property. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Is it an offence then, Mr. Minister, for a 

non-registered snowmobile to be travelling along the side of the 

highway, in the right of ways? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes it is. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Why type of education is your department 

looking at in terms of providing to owners of snowmobiles? 

Because I know, in having been in the insurance industry 

before, many people will come in and say that they are not 

required to license their snowmobiles because they’re operating 

it on the farm. Yet I know that the people were involved in 

snowmobile rallies and raising funds by driving snowmobile 

trails where they have crossed public highways, where they 

have travelled for a distance along the right of ways. 

 

Is there a program that the snowmobile association, in 

conjunction with your department, is working in terms of trying 

to educate not only the potential snowmobile owner but maybe 

even the insurance agencies that are out there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you to the member opposite. 

There’s certainly some pamphlets out. SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) have a pamphlet in regards to The 

Snowmobile Act. The snowmobile safety course, the  



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association have a pamphlet out 

with a toll-free number that’s included in that. The snowmobile 

association also has the Saskatchewan snowmobile safety 

training program that’s available. 

 

And if the member opposite would like any of that information, 

I would be more than happy to send some information to him. 

 

The Chair:  Order. Before I recognize the hon. member, I 

just want to remind the minister in particular about the use of 

exhibits in the legislature. You were reasonably close to using 

that as . . . and I just remind all members not to use exhibits. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My concern 

about that, Mr. Minister, is not necessarily for my benefit do I 

want the information. I’m wondering about whether that 

information is being provided by the snowmobile association to 

insurance agencies, not necessarily SGI, but any insurance 

agency out there who might be passing on information. And 

that’s the point that I was trying to make. 

 

Mr. Minister, last week the minister responsible for SGI 

released statistical information regarding traffic accidents and 

alcohol, use of alcohol, and the number of accidents that were 

involved. It didn’t break down concerns through the 

snowmobile industry. I wonder if you have any information as 

to how many accidents involve alcohol, whether this is a 

concern of the snowmobile industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  In last year’s fatalities alcohol was likely 

involved in over half of the fatalities. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  That, Mr. Minister, I guess is appalling, in my 

categorization. I’m wondering, when we look at accidents 

involving vehicles, you know, non-snowmobile, we look at the 

statistic of the number of accidents, and the figures that were 

released last week showed that the incidence of course was 

much higher in that category of 16 to 24 years of age. Is that the 

same kind of thing that you’re seeing within those snowmobile 

accidents that you have reported? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  As I mentioned earlier, the fatalities last 

year varied between the age of 20 and 63. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  So there were no injuries in anyone under the 

age of 20? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  This is fatalities and I don’t how many 

injuries there were and whether alcohol were related in any of 

those injuries. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, thank you. You talk about the . . . sort 

of the wishes . . . The broad goals of the snowmobile 

association would be of course that everyone takes a safety 

course. And you identified regions or communities where there 

are qualified instructors. 

 

When we look at gun safety courses across the province, and I 

think the leaders of ensuring that that course has been offered 

have been wildlife federations’ presidents. 

 

Do you see a similar plan being put into place across the 

province to ensure that those people not identified in any of the 

communities that you have identified would be able to take a 

course through some local association? What is the long-term 

plan of the snowmobile association? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, certainly I do and the 

Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association have been very active. I 

know in my community where there is no instructor, certainly 

the snowmobile association has still gone into that community 

and provided a training course. So they’re very willing to do 

that. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I think one of 

my final questions, if I could refer you to the second page of the 

Bill under regulations, section 41, specifically, clause (f), 

41(1)(f) when regulations may exempt any snowmobile or any 

category of snowmobiles. Could you give me an example or 

more than one example as to what would fall into this category 

of actually being exempted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We have no example of where it may be 

and we believe that it’s never been used. It was in the existing 

Act and just carried forward. But we have no idea of maybe an 

example where it might be used. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Minister, if a 

person wants to purchase a snowmobile in Alberta, before they 

can licence it, is it a requirement that the provincial sales tax be 

paid on that machine? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, it would have to be paid. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, one of the comments that I’ve had 

in regard to the snowmobile issue is that many individuals are 

purchasing quad-runners and using them in very similar ways as 

snowmobiles in the wintertime for recreation, for some 

utilitarian work on the farm. But because of the design of these 

things now, they’re actually using them on snowmobile trails 

and in many ways as substitutes for snowmobiles. 

 

Would the same regulations apply, or is there any thought of 

putting these quad-runners under the same general legislation as 

snowmobiles? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  ATVs (all-terrain vehicle) are covered 

under a separate Act, and I believe that Act was brought in in 

1988. It’s very similar to this Act and includes training, 

includes helmets, and in fact is maybe even a bit stricter in that 

it deals with immediate family only. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. What about the whole 

question of licensing? And I guess it’s tied together with the 

fact that dealers in Saskatchewan are finding themselves pretty 

disadvantaged. They say, can you quote on a vehicle, and they 

say yes, you can, and then of course right away the 9 per cent 

comes in. 

 

It seems in The Snowmobile Act, the real hook that you have  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

on that is the requirement of PST being paid before licensing 

can occur. Is there consideration of that similar kind of thing 

happening with these ATVs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That would . . . You would have to ask 

that question of the Finance minister and with the Department 

of Finance. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just for the . . . 

Again, we’re heading back north here again, past P.A. (Prince 

Albert) and past Meadow Lake; we’re going way up north to 

the northern communities. 

 

And of course in your interpretation of the Act, what do you 

mean by public property verses private property, just for 

clarity’s sake? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Under section 2: 

 

(k) “privately owned land” and “private land” mean land 

other than land vested in the Crown in the right of the 

Province. 

 

So if it’s Crown land, it would be public land. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So all Saskatchewan Crown land is 

considered public land. Would all the reserves and all the land 

that the Indian . . . or the treaty land entitlement process be 

under the same rule? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I am not sure of that but I would find out 

that answer and certainly bring it to the member’s attention. 

Because I’m just not aware what happens on reserve land, on 

treaty land. I don’t know. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  The other question here is, in northern 

Saskatchewan  I’m thinking about the small communities 

again  this particular law is going to provide many challenges 

to the people there, I guess. For many, many years children of 

all ages and older people, and people that didn’t finish school 

and had some trouble with reading and writing and the language 

barrier and so on and so forth, they’ve been using ski-doos on a 

constant basis. And you go to any small northern town, you’ll 

see a ski-doo zip by you on a regular basis, except the summer 

months. 

 

I guess the question we have is: what you don’t want to see 

happen as a result of this Bill is a whole pile of charges being 

laid against people that do not understand the law; a whole pile 

of charges being laid against people that really aren’t there . . . 

the intent isn’t to break the law. So I think simply putting it off 

to the snowmobile association and hopefully that they’ll do a 

good job, I think the department, in particular your department, 

should make sure there is really a concentrated effort in 

northern Saskatchewan to not only educate these people in the 

intent of this new law in their own language and their own 

ways, but to also make sure that they have access to the training 

and to the courses. 

 

And again the other factor of course is the financial cost to 

them. Many of these people are living on very low incomes. So  

again you go to all the particular factors, those three points — I 

think it’s a challenge to you to make sure that these issues are 

recognized and that they’re dealt with. How do you feel about 

all those points? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you to the member opposite 

for the question. I’m not sure if we’re going to get any summer 

months any more anyway, to the member opposite, so they may 

be able to use ski-doos all the time. 

 

But I want to say that safety is the major concern here not only 

of people that live in the south part of the province, but 

certainly people that live in the North. And we want a common 

sense Act, something that is easily understood and people can 

comply with and in fact enforcement can be done. 

 

I guess we have to make sure  and I agree with you  we 

have to make sure that the North gets appropriate attention and 

that’s why the regulations are not drawn yet and in consultation 

will be drawn because there may be . . . we may have to look at 

some exemptions, for helmets for instance, in regards to fishing 

and trapping and those activities. 

 

Hunting, for an example, where you have to go in and retrieve 

game. You have to have a certain colour of uniform on to be 

able to do that. So it may be appropriate there to exempt helmet 

use. 

 

The other thing is that the Act will not be proclaimed until 

we’re absolutely sure that the North has appropriate attention in 

regards to the mandatory training. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  That leads to my next question, is what day 

do you envision this Act to become law? Obviously you have 

the summer months to design this process. Is it September 1 or 

is it October 1? These are some of the things that I think we 

have to be aware of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  My hope, to the member opposite, is 

that the regulations . . . and that we are in a position to proclaim 

the Act prior to this coming winter. However, that could even 

be delayed till the spring of 1997. But our hope is that it’s ready 

for this fall. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just to clarify your hope to have it 

proclaimed by this fall and enacted by next spring. Is that 

correct, where it officially becomes law by spring? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Whenever the Bill would be proclaimed 

that’s when it would become law. So if we were able to 

proclaim it this fall, if in fact we’re satisfied that the regulations 

are appropriate and that the training program is appropriate to 

northern communities and we are able to proclaim it, we would 

like to do it as soon as possible, because we do believe that the 

Act will reduce fatalities. So we would like to do it for this 

coming winter, but we want to make sure that all the regulations 

are in place and that the training program in northern 

communities is adequate. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just a couple of more questions. It says on 

one of the things, driving a snowmobile on the road except to  



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

cross it at a 90 degree angle is illegal. What is meant by that 

particular rule? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  First of all, in the case of an unregistered 

snowmobile, it is permissible to go from one private piece of 

land to another private piece of land where it crosses the road, 

but you have to do it at the most direct and shortest route. And 

that’s why it says 90 degrees, so that if you’re going from this 

private piece of property over to this private piece of property 

 there’s a road in the middle  you have to do it at a 90 

degree, straight, sort of cross the road like that. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay. The second point that the Canadian 

. . . or the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Safety Committee had 

asked for, actually was three things. They asked for mandatory 

helmet use; mandatory training courses for anyone under 16; 

and the last one was a 5-year phase-in of mandatory training 

courses for all ages. 

 

Is that part of the recommendation that you’ll be proceeding 

with and implementing as a result of this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That’s the one part of the 

recommendation that we felt was unnecessary. We want 

common sense legislation. We believe that the people between 

12 and 16 will take the opportunity, and there is a lot of 

opportunity to train that age group. To do it on the more senior 

people that drive snowmobiles, like I mentioned fatalities age 

20 to 63, it’s very difficult. 

 

So we believe that by training the young people, that training 

will go through the system over a period of time, and in fact 

will probably be more beneficial than to try and have everyone 

that drives a snowmobile take a snowmobile safety course prior 

to be licensed. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  In the event that the snowmobile groups 

aren’t able to provide a training program and a safety program 

to licence people under 16 and above 12, as you mentioned, 

have you had any discussions with the RCMP? Because many 

of these northern isolated settlements do have RCMP posts and 

the RCMP do things like bike safety. They do gun safety and 

they’re there; they’re immediate. 

 

Have you had any consultation to suggest that perhaps the 

RCMP could deliver such a course for the local residents? 

Because they in essence will be enforcing the Bill as well once 

it becomes law. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I can’t answer that specifically, but 

I do know that the RCMP were very involved in developing the 

Act. Certainly some of the RCMP are involved in the training 

program now with the snowmobile association. And my hope is 

that the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association is here for a 

long time  and I believe it is; the use of snowmobiles is 

increasing; the interest in snowmobiles is increasing; it’s 

becoming a great family sport  that they will be here for a 

long time and certainly be responsible for the training course. 

 

If at such a time in the future that they’re not interested any 

longer, we’ll certainly have to take a look at it at that time. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. And just a few points before I 

take my place here. I just want to point out that in this particular 

Bill the issues that I want to raise and make certain that you are 

aware of  certainly when it comes to the use of snowmobiles 

in northern Saskatchewan  is that you must, I think, warn the 

RCMP that this law will take time. In particular, meeting the 

challenge of northern people, because snowmobiling, you 

know, is used for sport in the South but in the North it’s used 

for basically hunting and fishing and trapping, and so on and so 

forth. 

 

It’s a vehicle that’s needed and used by many people of all ages. 

So if you warned the RCMP not to charge every person that 

drives across the road for two seconds or two feet, to charge 

them, I think you’d have a case-load of charges every week if 

you’re not to have some kind of discretion in warning period. 

 

And the other issue, of course, is to increase awareness of this 

law to northern communities and to provide the programs for 

them. Because you must look at the isolation factor; not only 

the isolation factor but also, you know, the language barriers, 

you know, the illiterate older people that might have problems 

understanding the laws and the wording and the whole bloody 

bit. So increasing awareness and providing training programs is 

the key thing. 

 

The third thing is the cost factor. I think that’s got to be looked 

at. There’s no question about it. Many people can’t continue to 

afford to take training programs for everything that they 

operate. And really if we recognize the special challenges of the 

North, then we should also recognize the cost factor. 

 

So in stating that, I’ll continue to provide you with problems 

that this law may . . . or this Bill may pose, even after it 

becomes law, over the next few months to make sure that 

you’re aware of the northern peoples’ concerns. And I want to 

thank you and your officials for taking the time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 8  An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair:  I’ll start by inviting the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Thank you, Mr. Chairperson. I want 

to introduce the staff from Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation who are with me here today. Zach Douglas, who is  



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

the president and CEO (chief executive officer), seated to my 

right; and to my left is Jan Carter, who is the director of 

corporate affairs; and in the back of the Assembly, Ladette 

Fuchs, the assistant to the president. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and 

welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. I have a number of 

questions for you, and the first one, I’m just clarifying that the 

$100 million additional that you’re requesting through this Act 

is for the actual Innovation Place purchase, as well as about $63 

million for an additional park somewhere either in Regina or 

any other locations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the member is right. In large 

part the $100 million is for innovation parks, both present 

existing innovation park  basically Innovation Place in 

Saskatoon — and any future parks that might be developed. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has any decision 

been made as to where the next park or parks is going to be 

constructed and when? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No, at this time we only have one 

park and that is in Saskatoon and no decisions have been made 

on location or other parks that we might do. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I think then in conversations we had previous 

from now, we talked about the original $100 million that was 

set out within the Act, and it hadn’t all been spent yet. Could 

you tell me how much of that original $100 million has been 

spent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Now in the interim before this new 

fund was applied for, of course, monies have been used of the 

first $100 million in part for Innovation Place in the interim; 41 

million, in fact, has been used for Innovation Place of that $100 

million. And about 13.5 million on actual investment of loans 

or equity. But when the new 100 million is in place of course, 

that 41 million will actually apply over on the innovation park 

side. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. SOCO 

(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) has been established 

now for a couple of years, and if you’ve really only spent about 

13.5 million, is there any reason that this amendment has been 

put forward at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Because if we hadn’t set the next 

. . . if we hadn’t made amendments to this, we would be 

bumping up against the limit before . . . likely before the next 

session of the legislature, given the investment portfolio that 

we’re looking at extending into and the expansion at Innovation 

Place in Saskatoon. 

 

Ms. Draude:  When we read through the original Act and 

look at the mandate that was actually given to SOCO, I wonder 

if the purchase of Innovation Place under the original Act was 

actually legal under the definition of the Act. Has that been a 

concern? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  All of the advice that we’re getting  

 and it’s considerable  is that it is within the purview of the 

legislation. 

 

Ms. Draude:  What do you consider . . . or what do you think 

the interest rate is that the people of Saskatchewan are getting 

on the money that we have invested in Innovation Place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  At the present time, the monies that 

we get from Finance, we pay a 6 per cent interest rate. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So the $41 million that we have invested in 

Innovation Place, the people of Saskatchewan are getting about 

6 per cent interest on their money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, this is averaged over the year, 

6 per cent. And this is basically what it cost Finance to borrow 

the money. So we pay the actual cost of the borrowing of the 

money by government. 

 

Ms. Draude:  And the 6 per cent interest that we basically 

are getting, we actually needed to borrow, or through an order 

in council we actually . . . There was more money requested for 

Innovation Place for last year, so even on top of the interest we 

had to subsidize Innovation Place. What was the exact figure 

that was required to keep Innovation Place going last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the subsidy was about 

499,000. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Could you explain to me what the 499,000 was 

used for? Was that actually the operation of the building? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, that was everything in interest, 

operating, the whole ball of wax, to manage the Innovation 

Place, plus depreciation. 

 

(1600) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Since your government took over in 1991, how 

much money has been put in to subsidize Innovation Place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  In terms of the historic subsidy in 

Innovation Place, I don’t have that number here, but I can try to 

get that for you. Like it goes back really to the mid-‘70s, I 

guess, so we’ve got about 20 years, and I just don’t have the 

record of it. 

 

But I do have sort of the direct impact on net payroll, and 

provincial purchases is about $92 million. Total impact direct 

and the multiplier effect that we use would bring it up to about 

$152 million. And the employment of course directly at 

Innovation Place is around 1,400. 

 

So if one were to look at the number of jobs that are being 

created . . . and not only that but because it’s such an interesting 

R&D (research and development) park, and I think most people 

would urge us to spend even more on research and development 

because it’s really where a lot of projects start from. 

 



1554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

And I think it’s fair to say that my opinion is very strong that 

governments and companies have to do more in terms of 

research and development, even than what we are doing at the 

present time, if we’re going to be positioned well for the next 

century. So I think this is a very, very small investment when 

you look at the kind of research and development that is being 

created at the centre. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you explain to 

me what you mean by the multiplier effect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well let’s say if there are 1,400 

jobs at Innovation Place. All of these people would spend 

money in the community. Some of them would have children 

that would go to school, so therefore there would be more jobs 

created in teaching positions. There’d be more retail folks 

employed somewhere because these people have jobs. 

 

And so there’s a multiplier when we look at this kind of a 

position that may be subsidized, but if not subsidized, those 

jobs would disappear. There’s a multiplier effect that you 

would put in place. This multiplier effect that we use is 

relatively low at 1.65 times. Some industries, you would use a 

different multiplier as high as three times the number. So that’s 

what the multiplier effect in this case would be. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How many tenants are there that occupy 

premises in Innovation Place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Right now at the present time, it’s 

about 85. 

 

Ms. Draude:  If it is fully occupied, what is the total revenue 

received by the government on a yearly basis as a result of the 

lease payments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I’ll answer this, but really we’re 

getting into a lot of estimates questions. And I don’t mind 

answering these in estimates, but they don’t have . . . I mean we 

can do it here; it doesn’t matter. But the revenue impact is about 

$8 million a year. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I ask that 

is because I realize that from the proposal there’s actually going 

to be expansions that have been requested by various 

companies there. So I guess I was getting to the next question. 

What will be the increase in the lease payments then, once 

you’ve actually completed the construction and the expansion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I just have to do . . . The member 

may have another question. I’ve got to do a little bit of 

calculating on the expansion because this is not an easy 

formula, because of course the space that we are constructing 

there includes greenhouses and lab space as well as office 

space. The office space is pretty easy to do the calculation on, 

but some of this other . . . It’ll just take us a minute to get the 

number you asked for. 

 

It looks like about 1.6 million increase, which will bring the 

total income revenue to 9.6 million from 8 million. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess I forgot to ask you, what will be the 

cost of the expansion then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, the expansion that is under 

way or announced at the present time is about $18 million 

worth. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me 

how Innovation Place works with the university? Is there 

certain departments in the university that works hand in hand 

with Innovation Place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  There’s a number of ways that . . . 

where there is close linkage. But first of all, the property on 

which Innovation constructs is leased from the university, so 

there is a very direct linkage dealing with the property issue. 

 

And then there’s a management advisory committee which 

actually approves or disapproves of tenants, new tenants, to the 

park. And of course Dr. Dennis Johnson from the university 

also sits on the board of directors of Sask Opportunities 

Corporation. 

 

So there’s any number of ways that linkages occur between the 

university, but that’s three of the technical ones. But on a 

day-to-day basis there is overlap and communication on a very 

constant basis. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is all the expansion that’s going to be 

undertaken, it’ll be done on university soil? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, all of Innovation Place is on 

university property in what we call a head lease agreement with 

the university. In fact at the present time Innovation Place has 

pretty well taken up the allocation of what property is available 

and we’re looking at negotiating with the university for further 

possible places for further expansion of Innovation Place. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Well is the expansion of 

Innovation Place, is that going to be covered under Crown 

tendering? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, Sask Opportunities 

Corporation and Innovation Place are not in the list of, you 

know, the agreement. Crown Tendering Agreement lists the 

corporations to which it applies. Sask Opportunities is not one 

of those corporations. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering if 

you have any documentation or studies to prove that another 

R&D building or location will actually bring another type of 

research to this province, and I guess I’m taking for granted that 

a new type of Innovation Place probably wouldn’t be biotech. It 

probably would be another type. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No, if another centre were to be 

built it would not be duplicating work that is presently being 

done at Saskatoon. One might imagine something like 

information technology as being an area of expertise that 

Regina may have that they may want to build that kind of a 

centre of excellence around. 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1555 

Ms. Draude:  The minister and I have had a number of 

discussions about this  the whole concept of an R&D park  

and I guess I want to state clearly that I feel that building an 

R&D park is giving a type of special treatment to a company 

that can locate under a roof like Innovation Place and it’s 

leaving out a very important part of the economy and that is 

small businesses that are out there working under their own 

roof. 

 

Do you have any comments on that and do you have any ideas 

that would actually give everybody a more level playing-field? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Let me use Innovation Place as the 

example of where you may perceive there to be unfairness, for 

example, there between the farming community and the 

companies that do research at Innovation Place. But if you look 

at the kind of work that is being done at Innovation Place, 

whether it’s on the biotechnology that would apply to new 

chemicals for crops or whether it would be genetic engineering 

of canola plants to make them more suitable to certain areas of 

the province, I would argue that one of the most direct 

beneficiaries of the research that’s being done in Saskatoon 

happened right on our farms across the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that as a result of that, our farmers are more competitive. 

And your desk-mate, I know, who’s involved in farming and 

specifically in the area of diversified farming, I understand 

grows a lot of the more diversified crops whether it’s field peas 

or special lentils. Hopefully at the end of the day, much of the 

research that’s being done in Saskatoon comes right back to the 

farm gate. So this small, small subsidy that you’re talking about 

that creates 1,400 jobs in Saskatoon, I feel very directly, as a 

farmer, that that subsidy comes back to me as a farmer many, 

many times over. 

 

(1615) 

 

And so I think part of the key to this is explaining how this 

whole concept works, and we try to do that over and over again. 

But when I meet with companies in the United States, which we 

have when we have gone to St. Louis and met with Monsanto 

or met with AgrEvo in Berlin or the companies in France, they 

say the reason they want to come to Saskatchewan, want to 

come to Canada, is because first of all there’s a regulatory 

structure in Canada and in Saskatchewan that allows for them 

to develop their products quicker and more efficiently, even 

though the regulations are strict by comparison with other parts 

of the world. They know what the rules are, and they can do 

their research quickly. 

 

Secondly, they have Innovation Place where they don’t have to 

invest huge amounts of money. They can lease their space at 

commercial rates which gets back for the taxpayer all the money 

they put into the deal. 

 

But they say the most important thing is that they have 

innovative farmers who will pick up the products that they do 

the research on, and so there’s a full circle right here in the 

province where everybody benefits. The company benefits. The 

university benefits. The people working on site benefit, and  

certainly the farmers who use the product benefit as well. So I 

believe it’s a system that . . . while there may be a small 

subsidy, it’s very, very minuscule when you compare the huge 

benefits that flow to the different layers in our society. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I’m not 

disagreeing that there are some benefits to it. Where I’m 

disagreeing is that we’re again picking and choosing which 

company we’re going to be helping and which ones we’re not. I 

guess that’s another question. How do you decide which one of 

these businesses you’re going to help and which one you’re 

not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well as I said, there’s an advisory 

committee made up of professionals from the university and 

Innovation Place, a joint committee that review and decide who 

would be eligible to come into Innovation Place. 

 

And what you should know too is that the cost of building a 

greenhouse and these new projects that we’re bringing into 

place, they will all be paid for by the people who in fact use 

them, because the rates that are set for use of labs in Innovation 

Place or greenhouses or office space are now at a commercial 

rate. The new leases that are being set up, there’s no discount, 

there’s no special treatment being given. And so we shouldn’t 

assume that there’s subsidy going into the new construction. 

Therefore there’s no advantage in terms of cost of the building. 

 

So that’s not the reason people come to the innovation centre. 

The reason they come is to be in a cluster of scientific 

community, not unlike the reason why the oil industry wants to 

be located in Calgary. The reason the oil industry wants to 

locate in Calgary, in large part, is because there’s a cluster of 

industry that likes to be associated with one another. In 

Saskatoon the reason that they want to come from around the 

world is not because of the subsidy, because there is no subsidy 

in the new office or greenhouse. It’s because they want to be 

part of a large scientific community. 

 

Now 85 companies located in one centre and there’s 

interchange and partnerships that go on on a daily basis. And so 

I just . . . I want to make it clear that when the decision is made 

by the joint committee of the university and Innovation Place to 

bring people in, it’s a question of whether they strengthen the 

overall group that are in existence at the centre in Saskatoon. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’m having difficulty not seeing 

a new building as some sort of edifice to the government, 

because that’s what it’s going to be seen as, I believe. 

 

I’ll just go off this topic for a second and ask you if you . . . I 

imagine you’re familiar with investment tax credit from the 

federal government. And I’m wondering if you know how 

much of that money, federal R&D tax credit, comes into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t have that 

number here. I could get the Minister of Finance to bring it up 

for us, but we don’t have that number. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Actually, Mr. Minister, I do have some of  



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

these, this information, although it’s not up to date. The latest I 

could get was 1993. And it was significant, the different sectors 

of the economy that applied for R&D tax credit, and that’s one 

of the reasons why this bothers me, is because we are again 

choosing. 

 

I’m wondering if the companies that are housed in Innovation 

Place actually receive this tax credit from the federal 

government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes, some do and some don’t. But 

they obviously wouldn’t be treated any different because they 

were in Innovation Place or not in Innovation Place. Each one 

would make some application to the federal government or the 

Department of National Revenue and then a decision would be 

made. 

 

But it would not . . . I don’t think there would be any linkage to 

whether they were in Innovation Place or not. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Will you be advising the various towns and 

communities that money will be available for another 

Innovation Place-type structure across the province and 

allowing them to put forward a proposal that would allow their 

communities to bid on this type of building? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Obviously the fact that we’re 

debating it openly today and the legislation is a very public 

piece of information, one would assume that the public will 

know about it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  When I looked at the SOCO Act and I looked 

at the board of directors, I’m wondering how many directors 

there are and who is on the board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  For the member opposite, I 

mentioned Dr. Dennis Johnson who has recently been added 

from the university. And in addition, and I’m quoting here, Mr. 

Chairman, the Hon. Keith Goulet is the vice chairperson, Sherri 

Cybulski is a member, Mel Watson, Naomi Ceib, Gord 

Steininger, and Trent Beatty. 

 

Those are the board members. And Don Axtell is the secretary 

to the board. And as well, Dianne Olchowski. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Can you tell me how often they meet and if 

they are actually political appointments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairperson, the member’s 

question was how often they meet and whether they’re 

political? 

 

The board tends to meet once a month, I understand, and I 

quote here because his name is here and I’ve used it  Keith 

Goulet is political. 

 

And I think Mel Watson was political but I don’t think he is any 

more. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How did the owners of the office buildings 

downtown feel about the government giving a type of subsidy  

to businesses to get them into Innovation Place when their own 

office space is vacant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I know the economic development 

authority in Saskatoon, which is chaired by Jim Yuel and 

staffed with people like John Hyshka, are very, very supportive 

of Innovation Place and the developments that are going on. 

One of my Saskatoon colleagues mentions that members he 

knows in the chamber are supportive as well. 

 

And really if you think about it, what most people know in 

Saskatoon  and it’s harder for us who are not from Saskatoon 

to understand the concept  but these people know if it 

weren’t for the innovation research park, these are not people 

who would come to downtown Saskatoon. If you’re talking 

about the move of Monsanto from St. Louis of their canola 

research, they would not have moved to a downtown location in 

Saskatoon. And the same is true of Plant Genetic from Belgium, 

AgrEvo from Berlin, Germany; the Groupe Limagrain from 

France. These companies have come here because there’s a 

research park associated with the university. And most of the 

people at Innovation Place would tell you that the reason 

they’re in Saskatoon is because of a research park associated 

with the university, not unlike other large research parks at 

other universities in other parts of Canada. 

 

These are sought-after institutions of the highest order, and 

oftentimes subsidized with millions and millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars. This is a very, very low level of subsidy that we pay 

here in Saskatchewan, and yet it’s a world-class institution that 

wouldn’t exist . . . these companies wouldn’t be in Saskatoon if 

it weren’t for the research park. 

 

And I think it has the potential to grow to be dramatically larger 

than it is already with other companies coming from around the 

world to do their biotechnology. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, are you considering trying to 

involve some of the REDAs (regional economic development 

authority) in the board of SOCO or in the directors, to get a true 

representation from across the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Just so you know the representation 

that we have . . . Naomi Ceib of course is a person with 

northern connections. I think she has two of her own small 

businesses in northern Saskatchewan. Mel Watson of course 

needs no introduction. He is owner, with his family, of Watson 

Tractor here in Regina, with roots in Weyburn in the John 

Deere equipment business all over the province for many, many 

years, and past president of the chamber of commerce, so 

understands business, particularly small business, very well. 

 

Gord Steininger of course is a union leader so has lots of 

understanding of working people. And of course in an 

institution like this, understanding working people and knowing 

about what brings about good labour relations and 

understanding between management and workers is important. 

And of course Trent Beatty is very much involved in 

investments of all sorts, and Diane Olchowski is involved in 

one of the rural economic development committees in her area 

of the province. 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

So I think if you look at it fairly, this is a well-balanced group 

of people. And I failed to mention Dennis Johnson who is . . . 

Dr. Dennis Johnson who is very much involved in the area that 

would be looked at within the Innovation Park. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the other 

questions I have about SOCO is . . . if it’s considered a Crown 

corporation, why do we as taxpayers have to pay for the 

administration part of it through Economic Development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I think that it would . . . it’s 

fair to say that in a perfect world Innovation Place would pay its 

own way and would make money. Hopefully down the road, the 

park will break even and make money for the taxpayers. But 

that would be assuming that it isn’t already making large 

amounts of money for the taxpayers in general with the job 

creation and benefits that flow from the park. And I would 

make a strong argument that it already does because the subsidy 

is so low. 

 

But on the other hand, it’s not the only research park in the 

world. And I would challenge the member to look at other 

research parks associated with other universities. And you will 

find that if you went the other step over to the university and 

said, is there any subsidy in the university? . . . of course the 

taxpayers put tens of millions of dollars into the university. But 

you would have to then draw the line and say, one is a subsidy, 

and one isn’t because of course the university has a large 

component of . . . and you may be arguing that we shouldn’t put 

any subsidy in the university either, that people should just pay 

their own way. 

 

But I don’t think that’s what you’re saying. This is an extension 

and a continuation of commercializing work that is done on the 

university, and I think pays its way over and over again. 

 

But on the other hand, there are other Crowns that don’t make 

money: STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company). There 

are those who would argue because we put $5 million into 

subsidizing transportation, particularly in rural Saskatchewan 

. . . because none of that subsidy comes to urban centres. And it 

may be that you would argue we should shut STC down 

because there is subsidies going into it to supply transportation 

service to rural Saskatchewan. But I don’t think you’re making 

that argument. 

 

So the idea here is, is that Crowns are set up historically in 

Saskatchewan where they’re needed to offer a service that 

wouldn’t happen if they weren’t there. And this is certainly the 

case as it would apply to Innovation Place. 

 

(1630) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. If we add the $4.6 million subsidy 

for the administration plus the subsidy we had to put in to keep 

Innovation Place going last year, to keep it operational, then it 

gets to be a larger amount that’s again just affecting not that 

many people. And that’s what I have a difficulty with . . . is the 

number of people we are dealing with. 

 

I’m wondering if SOCO put money into the T-Rex film? 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I just want to go back to your 

comment of $4.6 million into operating of Innovation Place. 

There’s no $4.6 million subsidy going to Innovation Place from 

anyone. As I mentioned earlier, last year it was 499,000. You 

may be talking about loan-loss provisions and a lot of other 

things that go into Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, 

but let’s not confuse and put all that allocation towards 

Innovation Place because the number of subsidy going to 

Innovation Place last year was 499,000. 

 

At this point in time, there’s been no money put towards a 

T-Rex film although there is a proposal around that that could 

happen. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess I said it wrong. It’s four point two 

point nine six million and that was through the . . . it was a 

grant to Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation to deliver the 

financial services. So I guess that’s what I meant to say. And I 

understand the minister said that there was no money put into 

the T-Rex film. 

 

How many projects have been transferred from SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) to SOCO? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The transition was when SEDCO 

was shut down. The assets were transferred to CIC (Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), a division of CIC. 

And after that point in time, nine projects were transferred from 

CIC to Sask Opportunities Corporation. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are these projects still in good standing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes. Of the nine that came over, 

eight are in good standing, and one has actually paid out the 

total amount of their loan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Was the interest rate that was being charged by 

SEDCO the same amount that’s now being charged by SOCO? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I just want to mention to the 

member that interest rates on loans to individuals or companies 

. . . I’m not at liberty to give out. But I can tell you that the 

interest rate has not changed as a result of coming over to 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. So they’ve been 

consistent as they have moved. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are any of the facilities that are available to be 

used as R&D parks, are there any that are still owned by 

SEDCO that would be available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No. We’re not looking at any 

vacant SEDCO property as research park buildings. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are there a certain designated length of time 

for SOCO agreements, or do they vary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes. They vary depending on 

negotiated contracts and agreements. 

 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 1996 

Ms. Draude:  Under section 32 (1), it says that the 

corporation can invest any or part of the capital or operating 

money. Does SOCO have any of its money invested? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I wonder if the member would be a 

little bit more specific; I’m just not sure what the question is. 

 

Ms. Draude:  It says: 

 

The corporation may, from time to time: 

 

(a) invest any part of the capital or operating moneys of 

the corporation in any security or class of securities that 

is authorized for the investment of moneys in the general 

revenue fund pursuant to The Financial Administration 

Act, 1993. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Yes. None of the short-term cash 

position is invested. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy 

Chair, I don’t believe that SOCO is . . . allowing SOCO to have 

access to another hundred million dollars, in a time when the 

government is gutting our health care and education dollars, is 

appropriate. And I don’t believe that they are capable of 

handling this amount of money. 

 

If they can’t handle these cuts, I find it very confusing to think 

that they have money to further fund R&D parks. And I want to 

make it clear that I’m not opposed to R&D parks but it comes 

down to a matter of priorities. I know the people of 

Saskatchewan value their health care and their education and 

the safety net  their social safety net  above all things. 

 

We continually hear this NDP government claim to be cash 

strapped, and then on the other hand they have millions of 

dollars to build R&D parks. Where is the money coming from? 

 

If we have the money for R&D parks why have we heard the 

government crying poor and consequently gutting the essential 

services to Saskatchewan residents? 

 

They spend a hundred million dollars on a union-preference 

tendering policy, but they can’t afford to appropriately fund our 

health and education system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the Act as it currently reads and 

therefore I’d like to move an amendment to the Act, clause 3 of 

the printed Bill: 

 

Amend clause 3 of the Printed Bill by striking out the 

words “, including the development and operation of 

research and development parks,” where they occur in 

section 16 as being enacted therein. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairperson, I won’t speak 

long to the amendment, only to say that of course we are 

opposed to it because it really is the essence of the amendment 

 that is, to finance and fund research parks. And in this case 

particularly, as we know, Innovation Place in Saskatoon. 

 

And why the members would want to go on record voting for a 

moratorium on construction at Innovation Place at this point in 

time . . . because that’s what would happen once this tranche of 

expansion is completed. It would mean that the government 

could no longer support any more expansion at Innovation 

Place. 

 

But the vote will clearly set us apart  the official opposition 

being opposed to any further expansion of Innovation Place in 

Saskatoon, and the government supporting expansion. 

 

And I can’t quite fathom why any political party would want to 

be on that record, with that record then going to city council in 

Saskatoon, to the university in Saskatoon, to the regional 

economic development in Saskatoon, the chamber of 

commerce. 

 

It seems very, very short-sighted because this money, as I say, is 

all paid back. This money is put in as an investment and we 

collect back a commercial rate of return on this investment and 

create literally hundreds of jobs high-paid Saskatchewan jobs 

 from companies that come there from around the world. 

 

And I need not say more. I mean nothing could be more 

obvious than where the two caucuses stand on this issue. And, 

Mr. Chairman, I therefore look forward to the vote. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:41 p.m. until 4:50 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 6 

 

Osika Aldridge Draude 

Belanger Krawetz Gantefoer 

 

Nays 24 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Wiens 

Lingenfelter Shillington Atkinson 

Tchorzewski Johnson Goulet 

Kowalsky Renaud Calvert 

Koenker Bradley Cline 

Serby Stanger Hamilton 

Murray Wall Kasperski 

Ward Sonntag Thomson 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to on division. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 



May 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 8  An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1533 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1533 

  Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................1534 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1534 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1534 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1534 

  Hagel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1534 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Battered Women’s Awareness Week 

  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1534 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1535 

 Royal Bank Cup 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1534 

 Osteoporosis Week 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1535 

 Cooking for Literacy 

  Stanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................1535 

 Expansion of St. Volodymyr Villa 

  Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................1535 

 Passing of Dennis O’Brien 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1535 

 Navy Captain from Saskatchewan 

  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1536 

 Hospital Auxiliaries 

  Toth ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1536 

 Sea Buckthorn Development 

  Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................1536 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1536 

  Wiens .............................................................................................................................................................................1536, 1538 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1537 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1537 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1538 

 Labour Relations Board Decision 

  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1539 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1539 

 Potential Home Care Workers’ Strike 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1539 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1540 

 Health District Boards Funding 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1540 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1540 

 Recovery of Government Funds 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1540 

  Lautermilch .............................................................................................................................................................................1541 

 Northern Highway Maintenance 

  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1541 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1541 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 91  An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1541 

 Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1541 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 88  An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1541 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1542 

 Bill No 89  An Act to amend The Dependants’ Relief Act 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1542 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1543 

 Bill No. 90  An Act to amend The Provincial Mediation Board Act 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1544 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1544 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 47  An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1545 

 Bill No. 48  An Act to amend The Animal Identification Act 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1545 

 Bill No. 60  An Act to amend The Crop Insurance Act 

  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1546 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1547 

  Belanger .........................................................................................................................................................................1547, 1551 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1549 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1550 

 Bill No 8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1552 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1553 

 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1558 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1559 

 Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1559 

 


