


















































June 4, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2179 
 June 4, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 5 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As previously 
agreed to, I’d like to move, seconded by the member from 
Saltcoats, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 
5 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: (1) a list of all public sector job 
classifications that are not gender neutral; (2) if there are 
any, why a gender distinction is made; (3) if pay equity is 
negotiated with the public sector unions, the procedures 
that will be used to evaluate the work of gender specific 
jobs; (4) in negotiating pay equity in the public service, 
whether the government will identify jobs which tend to be 
held by one gender; (5) and the criteria for judging the 
gender tendencies of a given job classification. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the conclusion of the vote, 
table the answer to this item. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 6 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Kelvington-Wadena, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 6 showing: 
 

Regarding the Executive Council’s order of September 6, 
1995, authorizing the Crown Investments Corporation to 
borrow $100 million: (1) the specific purposes this 
borrowing was authorized for; (2) whether the purpose or 
purposes behind this borrowing helped create any jobs, and 
if so, the number; (3) the reason this borrowing was over 
and above what the Department of Finance had anticipated 
for the Crown Investments Corporation in the 1995-96 
budget; and (4) the terms of the financing obtained. 
 

Seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of the vote, be 
tabling the answer to this. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 7 
 
Ms. Draude:  I move, seconded by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale, to move an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 7 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Indian and Metis Affairs: 
(1) the percentage of the department’s last budget that has 
been spent on administration staff; (2) the number of grant 
allocations that are being awarded to Indian organizations  

and the grant amounts; (3) the number of grant allocations 
that have been awarded to Metis organizations and the 
grant amount; (4) of the grant amounts allocated, the 
number that were awarded north of the 54th parallel to 
Indian organizations as well as south of the 54th parallel; 
and (5) of the grant amounts allocated, the number that are 
awarded north of the 54th parallel to Metis organizations, 
as well as south of the 54th parallel. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will on the  before I take my seat 
 be moving an amendment. I will be moving a deletion of 
numbers (4) and (5), questions (4) and (5). Now I recognize this 
is going to rob the question of much its value for the member 
from Athabasca because it was really (4) and (5) that he wanted 
to know. 
 
What the department has told us is that grants are not 
segregated by north or south. Almost all the grants are given to 
provincial organizations and thus the question is not capable of 
being answered because they have no idea where the money’s 
spent. Grants are not given to local organizations, they’re given 
 in almost all cases  to provincial organizations, and thus 
the question cannot be answered. 
 
Thus, I move, seconded by the member from Cumberland: 
 

That this Assembly delete sections (4) and (5). 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of the vote, be 
tabling the answer to the amended question. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 8 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, as previously agreed to, I move, 
seconded by the member from Cypress Hills, to move an order 
of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 8 showing: 
 

(1) Whether a reduction in the provincial sales tax is being 
considered; (2) if so, when will it be implemented; (3) 
whether this proposed reduction will be brought in the next 
budget; (4) the amount that the PST will be reduced; (5) 
whether such a reduction will be instituted equally 
throughout the province or whether provisions will be 
made for the special competitive situations of border 
communities. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of the vote, be 
tabling the answer to this question. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 9 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Wood River, that an order of the Assembly 
do issue for a return no. 9 showing: 
  



2180 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

Regarding the Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, CIC: (1) The names of all corporations 
under CIC’s direct or indirect control on which Mr. Don 
Ching serves as a director; (2) the amounts of remuneration 
he receives as a result of these directorships; (3) the dates 
on which the appointment or appointments were made. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of the vote, be 
tabling the answer to this question. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 10 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I move, seconded by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 10 showing: 
 

Regarding SaskPower: (1) the number of industrial class 
customers that have negotiated rate reductions with the 
company since the government allowed it to go ahead with 
power rate increases on January 1 of this year; and (2) the 
total value of those rate reductions. 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to, on the conclusion of 
my comments, urge that this one be defeated. We are told by 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation . . . and again, in many of 
these cases, you accept the information you’re given; there isn’t 
a lot of time, with this many questions, to delve into each or 
even to have the staff delve into each one of these individually. 
What we are told by SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) is 
that there are, in Saskatchewan, a relatively small number of 
industrial customers, and in some of the classes there’s only 
one; in some classes there’s only two or three. The disclosure of 
this information would therefore disclose confidential 
information between SPC and its customers. It’s their policy not 
to give information about specific power charges to specific 
people, and that’s particularly true of industrial corporations. 
Therefore again, contracts, these things are confidential and 
their release would jeopardize this confidentiality. I will be 
urging the Assembly to defeat this motion. 
 
The Speaker:  I can’t recognize the hon. member who is 
standing because he’s already spoken to the motion. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, to raise a point of order. 
 
The Speaker:  What is the point of order? 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that when a 
question has been raised  and I’m not exactly sure; maybe 
you could clarify it  but it seemed to me that in debates in the 
past, if a question’s been raised and the minister has suggested 
that by not giving an answer . . . that the House Leader can 
certainly get up and raise another question and ask why. That’s 
when the debate would normally begin. So I’d like a  

clarification on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  The rules of the Assembly, as all hon. 
members will know, require members to move the motion at the 
conclusion of their debate. If a member moves a motion without 
other comment, it meets the same purpose. It concludes the 
debate. 
 
The hon. member for Wood River moved the motion and the 
Government House Leader spoke contrary to the motion and the 
debate continues. And as is the rules of the House, all members 
will recognize that no member can speak twice to the same 
question. 
 
So the point of order is not well taken. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can I direct . . . or 
is it debate or do I have to direct a question or . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s a debate. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Okay. I would like to then comment on the 
argument that was raised by the Government House Leader in 
terms of industrial classes of customers. It would strike me that 
when I listen to the reasons and the rationale for this great 
power adjustment and rate adjustment that was going on, it was 
never implied in my mind that we were talking about all of the 
benefits that were going to be shifted from the residential and 
farm customers to be shifted onto one industrial customer that 
the minister seems to be indicating it would be improper for that 
answer to be given so that it would disclose that individual 
company or corporation’s position. 
 
It strikes me, Mr. Speaker, that when I recall the whole 
argument that led up to this whole, massive change in what the 
rates were going to be, is that there was a fundamental thing 
that was implied in that, is that there were a multitude of 
customers that were going to leave the SaskPower network, if 
you like, if this action was not taken. 
 
(1915) 
 
And now the minister raises the argument and says they’re 
unable to be able to do this. They are unable to disclose this 
information because it would violate some individual 
confidentiality. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that that is very 
much at odds with the logic of the first position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s important as well that the people 
of this province would like to have an answer to this question. 
All across the residential and rural areas of the province, they 
have now come to have to realize the reality of those power rate 
increases on the residential, and on the small commercial, and 
on the farm customers. And they need to know exactly what 
economic benefit or the magnitude of the economic benefit that 
this shifted policy is going to mean for the province. 
 
All along, we’ve heard how open and accountable . . . and how 
it was going to be something that we could document 
quantitatively, what this would mean for economic 
development across the province. And I find it really strange  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2181 

that now we get this kind of an answer that refuses to even 
identify what the total amounts of this benefit are going to be to 
these large industrial customers. 
 
As I recall as well in the debate, and I could stand to be 
corrected, but it seems to me that the largest industrial customer 
for SaskPower was indeed the city of Saskatoon. Now surely if 
that’s so, that there wouldn’t be a great deal of problem with the 
city of Saskatoon explaining why this has been a massive shift 
in terms of commercial rates. 
 
I know there are other large industrial customers in the 
province, and I don’t think that they would object if, as a 
cumulative body . . . that they would be pleased to see what the 
change in rates mean. For example, I believe a number of those 
major customers probably publish annual financial statements; 
would disclose what they’re paying for the utilities; and what 
their hard and soft costs are in relationship to their operation. 
And again, I really question why the government would be so 
reluctant to release this information. 
 
Not so much that it’s going to jeopardize any of these 
individuals. They know what the rates are. The argument you 
used was that they could go to Manitoba or to Alberta or 
anywhere almost that they wanted to and get these cheaper rates 
and it is incumbent on the government to match those rates. 
 
And so what I think that is increasingly important is that if 
you’re going to make these massive shifts in public policy using 
either the government’s forum or using Crown corporations, 
because they are a tool of government, that you should be 
prepared to disclose what the total ramifications of dollars that 
are going to be involved in this. So that the people that are 
paying more, who know exactly how much more money they’re 
paying, can understand where it’s going and potentially begin to 
understand what the benefit is going to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it strikes me as that one of the things that we miss 
too often is that we miss the opportunity to fully understand 
how important the Crown corporations are as a lever of 
government policy. SaskPower president, Mr. Messer, has a 
very important and powerful influence on public policy, and the 
members opposite know that. And if they make these kinds of 
decisions as terms of public policy, they sometimes can hide 
behind the office that they have and these guys are all scared of 
them. So we need to have that information in this House and we 
need to know it because it’s important for the people we 
represent. 
 
All across the province when this rate hike changed, or this 
shift, if you like, occurred, the argument was that it was going 
to be revenue neutral. Well if it’s so revenue neutral, and if that 
is a case in fact, then why will the government not disclose the 
benefits that these major corporations are receiving, because 
everyone knows how much it’s costing them. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, while I think that it’s important that we 
try to move through these things with relative ease and an 
amicable atmosphere, I also think it’s important that the 
taxpayers, the people that are utility users in this province, 
understand that there’s fair and equal treatment and that the real  

benefit that was important to extend to the major corporations 
in order for them to have their competitive advantage 
maintained or to get into a competitive fair play, that they 
clearly understand that. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I will sit in my place, having recorded 
that I’m very much in favour to this information being 
disclosed. And I regret very much the government’s decision to 
not disclose it and I would ask respectfully that they quickly 
reconsider their position and disclose this information. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 11 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member for Kelvington-Wadena, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 11 showing: 
 

Regarding Mr. Donald Ching’s service as a Director of 
SaskTel’s subsidiaries, LCL (Leicester Communications 
Limited)Cable and East Midlands Cable Group of the 
United Kingdom: (1) whether Mr. Ching received all of the 
25,000 pounds sterling that was annually paid to SaskTel 
by LCL or the East Midlands Cable Group for his services 
as a director; (2) if Mr. Ching received only a portion of 
this money, the specific annual amount; (3) the amount Mr. 
Ching received for travelling and lodging expenses 
incurred in serving as a director while SaskTel owned the 
company; (4) whether the fees or expenses paid were done 
so on top or as part of his base salary . . . 
 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. I’m going to have to call 
the hon. member to order. In reflecting, and this is the difficulty 
with having leave without writing, but it is the Chair’s 
recollection of the agreement that was reached, when providing 
the leave for caucus colleagues to move a motion, was if the 
member whose name the motion is standing in the order papers 
is not present in his seat. And so I will ask that the question be 
called again. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  A point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Put your point of order. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  The point of order that I am raising is that 
in fact that wasn’t the agreement that we had reached at with the 
understanding of the House leaders. The point was that any 
member from any caucus could move the motion and regardless 
of whether that member was in the House, or present or not, 
was not raised amongst the House leaders. So this would go 
contrary to the agreement reached by the House leaders. 
 
The Speaker:  The Chair is not able to interpret based on 
information that he didn’t have and is not able to make a ruling 
based on understandings members may have had. 
 
I do recollect very clearly  order  I do recollect very clearly 
when putting it to the House, because I recall saying to the  
  



2182 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

House that this was unorthodox and that I repeated it twice to 
ensure that it was clearly understood, and both times I very 
clearly recollect saying that the leave was to provide for moving 
of the motion if the member whose name the order was listed in 
was not present in his or her seat. And so I find the point of 
order is not well taken. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  What is the member’s point of order? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  The point of order for me to make my case 
puts me in . . . with a problem with the rules of the Legislative 
Assembly because I can’t refer to members who are or are not 
in the House. But if you would allow me so, the member from 
Thunder Creek is not in the House at this point and that’s why 
the member from Arm River was  or is  moving that 
motion. 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member, I think, is challenging the 
ruling of the Chair and he knows that that’s not appropriate. His 
point of order is not well taken, and I’ll ask that item no. 11 be 
called again. 
 
Mr. McLane: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As previously 
agreed, I move, seconded by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 11 showing: 
 

Regarding Mr. Donald Ching’s service as a director of 
SaskTel’s subsidiaries LCL Cable and East Midlands 
Cable Group of the United Kingdom: (1) whether Mr. 
Ching received all of the 25,000 pounds sterling that was 
annually paid to SaskTel by LCL or the East Midlands 
Cable Group for his services as a director; (2) if Mr. Ching 
received only a portion of this money, the specific annual 
amount; (3) the amount Mr. Ching received for travelling 
and lodging expenses incurred in serving as a director 
while SaskTel owned the company; (4) whether the fees or 
expenses paid were done so on top or as part of his base 
salary as CEO (chief executive officer) of the Crown 
Investments Corporation; (5) whether Mr. Ching was 
appointed to this position by his own authority as CEO of 
CIC or whether he was appointed on the authority of 
someone else; and (6) if so, the person who made this 
appointment. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, we’re going to amend this one 
as well, and I know, given the recipient of these expenses, this 
is going to be controversial. 
 
The answer I’ve got here isn’t very helpful because it’s not 
accurate. The answer given by the . . . on this paper isn’t 
accurate. 
 
Fortunately I know what the problem is. The problem is the 
expenses were billed to Leicester Cable. I happen to know this 
because I had attended one or two . . . attended one directors’ 
meeting and the expenses were all billed to Leicester Cable. 

The difficulty is that SaskTel no longer owns Leicester Cable. 
It’s now owned privately by actually Goldman Sachs of New 
York, and thus the information is not available to us. On that 
basis (3) falls and so does . . . and then (4) falls with it. 
 
So, I will be moving, seconded by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That this Assembly delete questions (3) and (4) and 
renumbers (5) and (6) to (3) and (4) respectively. 

 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, this is a problem of course 
which multiplies, because we’re talking here about three people 
who were supplied to that particular board of directors by 
SaskTel. So not only do we have Mr. Ching here in question, 
but I do believe we also have Mr. Garry Simons and Fred Van 
Parys as well. 
 
So this is a question which really could have been asked in 
triplicate, and unfortunately we haven’t heard the answer of 
course that we had wanted to hear this evening. 
 
The fact is that these monies were to be paid by Leicester Cable 
to SaskTel for the purposes of SaskTel having provided the 
expertise, these particular directors, to the LCL board. I would 
have thought, given that the government constructed this 
agreement, which was one to the amazement of many taxpayers 
in this province, I might add, because in the Intergovernmental 
Affairs minister’s own words at the time, the monies that were 
got from the sale of LCL Cable versus the offers that had been 
made only months earlier from the date of the announcement, 
there was just a . . . the offers had only been a fraction of what 
had been offered. 
 
So I would think given that that this government would want to 
claim a few more bragging rights in this regard. Let people 
know how you turn a dog into a darling. This was a company, 
this was a company who, by the International Chamber of 
Commerce’s own ratings from zero to ten or one to ten, they 
rated, in terms of their own peers and their own industry, a two 
out of ten. 
 
So I think the taxpayers in this province are quite curious about 
how you can do that, and in fact you could do a great service to 
many people back here, back here in our own province, if you 
could tell people how they take and turn an investment such as 
that into such a grand turn. 
 
But as I say, this is a case where there’s three particular 
directors that were offered up by SaskTel, and I believe that the 
agreement for sale that we had requested that was denied to us 
should have had something structured in there where these 
particular fees could have been disclosed to the taxpayers of 
this province. 
 
Now I could say further about this, but I’ll just leave it at that. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to concur 
with what my counterpart has said, but I would also find it  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2183 

completely amazing that the openness and accountability goes 
out the window the minute we start talking about some of the 
patronage appointments that this government has made: Jack 
Messer, SaskPower; and now Don Ching. 
 
Everything is going fine, we’re getting our answers until all of a 
sudden we get into the nitty-gritty of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) Party itself, and then the openness and 
accountability stop. 
 
I find in the Don Ching case, it’s very interesting and there’s a 
lot of questions that should be answered. And I think it’s only 
fair to the taxpayers of this province that these few questions 
we’ve asked on Mr. Ching, who keeps surfacing in these jobs 
that are handed to him by this government  I might add cushy 
jobs at a very high rate of pay that the taxpayers of this province 
are picking up the tab . . . and it seems we have no right as 
taxpayers to know what he is getting for this or anything else. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I find this is really not the way . . . I didn’t 
plan this legislature . . . or think when I got here that this is how 
it would work. And I don’t think the taxpayers of this province 
deserve this. They deserve a lot better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of this, be 
tabling the information. 
 
The Speaker:  I’m sorry. The Chair is going to have to rule 
the comments of the Government House Leader out of order as 
he has already been recognized in this debate on this question. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 12 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As previously 
agreed, I move, seconded by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
a return no. 12 showing: 
 

Regarding the New Careers Corporation: (1) the number of 
projects in which New Careers placed its clients during 
1995; (2) the names and descriptions of those projects; (3) 
the locations of those projects. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of this, be 
tabling this very weighty answer to the question. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 13 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As previously 
agreed, I move, seconded by the member from Wood River, 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 13 
showing: 

To the minister responsible for the Public Service 
Commission: (1) the number of individuals currently 
employed by the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) the 
number of those employees that are full time and part time; 
(3) the number of those employees that are permanent, 
temporary, casual, or contract; (4) the number of those 
employees that are in scope, out of scope; and (5) the 
number of positions that are currently vacant; (6) the 
average salary in each of the departments; and (7) the 
manager-to-staff ratio in each department. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to be urging the Assembly 
to defeat this. The focus of this question is the public service 
and what happens after the lay-offs. After the budget there were 
a large number of lay-offs. Indeed it is, I think, in this last 
budget, some 7 per cent of the total public service . . . the 
lay-offs equalled 7 per cent of the total public service. It was a 
very, very large number of lay-offs after this budget. 
 
I’m also proud to say that that occurred without any in-scope 
people being laid off. Those entire vacancies were managed 
through lay-offs . . . I’m sorry, not through lay-offs, through 
bumping, through transfers, moving people around departments. 
So while the number of positions which were reduced was 
extremely large, to lose 7 per cent of your public service in one 
fell swoop was quite a feat  to be able to manage that in such 
a way that nobody was actually laid off. 
 
However there are  as a result of that process  there are a 
large number of people bumping, the in-scope people bumping, 
and that goes on for months. Someone A bumps B, B then has 
two or three weeks actually before they’ve got to bump and so 
on. It goes around. Thus the information is not available, and it 
won’t be complete within any relevant time. So we are unable 
to answer this within a relevant period of time. And that being 
the case, I am urging the Assembly to defeat this motion. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m totally amazed 
that the government took this question to be something to do 
with lay-offs and bumping. I asked the question about 
employment, who was actually working. And I think because 
these people are paid by the public, we have a right to know 
how many people we’re paying. That’s what I’ve asked for. I 
didn’t ask how many people were bumped around the province 
here. 
 
We’ve asked, we would like to know, how many people there 
are actually still working. I’ve been listening to the Minister of 
Economic Development here for the last five months bragging 
about job numbers. And I’d really like to know how many of 
these job numbers had something to do with government hiring 
and not hiring. 
 
I think if we can take some of those numbers that aren’t as . . . I 
think real numbers, I think I want to know how many people are 
actually working out in the province there. And it has nothing to 
do with those that aren’t working. I really am disappointed that 
this type of answer can’t be given to us. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact, 
to the members opposite, it is quite amazing. We hear the  
  



2184 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

members across are talking about open and accountable . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now the Chair apologizes for my error 
again. The hon. member has already spoken to the motion and 
cannot be recognized a second time. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 14 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As previously 
agreed, I move, seconded by the member from Thunder Creek, 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 14 
showing: 
 

To the Premier, regarding political staff and appointments: 
(1) the number of individuals currently employed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan as a result of political 
appointments; (2) the average salary for these political 
appointments; (3) the total number of ministerial assistants 
currently employed by cabinet ministers; (4) and the 
average salary for these ministerial assistants. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The member from 
Kelvington-Wadena can safely return to her seat. On the 
passage of the vote, I intend to table the answer. Just so that we 
might save wear and tear on the carpet over there, there will be 
no need for the member from Athabasca to flee on 15; no need 
for the member from Melville to flee on the next one. We’re 
going to table the answers. So we can save wear and tear on the 
carpet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 15 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To move an order 
of the Assembly to issue a return showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for SaskPower: (1) The 
average increase in percentage terms of northern 
Saskatchewan power bills since the January 1996 rate hike; 
(2) whether there has been any consultation with business 
or consumer groups in the North with regards to the 
subsequent impact of these power hikes on the already 
high power bills; (3) whether there are any public 
awareness plans in place now to assist home owners and 
other SaskPower customers on ways to reduce excessive 
power use in the North; (4) what SaskPower is doing to 
address the constant power failures that occur in northern 
Saskatchewan; (5) in terms of the long distance power 
must travel to bring service to the people of the North, the 
percentage of power loss that has incurred over these long 
distances; (6) the reason the people of the North pay higher 
power rates as the rest of Saskatchewan when they receive 
a lower quality and quantity of service. 
 

Seconded by the member from Humboldt. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of the vote, be 
tabling the answer to this question. 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 16 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 16 
showing: 
 

To the Hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General: (1) 
the annual salary of the senior Crown prosecutor who is 
employed at the North Battleford Crown prosecutor’s 
office, and who was suspended with pay on October 25, 
1995 arising from the investigation surrounding the Robert 
Latimer case in North Battleford; (2) the amount the said 
senior Crown prosecutor has earned since he was 
suspended with pay; (3) the length of time the said senior 
Crown prosecutor will remain on suspension with pay. 

 
Seconded by the member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of the vote, be 
tabling the answer to this question. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 17 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 17 
showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation: (1) the total amount of tenders for 
capital asset construction activity in the fiscal year 
1995-96; (2) the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement that was in place at that time and the total 
amount that would have been subject to the CCTA (Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement). 

 
Seconded by the member for Humboldt. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to . . . There’s going to 
have to be a bit of faith here. I’m going to delete . . . I’m going 
to move that the Assembly delete the second section, and I want 
to make the argument to the members that this question is 
answered in question 41 and the information is more complete 
and it’s better set out. 
 
So, the members opposite, I can see how this happens. These 
questions may be asked sometimes days or even weeks apart. 
The information is largely the same and so I’m going to delete 
no. (2) but will be providing that information and more under 
question 41. 
 
I therefore move, seconded by the member from Redberry 
Lake: 
 

That this Assembly delete section (2). 
 
(1945) 
 
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2185 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not quite 
sure  and I don’t know if I can ask at this point for 
clarification  but it strikes me that the questions are 
somewhat different and the minister, in asking for a leap of 
faith, is asking for a combined number. And I guess what I’m 
concerned about is that we’re very much interested in the 
specific and detailed numbers for each of the specific 
corporations. And you recognize of course the difficulty in the 
way you have to pose questions by individual entities, by 
individual years, created a lot of these duplications. 
 
But I think from our point of view we’re very much concerned 
that not only the total amount of capital work be tabled in each 
of these questions for each of these entities but that the amount 
for each specific entity of the capital projects that would be 
subject to a CCTA-type agreement would also be noted. And so 
I’m not quite clear if that’s the intention of 41 and we’ll get that 
information if there is. I have no further objection but I would 
really like if the member opposite would clarify that for us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  The question before the House  order  
the question before the House is the motion by the hon. member 
for Canora-Pelly, seconded by the hon. member for Humboldt. 
And I think in this one, in the interest of clarity, I’m going to 
read it. 
 
To move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return 17 
showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation: (1) the total amount of tenders for 
capital asset construction activity in the fiscal year 
1995-96; and (2) the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement that was in place at that time and the total 
amount that would have been subject to the CCTA. 

 
And then the amendment, moved by the Government House 
Leader, seconded by the hon. member for Redberry Lake: 
 

To delete section 2. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
concern that we have over on this side of the House is in fact 
are we to expect that all of the motions regarding Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement, and asked for in each of 
the departments, will we have that breakdown if you’re going to 
provide that answer to question 41? 
 
This is the problem that we’re dealing with. If we’re not going 
to have it broken down as to each and every department, then it 
isn’t answering the questions that we needed answering, and 
that’s why the member was asking for this clarification. 
 
So unless I can get a signal from the Government House Leader 
that in fact we are having them broken down by department, 
then we have a concern as to the speed on which these are going 
to be moving through . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well then 
if the Government House Leader then would go on  

record . . . or perhaps a better way of doing it is if he would ask 
for leave to move directly to 41, and then we’ll come back and 
we’ll know exactly what we’re dealing with after we see what’s 
being tabled. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There seems to be 
some confusion here, and I’m not sure that this is indeed open 
and accountable government. 
 
We’re asking for a specific answer. And if it’s going to be 
answered in a further question anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
sure what the problem would be including it in these questions. 
And if the government, represented by the Government House 
Leader, isn’t prepared to make that commitment to us, then of 
course we’re going to have problems with the next 15 questions 
or so. 
 
The Speaker:  This is rather unorthodox here. There are . . . 
Order. Order. Now the Chair is not looking for advice about 
procedure. Members have available to them procedures to 
accomplish what they wish. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, here again I think we’re in a 
bit of a dilemma because I’m not sure that I can ask for leave to 
move to a motion that is belonging to the third party. But if that 
you would find agreeable . . . and you do? Okay. Well I guess 
we do. Then I ask leave that we move to question no. 41 and 
have it dealt with. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Return No. 44 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 
Assembly do issue a return showing: 
 

To the Minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation: (1) the Crown projects contracted pursuant to 
the terms of the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
in the past year and the cost of each contract; (2) the 
Crown projects contracted outside the terms of Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement in the past year and the 
cost of each contract. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member from Moosomin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to table the answer to the 
last question which we’ve passed. And while that might not 
strictly be in order, I think it will be in order to point out that I 
will table the answer to this one on the passage of the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  To ask leave for a five-minute recess 
while we review the response to question 41. 
 
The Speaker:  This is an evening for unorthodox procedures.  
  



2186 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

Is the hon. member asking for leave of a certain period of time 
. . . for recess of a certain . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Ten minutes. 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member for Wood River has asked 
for leave for the House to take a recess of 10 minutes. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The recess having expired, the 
House will come to order. 
 
First of all, before proceeding, during the recess the Chair was 
advised of a procedural error and the House had proceeded 
contrary to the intention of the House in the opinion of the 
Speaker. And so let me first of all make a ruling. 
 
It was . . . the motion . . . the leave was requested to proceed to 
return no. 41. And in error, what was called from the Table on 
this evening of procedural unorthodoxies was item 39 . . . or 
excuse me, was item 41 which is return no. 44. 
 
So the House did not in fact follow direction of the leave that 
was requested and approved by the House. I am therefore, first 
of all, going to rule the consideration of item 41 out of order on 
the grounds that the House acted incorrectly on the direction of 
the leave that it was required to follow, and therefore return to 
call item number . . . and therefore I rule the decision on item 
41 null and void at this point. And then return to item 39, which 
is return no. 41, which was the direction that the House was 
given when the leave was asked. 
 
That’s the ruling of the Chair, and therefore we will follow 
then, the leave of the House being granted, to call return no. 41. 
 

Return No. 41 
 
Ms. Draude:  As previously agreed to and seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly, to move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 41 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Executive Council: (1) The 
number of government-funded tenders that were awarded 
to union-only firms in the fiscal year ‘95-96; (2) the total 
dollar value of these tenders; (3) the number of 
government-funded tenders that were awarded to 
non-union firms in the fiscal year of ‘95-96; and (4) the 
total dollar value of these tenders. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of this vote, be 
tabling the answer to this. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker:  Now it is the interpretation of the Chair that it 
was leave only for item 39 and we will therefore return to item 
no. 18. 

Return No. 18 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I move, seconded by the member from 
Canora-Pelly, to move an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 18 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation: (1) the estimated amount of tenders 
for capital asset construction activity for the fiscal year 
1996-97; and (2) on that estimated amount the total which 
is estimated to be subject to the CCTA. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There’s going to be a whole series of 
these we’re going to urge the Assembly to defeat. 
 
The difficulty is that the members have asked for information 
about the fiscal year ‘96-97 which won’t be completed until 
April ’97. And there’s a whole series of these we’re going to 
defeat. They ask about information for a fiscal year which is not 
yet complete and won’t be. 
 
So I will be urging the Assembly to defeat these, and there’s 
half a dozen or so others. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, in discussion that we had on 
item no. 17 where we looked at Saskatchewan Forest Products, 
and there was an indication there that for the fiscal year just 
expired, ‘95-96, there was a suggestion that the number of 
projects, capital asset construction projects that were issued, 
were zero. And we see in the return (debatable) for no. 41 that 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is also listed as 
zero projects at the time. And we find it interesting that Sask 
Forests Products Corporation was not included in the return for 
item no. 41. 
 
Now when we start to look at estimates . . . and I know that the 
series of questions that have been put to the Assembly deal with 
estimates. What we’re asking of the government is that they 
provide us with a estimate as to what number of projects, at 
what expense, might be let in the fiscal year 1996-97. There’s 
no accuracy, we understand. But surely based on numbers that 
were provided for the past fiscal year, for the Crown 
corporations that have been tabled, that there would be, from 
the ministers in charge of those departments, that there would 
be an estimate as to what the amount of project that would be 
let for ‘96-97. 
 
That is the point that we have been asking for, and we find that 
that should be something that the government can consider. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 19 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 19 
showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance: (1) the total amount of tenders for 
capital asset construction activity in the fiscal year ‘95-96;  

  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2187 

(2) the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement that was 
in place at that time and the total amount that would have 
been subject to the CCTA. 
 

Seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will on the passage of the motion be 
tabling the answer to this question. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 20 
 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 20 
showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance: (1) the estimated amount of 
tenders for capital asset construction activity for the fiscal 
year 1996-97; (2) of that estimated total, the amount that is 
estimated to be subject to the CCTA. 
 

Seconded by the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, this is one of those 
matters in which they’ve asked for information for an upcoming 
year. I only say to the member it has never been the practice  
for the member from Pelly I guess it is  it’s never been the 
practice to ask for estimates under orders for return. 
 
Under orders for return, we ask for information. It’s never been 
the practice to ask for estimates. You can ask for estimates in 
estimates and they may or may not be given or may be given in 
a qualified fashion. 
 
You can also ask for estimates in the Crown Corporations but 
it’s never been the practice to use orders for return to get 
estimates and we don’t think it’s a wise practice. If the 
members wanted to suggest a Rules Committee or something 
we could do that, but this has never been the practice. It is not 
the purpose of orders for return to ask for estimates, it’s to get 
factual information. We will therefore be urging this be 
defeated. 
 
(2015) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
strikes me as that this is indeed at least an appropriate time in 
order to talk about things that have been documented to some 
extent. 
 
I recall in the Finance Minister’s budget speech, I believe on 
page 7, there was a figure of 600-plus, $635 million of capital 
construction activity that was alluded to in the budget 
document. And those things become part of the psyche, if you 
like, the expectation, the anticipation of what’s going to happen 
to the province in this coming fiscal year. 
 
And therefore I also think that because the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement is such a thorn and such a problematic  

kind of a device for this government, that it’s quite appropriate 
to try to link the information that the minister used in her 
finance documents to information that then says how much of 
this $630 million is going to be subject to the CCTA. 
 
I think it’s critically important to the construction industry. It’s 
important to the people that realize that this very flawed 
agreement is costing Saskatchewan taxpayers as much as 30 per 
cent more on every project that’s undertaken. So I think it’s 
very timely that this indeed be answered in detail by these 
groupings, not only in the past record . . . because it’s really 
difficult to undo the past. If we’re going to have any impact at 
all on the future, we have to start dealing with today forward. 
And if you say that’s estimates and it’s an inappropriate time, I 
find that just a tad strange. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time again we’ve raised the concerns of 
the construction industry. We’ve raised the concerns of the 
people that realized how much money was being wasted on this 
ill-thought-out plan and agreement. We’ve tried to have these 
questions answered at question period and other so-called 
appropriate times. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that from our point 
of view, any opportunity and any device that we can get to try 
to attempt to get a real answer for the people that are so vitally 
concerned about this whole issue is quite appropriate. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I find it very unfortunate that the 
government chooses not to answer this question and to duck 
behind some kind of precedent or tradition of the House every 
time that we try to find a new way of getting to the actual 
factual information that people are looking for in a detailed 
way. And I know that the construction association, all the 
workers, are going to be very, very disappointed with the 
government’s attitude, and I have to register my disappointment 
as well with the government’s attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 21 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Canora-Pelly, to move an order of the 
Assembly do issue a return no. 21 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation: (1) the total amount of tenders for capital 
asset construction activity in the fiscal year 1995-96; and 
(2) the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement that was 
in place at that time and the total amount that would have 
been subject to the CCTA. 

 
Seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, you already . . . the members 
opposite already have the answer under the other return. 
Moreover this one is awkwardly phrased because it refers to 
‘95-96 and SaskTel keeps its records on a calendar basis. So 
you’ve got the information on the other return. This one could 
not have been answered in any event. 
  



2188 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

I’ll therefore move, seconded by the member from Regina 
Sherwood: 
 

That this Assembly delete section (2). 
 
And on the passage of the motion as amended, I will be tabling 
the answer to the question. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 22 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 22 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation: (1) the estimated amount of tenders for 
capital asset construction activity for the fiscal year 
1996-97; (2) of that estimated total, the amount that is 
estimated to be subject to the CCTA. 

 
I move that, seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’ll be urging the Assembly to defeat 
this motion. As I explained earlier, it is not our policy to 
provide estimates on orders for return. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as a 
business person, every business person in this province knows 
that every year you have to do a cash flow projection for your 
banker and you have to give him an estimate of what you 
expect to have happen in the next year. I’m sure that 
government departments are no different than that. The only 
difference is, they have the money to be able to make sure they 
have lots of paper flow and they’d be able to drown all their 
customers in it if they want to. 
 
This year we’ve also . . . and all the people of this province are 
subject to massive rate hikes as well as the reconstruction 
charge on our power bills. I would think with this 
reconstruction charge on our bills, that must mean they have 
some estimate of what they’re going to do with all our money. I 
think this one is a grievous attempt at camouflaging what’s 
going on and I really resent what’s happening. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 23 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Canora-Pelly, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return no. 23 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Sask Telecommunications: 
(1) the total amount of tenders for capital asset 
construction activity in the fiscal year 1995-96; (2) the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement that was in 
place at that time and the total amount that would have 
been subject to the CCTA. 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Once again, as members I’m sure 
have anticipated, we will be moving to delete section (2). As I 
explained on the comment, the reason for this is as described 
earlier. You’ve asked for the information on the year ‘95-96. 
SaskPower’s on a calendar year so we couldn’t have answered 
it. Moreover, the information’s been provided to you under item 
no. 39, return 41. 
 
I’ll therefore move, seconded by the member from Estevan: 
 

That section (2) be deleted. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended negatived. 
 

Return No. 24 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly, to move an order of the Assembly 
do issue for return no. 24 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications: (1) the estimated amount of tenders 
for capital asset construction activity for the fiscal year 
‘96-97; (2) of that estimated amount that is estimated to be 
subject to the CCTA. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  As I’m sure members have 
anticipated, we will be urging that this be defeated. Again, it is 
not our policy to provide estimates on orders for return. I 
therefore urge the Assembly to defeat this motion. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to reiterate what 
the member for Kelvington said to one of the previous motions, 
that most businesses, especially big businesses in this province, 
have to project the upcoming year before they can set their 
finances in order. And I would suggest that the size of SaskTel 
and the volume of monies that this company goes through in a 
year would be more reason to even have this estimate down and 
pat. 
 
So I would suggest to the minister the opposite that it shouldn’t 
be that hard to give us the estimate for this year. We’re not 
asking for an actual figure; we’re asking for an estimate. And I 
would think if it was looked for, it’s probably already there. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 25 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 25 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company: (1) the total amount of tenders 
for capital asset construction activity in the fiscal year 
1995-96; (2) the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement that was in place at the time and the total 
amount that would have been subject to the CCTA. 

  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2189 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, at the conclusion of my 
comments, which will be extremely brief, move that we delete 
section (2). The reason is the same. You’ve already got the 
information under another section, and you’ve asked for this on 
the year ‘95-96 when SaskTel . . . this Crown corporation 
rather, operates on a calendar year  Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. 
 
Therefore I move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest: 
 

That this Assembly delete section (2). 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended negatived. 
 

Return No. 26 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Canora-Pelly, that the Assembly do issue 
for a return no. 26 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company: (1) the estimated amount of 
tenders for capital asset construction activity for the fiscal 
year 1996-97; (2) of that estimated amount, the amount 
that is estimated to be subject to the CCTA. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Once again, this is one where they’re 
asking for an estimate, and once again we do not provide this 
information. We’ll be urging this be defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 27 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly, that the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 27 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation: (1) the total amount of tenders for capital 
asset construction activity in the fiscal year 1995-96; (2) 
the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement that was in 
place at that time and the total amount that would have 
been subject to the CCTA. 

 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  For the reasons mentioned earlier, I 
move, seconded by the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley: 
 

That section (2) be deleted. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Day after day in this House, Mr. Speaker, we 
hear about open and accessible government  or is it open and 
accountable, I’m not sure. I don’t think any of those actually fit 
to be honest with you. The Government House Leader has 
talked about this day in and day out. 

And now he’s saying that well, since they run on calendar years 
he can’t give the answer. It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that if 
this such an open and accountable government, why wouldn’t 
they simply have come up with an answer for 1995 calendar 
year and one for the calendar year of 1996. We could have 
saved all this confusion, and he wouldn’t have had to stand up 
here and embarrass himself and his government by saying they 
can’t answer the questions. 
 
So it appears to me that if this government indeed is so open 
and accountable, and want to be open and accountable for the 
people of Saskatchewan, then try and answer the questions in 
the best way that they can instead of strictly going by the book 
and what they do to be beating around the bush. So I find it 
totally unacceptable if the government doesn’t answer these 
questions. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 28 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Canora-Pelly, that the Assembly do issue 
for return no. 28 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation: (1) the estimated amount of tenders for 
capital asset construction activity for the fiscal year 
1996-97; and (2) of that estimated total, the amount that is 
estimated to be subject of the CCTA. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It is our policy not to provide 
estimates on orders for return. I’ll therefore urge that this be 
defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 29 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Canora-Pelly, that the Assembly do issue 
for return no. 29 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the SaskEnergy 
Incorporated: (1) the total amount of tenders for capital 
asset construction activity in the fiscal year 1995-96; (2) 
the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement that was in 
place at that time and the total amount that would have 
been subject to the CCTA. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  For reasons mentioned earlier, Mr. 
Speaker, I will move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast: 
 

That section (2) be deleted. 
 
And the passage of the amendment and on the passage of the 
amended motion, I will be tabling the answer to this question. 
 
  



2190 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice the 
Government House Leader is saying for reasons given before, 
and in my mind, the recollection I recall that his reasons were 
that his government doesn’t want to be open and accountable. 
And with that, I will accept his reasoning for that. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 30 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded 
by the member from Arm River, that the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 30 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the SaskEnergy 
Incorporated: (1) the estimated amount of tenders for 
capital asset construction activity for the fiscal year 
1996-97; (2) of that estimated total, the amount that is 
estimated to be subject to the CCTA. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again, it is not our policy to provide 
estimates on orders for return. I’ll therefore urge that this 
motion be defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 31 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Cannington, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 31 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Public Service 
Commission. Regarding employees and positions cut in the 
recent budget: (1) the total number of jobs and/or positions 
eliminated in the recently delivered provincial budget; (2) 
the breakdown of the number of jobs lost by branch, 
department, or arm of government; (3) the breakdown of 
jobs by department and community, as well as the total 
payroll lost per community as a result of these 
eliminations; (4) the percentage of total jobs in each 
community that the elimination of these positions 
represent. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This time I think we’re going to be 
able to give the members substantially all they want . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Almost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, almost all they want. Item no. 
(4) requests the percentage of total jobs in each community that 
the elimination of these positions represent. We really have no 
way of knowing the answer to that. 
 
We don’t know how many jobs there are in the community. We 
only really have a rough idea of the population. You’ll know 
the population and you won’t know how many jobs there are, 
and thus it’s impossible for us to give this. 
 

However, we’re providing all the rest of the information, and I 
think that is substantially all the members want. 
 
I therefore move, seconded by the member from Carrot River 
Valley: 
 

That this Assembly delete section (4). 
 
On the passage of the amended motion and on the passage . . . 
yes, on the passage of the amended motion, I’ll be tabling the 
answer to this question. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 32 
 
Ms. Draude:  As previously agreed, and seconded by the 
member from Humboldt, move that an order of the Assembly 
do issue for return no. 32 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture regarding the closure of 
eight Crop Insurance offices: (1) whether there are leases 
for Crop Insurance offices that were closed in February in 
the towns of Wilkie, Kyle, Wynyard, Carnduff, Outlook, 
Melfort, Canora, and Wolseley; (2) if so, who holds the 
leases; (3) the cost incurred in the termination of the lease 
at each of the said offices; (4) since the rural service centre 
extension offices in Leader, Kamsack, Melfort, and Fort 
Qu’Appelle are to be closed immediately, the date for 
termination of leases for those rural service centre 
extension offices; (5) the costs that will be associated with 
the termination of these lease agreements. 

 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, on the passage of this vote, be 
tabling the answer to this question. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 33 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 31 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Justice regarding public notification 
process for released sex offenders: (1) the number of 
meetings that the minister has held and/or attended 
regarding implementing public notification process in the 
province of Saskatchewan; (2) those who were in 
attendance at those meetings; (3) the number of other 
notification processes from other jurisdictions that have 
been studied to date; (4) the number of provinces that have 
a public notification process in place presently. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to urge the Assembly to 
defeat this one. The members opposite groan. The question, I  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2191 

think, would be some of these would be impossible to answer, 
like such as those who were in attendance at the meetings. No 
registry was kept. In any event, this motion had to do with the 
identification of sex offenders and it was put forth at a time 
when the government was still formulating its policy and, as a 
result of deliberations here and elsewhere, the government did 
in fact meet what I think were the expectations of the Assembly 
and passed legislation. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Exceeded your expectations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Therefore . . . Probably the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton is probably right. I think we 
probably exceeded your highest hopes and expectations. 
Therefore the information has now really become irrelevant, 
and I’m going to urge the Assembly to defeat it. The members 
opposite probably say, no harm would be done in answering it. 
There’s a good deal of expense in answering these questions 
and if they no longer serve a purpose  and this no longer 
serves any purpose; the legislation’s now been passed  we 
really think it’s pointless to put the public service to the expense 
of answering questions, the whole reason for being for which 
has disappeared. So I’m going to be urging the Assembly to 
defeat this motion. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 34 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 34 showing, and 
this will be seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

To the Minister of Finance regarding order in council 
243/96, please provide the following information: (1) 
whether the assurances that were given to the Johnsons 
regarding their eligibility for Saskatchewan tax credits 
were given verbally or in writing; (2) the name and/or 
position of the government official who gave the erroneous 
assurances; (3) the Saskatchewan venture capital 
corporation that was involved in the investment from the 
Johnsons; (4) whether any other investors were given 
erroneous assurances with reference to investing in the 
Saskatchewan venture capital corporation; (5) whether any 
other investors were given erroneous assurances with 
regards to any other Saskatchewan venture capital 
corporation or any other tax credit-eligible investment; (6) 
whether similar compensation has been paid to other 
investors, and if so, the total number of such payments 
over the past year. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m going to urge the Assembly to 
defeat this. This is perhaps a proper question but I think an 
improper forum in which to ask the question. This question 
raises the question of whether or not a certain public servant 
discharged his or her duties properly. That’s a perfectly proper 
question, but this is probably not the proper forum to ask it. 
 
A proper forum would be for the member to write a letter. If the 
member felt the matter had not been properly dealt with, the 
member could take it up. But to answer this motion would have  

the effect of public punishing of a public servant. It’s not the 
policy of this government or any other to do that. 
 
So I say to the opposite member, it’s a proper question. In our 
view, it’s not the proper forum in which to raise it. It should be 
raised privately in a letter. We’re therefore going to recommend 
to the Assembly that this motion be defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 35 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 35 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Agriculture regarding rural 
service centres/ agriculture service centres: (1) the total 
number of inquiries that the rural service centres received 
in 1995; (2) the number of inquiries each rural service 
centre received individually in 1995; (3) the number of 
inquiries received in 1995 by the centres that the 
government proposes to close; (4) the furthest distance a 
producer in rural Saskatchewan will have to travel in order 
to reach the nearest rural service centre once the closures 
take place; (5) whether there is a formula and/or distance 
cap that has been developed by the department regarding 
the amount of travel producers must undertake to reach 
these centres. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I will, at the passage of this vote, be 
tabling the answer to this question. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 38 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 38 
showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for SGI: (1) the number of 
claims SGI has received as a result of deer damage to 
vehicles in the fiscal year 1996; (2) the number of claims 
that have been settled; (3) the total estimated expense to 
settle the claims made in the fiscal year 1996. 

 
Seconded by the member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I will be urging the 
Assembly to defeat this. This is not a case where the members 
opposite have asked for an estimate  they’ve asked for 
information, they’ve asked for information for the calendar year 
1996. That information is not of course available and won’t be 
available until the end of the year. 
 
The question therefore can’t be answered and I will urge the 
Assembly to defeat the motion. 
 
Motion negatived. 
  



2192 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

Return No. 40 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move an 
order of the Assembly do issue for the return no. 40 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Health: (1) whether an individual 
diagnosed with fourth-stage multiple chemical sensitivity 
syndrome, MCS, can obtain treatment in Canada and the 
location; (2) whether out-of-province patients are accepted 
if treatment is available in Canada but outside of 
Saskatchewan; (3) the nearest treatment centre if treatment 
for fourth-stage MCS is not available in Canada; (4) 
whether the costs associated with such treatment are 
covered by Saskatchewan medicare. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
The Speaker:  I just want to reflect for a moment as to 
whether the motion was in order. 
 
As all members will know, the procedure that the House has 
accepted is to permit the motion to be moved by another 
member of the member’s same caucus. 
 
And I will have to rule this out of order unless the hon. member 
for Cannington can indicate to the House that he has the hon. 
member’s permission and request to move it on her behalf. If 
the hon. member can indicate that to the House, then I’d ask 
him to indicate it to the House now. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe my 
House Leader has talked to Ms. Haverstock about the motions 
on the order paper from her dealing with this issue. 
 
The Speaker:  I think I’m going to ask for the House to grant 
leave in order for the motion to be put. So I’ll invite the hon. 
member for Cannington to do that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 
leave to be allowed to move the motion originally made by Ms. 
Haverstock, the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member has put it on record, the 
seconder being the member for Rosthern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We’re prepared to grant leave on 
these matters, Mr. Speaker. Our basic approach is we’ve got all 
the answers. We simply want to file them and not have to return 
to this item another night when the member’s back. 
 
So on the passage of this motion, I will table the answer to that 
question. 
 
The Speaker:  And I will have to rule the member’s 
comment referring to the presence or absence of a member as 
being out of order. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 39 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve asked 
myself for leave and I’ve given it. I move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 39 showing: 
 

All correspondence between the Department of Economic 
Development and the Minister of Economic Development 
regarding the Crown construction tendering proposal, 
including the analysis prepared by the department prior to 
this policy being introduced. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’m urging the Assembly on the . . . 
before I sit down I want to be urging the Assembly to defeat 
this. 
 
This asks for information. This asks for correspondence 
between a minister and another. If you . . . by virtue of 
Canadian law and English law, stretching back through the 
centuries, correspondence between a minister and his officials 
has been considered privileged. If you check in Erskine May 
you will find that to be the case, or Beauchesne. This is a rule of 
long-standing and certainly applies here. 
 
For these reasons we’re going to urge the Assembly to defeat 
this motion. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 42 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 42 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for Economic Development 
regarding the analysis prepared by the Economic 
Development department prior to the introduction of the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement: (1) whether the 
Crown Construction Tendering Agreement proposal was 
clearly identified to be a union preference policy; (2) 
according to the analysis, the costs of the Crown projects 
that were expected to increase as a result of this policy; (3) 
whether the analysis stated that this proposal would force 
non-union contractors to subsidize union contractors; (4) 
whether the Department of Economic Development 
recommended against the proposed Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement. 

 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Once again, Mr. Speaker, it is going 
to be . . . I’m going to be urging the Assembly to defeat this 
motion. 
 
Once again this motion asks for correspondence between the 
minister and his officials. As I explained in an earlier motion, 
by virtue of a long-standing rule, as I say stretching back 
through the centuries here and in England, correspondence  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2193 

between a minister and his officials is considered privileged and 
is not tabled. 
 
I’ll therefore be urging that this motion be defeated. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 44 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move an 
order of the Assembly do issue for the return no. 44 showing: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation: (1) the Crown projects contracted pursuant to 
the terms of the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
in the past year and the cost of each contract; (2) the 
Crown projects contracted outside the terms of Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement in the past year and the 
cost of each contract. 
 

I shall move, seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We urge that this one be defeated. 
The information has been substantially provided in return no. 
39. In order to avoid unnecessary expense and duplication, 
we’re not answering this one. I would urge the members of the 
Assembly to defeat this motion. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 

Return No. 45 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 45 showing, seconded 
by the hon. member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Indian and 
Metis Affairs Secretariat regarding the employment of first 
nations people in the public sector: (1) the number of first 
nations people that are employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan; (2) a breakdown of the departments, 
sectors, and Crown corporations in which these people 
work. 
 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To substantially provide this 
information, we need to amend the motion. 
 
I want to say as well that the information is a long way from 
being 100 per cent accurate. The reason for that is that only first 
nations people who self-identify are registered. And thus those 
who don’t self-identify aren’t. And so the numbers working in 
the public service are probably considerably higher than these 
figures indicate. This is simply the number of people who 
self-identify. 
 
I think it might have been open to the government to defeat this 
or to simply answer it and answer it unknown, unknown, 
unknown. We’ve tried not to do that. We’ve tried to 
substantially answer the question. 
 
I do need to amend it. Public sector is not a not a term of any  

precision, and so we’ll be amending that to read executive 
government. We don’t have even a self-identity system in the 
Crown corporations, so we really don’t know how many there 
are. 
 
I may say before I take my seat there aren’t nearly enough. The 
number of people working in the government and the number of 
people working in the Crown corporations is nowhere near 
equal to the percentage of people who are native in this 
province. So I’ll be the first to say that we probably should have 
answered this and I think the member from Athabasca might 
have been satisfied if we had just said, not nearly enough. I 
think with that he would have agreed. I recognize there aren’t 
anywhere near enough native people working in the public 
sector. However, that’s not the subject under debate now. 
 
We are providing the information as best we have it. I do want 
to warn you that it is really incomplete. With that as a 
background, I move, seconded by the member from Redberry 
Lake: 
 

That the Assembly delete the words “the Government of 
Saskatchewan” and substitute them with “executive 
government” in section (1); and delete the words “sectors 
and Crown corporations” from section (2). 

 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
just like to say through you to the member opposite that I 
appreciate the efforts put forward through the amendment. The 
reason for the questioning was because there was a commitment 
by this government, of course, to include a higher percentage of 
first nations people in the public sector, in employment in the 
public sector. I would ask if there is a possibility of getting a 
percentage, possibly, of those people that are now employed 
that you do know of. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington: — With leave, to respond to the minister 
by saying that we don’t have the . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. The Government House Leader has 
requested leave to respond. I presume he means to the member 
from Humboldt. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There is, perhaps, I just say to the 
member from Humboldt, there is maybe a better way to do it. 
There is a procedure which can be used: to rise and say, before 
the member takes his seat, I wonder if he would permit a 
question. I’ll certainly do that. I may not have the information, 
but if you use that procedure, it may not have to ask for leave. 
 
With that as a background, let me say that we really don’t have 
accurate percentages. This is the best information we have. I 
may say the figures are a lot higher than they were in 1991. 
We’re making progress, but it is painfully slow and I think 
unacceptably slow from the point of view of aboriginal people. 
With that in mind, I’ll table the answers assuming this passes. 
  



2194 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few 
comments to make in reference to the issues that we’re 
speaking about this evening. I can certainly concur with the 
minister in reference to the painfully slow analogy of the efforts 
of trying to employ first nations and Metis people within the 
public sector. 
 
Several months ago we spoke about the issue of Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement and how there was some 
feeble effort of trying to tie unions in with the aboriginal people 
and I felt that to a large extent there’s more so a political move 
on the government’s part as opposed to a genuine effort to try 
and increase the number of aboriginal people within the 
provincial workforce. 
 
And the only thing I would caution governments on is the 
self-identification process, that there should be some 
justification in essence of trying to ensure that the first nations 
and the Metis people that do apply for these positions are 
reasonably . . . or show reasonable proof that they have Metis or 
native ancestry. 
 
And the key thing here is not necessarily reverse discrimination, 
Mr. Speaker. Really the issue is trying to have parity for a small 
group of people in Saskatchewan in terms of working with and 
for governments. 
 
And a good example of that, Mr. Speaker, is in northern 
Saskatchewan where you could possibly have different resource 
officers working in the North talking about management of 
lands. You can have different police officers helping police 
some of these native communities. You could also have 
correctional officers working in some of these institutions. And 
if the majority of these people are not aboriginal, then naturally 
the aboriginal people will not see these systems as theirs. 
 
So there’s really a lot of benefit not only from the government 
perspective but also from society’s perspective as a whole to 
really try and make a concerted effort right across the board for 
every Crown corporation, for every government department, to 
try and increase the number of aboriginal people working for 
the government. Because if they’re part of this province and 
equal, they should have the same type of opportunity. 
 
So I encourage the government to continue on to doing their 
part and I’m appreciative of the information, but we certainly 
hope to get a heck of a lot more aggressive in terms of 
fast-tracking this process so we can see many more aboriginal 
people, both Metis and treaty, become part of the government 
and part of the system. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 46 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 46 showing: 

To the Minister of Finance: (1) the total amount of revenue 
taken in by the province in fines under The Highway 
Traffic Act for the year ending March 31, 1996; (2) the 
percentage of this revenue that was returned to municipal 
governments; (3) whether the provincial share of this 
revenue is targeted to any particular government program 
or does it all go to general revenue; and (4) the dollar 
amount in fines that were outstanding as of March 31, 
1996. 

 
Seconded by the member for Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I say to you and to 
members opposite, we don’t have to . . . I’m going to urge this 
Assembly to defeat this motion. We just simply don’t have the 
information. Specific numbers are not . . . this information is 
not recorded or tabulated and we simply can’t answer these 
questions. In order to do so a special computer program would 
have to be written and I don’t think the members are really 
asking for that. 
 
We don’t have the information; it’s not available. I’m therefore 
going to urge the Assembly to defeat this motion. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question is of great importance to me because I have a great 
investment within these fines and I would really have liked the 
minister to have answered this question. I’d like to know where 
my money has gone. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 43 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 43 showing: 
 

Minister responsible for SaskPower, regarding employees 
Mr. Jack Messer and Ms. Carol Bryant: provide a copy of 
employment contracts for Mr. Messer and Ms. Bryant 
including details of salary, perks, car allowances, 
memberships, travel allowances. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member from Rosthern. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, we’re going to urge that 
this one be defeated. The contract for Crown corporations . . . a 
written contract, where there is one, where a head of a Crown 
corporation . . . is available and is registered. 
 
This goes well beyond that. This asks for information with 
respect to Mr. Messer and Mr. Bryant. And they not only want a 
copy of the employment contract, which I think for Mr. Messer 
is registered; they want employment contracts for both, you 
want detail of salaries, perks, car allowances, membership, 
travel allowances. 
 
Public servants are entitled to some degree of privacy, and that 
includes these two public servants. There has been an ongoing, 
constant attack on these two public servants. We think it is 
unfair; we think they should be judged on their ability and on  
  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2195 

the job they’re doing. We think the activity and the success that 
SaskPower has enjoyed suggests that these people are 
competent and are doing a good job. 
 
The whole power industry is undergoing enormous changes to 
which SaskPower must adapt or present the public with very 
serious problems. SaskPower is making those adaptations, it is 
adapting. These two public servants are discharging their duties, 
we think, rather well. 
 
We only ask members opposite, and the public of 
Saskatchewan, to judge them on the job they’re doing rather 
than their . . . what they believe to be their political loyalties. 
 
That being the case, Mr. Speaker, and because we think it unfair 
that these two public servants continue to be attacked, we are 
going to ask the Assembly to defeat the motion. 
 
Motion negatived on division. 
 
(2115) 

Return No. 47 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With reference to 
the following homily, I would like to move, seconded by the 
member from Cannington, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for a return no. 47 showing: 
 

Minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation regarding the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement, CCTA: 
 
1. The dollar volume of total Crown project that has come 

under CCTA since it was announced on March 3, 1995. 
 
2. The number of CCTA projects, the total volume that 

has been tendered in urban areas, i.e., population 
centres over 5,000, where the eligible projects are 
greater than $50,000 in size; the number of non-union 
contractors that have been awarded work on such 
projects; and the number of non-union employees that 
have been actually working on these CCTA projects in 
urban areas. 

 
3. The number of CCTA projects, the total volume that 

have been tendered in rural areas where the eligible 
projects are greater than $150,000 in size; the number 
of non-union contractors that have been awarded work 
on such projects, and the number of non-union 
employees that have been actually working on the 
CCTA projects in rural areas. 

 
4. In total, a percentage of all person-years of construction 

jobs on CCTA-covered projects since March 3, 1995 
have been non-union. 

 
5. As a result of the CCTA’s required pro-union hiring 

sequence, in the light of the limited number of 
unionized contractors and employees in the province, 
i.e., less than 20 per cent of the entire construction 
sector, the number of contractors and workers on  

CCTA projects over the last year that came from out of 
province. 

 
6. On average, compared to similar-sized projects prior to 

CCTA, the estimated percentage increase in projects 
costs covered by this agreement. 

 
7. Many of the unionized contractors who work on the 

Crown projects covered by the CCTA can undertake 
name hiring whereas non-union contractors under this 
agreement cannot and must accept whoever is sent by 
the union for their out-of-work list. The number of 
name-hired unionized employees that have been 
working on CCTA projects since the agreement was 
announced. 

 
8. The number of unionized employees that have worked 

on CCTA projects over the past year that have been 
hired from outside the major cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon, the percentage of total unionized labour on 
CCTA projects that this would represent. 

 
9. The CCTA establishes a new group called the 

Construction Opportunities Development Council, 
CODC, to create, support, and promote programs to 
continually enhance the unionized construction product. 
The names of people on this council and specifically 
their activities over the last year, whether they will be 
required to soon publicly release an annual report on 
these activities. 

 
10. The agreement requires every contractor on a CCTA 

project to pay 21 cents an hour per worker in extra fees. 
An extra 5 cents an hour has gone into the building 
trade union. Ten cents an hour has gone to the 
unionized employee group, CLR (Construction Labour 
Relations Association). And an extra 6 cents an hour 
has gone to a special fund to finance the work of this 
new CODC mentioned in the previous question. All of 
these extra fees are ultimately borne by the Crown 
corporations through contract payments. On behalf of 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the amount of revenue 
through these extra fees that has been collected under 
the CCTA since March 3, 1995 for (a) the CLR, 
(Construction Labour Relations Association); (b) the 
SPBCTA, trade unions; and (c) the CODC fund. In 
each of these accounts, how the money has been spent. 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We’re going to urge the Assembly to 
defeat this one. There has to be, Mr. Speaker, some sensible 
limit to the expense to which the public should be put to answer 
these questions. Much of this information actually the 
opposition have in other questions. Some of the rest of it would 
take an enormous amount of time that would involve enormous 
expense. As I say, there has to be some sensible limit to the 
amount of expense to which the public can be put for these 
questions. 
 
We think this very long question exceeds what is sensible and 
reasonable. And we’re therefore, on the basis that it is too long, 
it is too complicated, and it would be too expensive to answer,  
  



2196 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1996 

we are therefore going to urge this be defeated. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I 
believe that the taxpayers of this province deserve an answer on 
this particular issue. You may believe that it’s going to be 
expensive to acquire this information, but this question relates 
directly to the reasons why you believe that the CCTA should 
be in place. If you can’t answer these questions, then you have 
no way of knowing whether the CCTA is doing what you 
claimed it was supposed to be put in place to do. 
 
So if you don’t know these answers, you don’t know whether or 
not your own Act, the CCTA, is actually performing as you 
claimed it was. Unless, Mr. Speaker, unless this particular Act 
has been put in place simply to provide funding or employment 
opportunity solely for unionized employees, then the 
government should know what the answers are to these 
particular questions. 
 
I would suspect that the government, if they are not, should be 
tracking what happens to the money, the 21 cents an hour per 
employee that goes into this union fund, the CODC. What’s 
happening to it? This is money that are coming, because of an 
Act of this legislature, to an organization and should be tracked 
by this particular government. 
 
And this is a government Act that we are dealing with here, Mr. 
Speaker. And for the minister to stand up and say that it would 
be too expensive to find out what the answer to this money . . . 
what the answer to these questions are as to what happens to the 
money, who are the people controlling it and how are they 
spending it, is ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This legislature deserves the answers that these questions bring 
forward and that this government refuses to supply to this 
Assembly and to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well in 
support of this motion for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As has been demonstrated over the last numbers of weeks and 
months, since the sitting of this legislature and before, the 
CCTA has become a fundamentally flawed program that your 
government implemented and for a lot of the reasons that are 
listed in this question. 
 
And it finds me as a very strange comment by the government 
to say that this is too expensive in order to answer these 
questions, would be too much expense to the Assembly or to 
the taxpayers of the province. But who in the world thought 
about the extra cost to the taxpayers of this province for you 
implementing this program? 
 
We’ve demonstrated time and time again that this project, or 
this process and this program, is costing the taxpayers 30 per 
cent more to comply with the components of this agreement. 
And the government has absolutely no problem justifying those 
extra expenses. And depending on the numbers that you use, the 
very least that we can use, based on the information tabled 
tonight, is $30 million subject to the CCTA agreement. And so 
we have on one hand where the government flippantly accepts  

the fact that 9 million extra dollars of taxpayers’ money is being 
spent in order to implement the CCTA agreement in order to 
keep the union component of their party happy. 
 
They don’t have any problem with justifying the expense of $9 
million, Mr. Speaker, in order for them to comply with this 
flawed policy; but they have a problem saying that we can 
release the answers to these questions. I find it very, very 
strange that the government would take such an irresponsible 
attitude. 
 
Secondly, I really disagree that these questions should be so 
difficult to find and to answer. It seems to me that any 
responsible government, before they even embark on a policy 
like CCTA, surely have weighed out the answers that have been 
incumbent to the questions in this section. Because if you 
haven’t been able to think through the implications of what 
your decision is going to be, then how can you logically 
proceed? 
 
And so to say that all these research things have to come from 
scratch is just ludicrous, or it indicates that this government did 
not think through the ramifications of the whole CCTA policy. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I certainly join in support of this motion 
and think that the government should think again before they 
take the position that they are going to defeat it and refuse to 
answer these very legitimate questions that are being asked, not 
only by the construction association but independent business 
and contractors and first and foremost taxpayers right across 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The division bells rang from 9:29 p.m. until 9:49 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  8 
 
Aldridge McLane Draude 
McPherson Belanger Bjornerud 
Krawetz Gantefoer  
 

Nays  19 
 
Wiens Lingenfelter Shillington 
Johnson Whitmore Goulet 
Upshall Kowalsky Renaud 
Calvert Trew Lorje 
Teichrob Nilson Murray 
Langford Kasperski Ward 
Jess   
 

Return No. 48 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 48 
showing: 
 

To the Minister of Finance regarding order in council 
282/96: (1) the reason the order in council was approved 
on April 30, 1996 when the program ran from April 1,  

  



June 4, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2197 

1995 to March 31, 1996; (2) whether this money was 
included in the 1995-96 Saskatchewan estimates  if not, 
the reason why; (3) the department which was responsible 
for providing the $7 million; and (4) the programs which 
received the $14 million, and how this money was divided. 

 
Seconded by the member for Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I just want to, before I deal with this 
motion . . . I said when we began some hours ago that this is the 
first time we have answered these returns and provided all of 
the answers at the time the motions were passed. It’s the first 
time it’s ever been done. 
 
This occurred, in large part, through a major effort by the public 
servants. There have been public servants in this . . . not so 
much in this building but in the city and around the province 
who have worked long hours to get this ready. I think all of us 
owe the public servants who have worked to provide this 
information for the members a vote of thanks. It really is a 
Herculean effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  With respect to this one I’m going to 
. . . we are going to urge that this one be defeated. 
 
This one deserves a bit of an explanation. There is nothing . . . it 
isn’t clear to the Department of Finance and it certainly isn’t 
clear to me what the member is getting at here. 
 
There is nothing . . . while the action of having the OC (order in 
council) completed after some or all of the money was spent is 
not normal, neither is there anything illegal about it, and it’s 
certainly not unique. It will happen from time to time. It wasn’t 
at all clear to the Department of Finance and it wasn’t clear to 
me exactly what you were getting at, so we’re going to defeat it. 
 
I remind the member that the minister’s estimates are open and 
that, if and when they return, you can ask the minister this very 
question and I’m sure she can provide the answer. 
 
So it just was not at all clear to us exactly what the member 
from Canora wanted, and we thought therefore it would 
probably be more appropriate to ask the question in estimates. 
 
I will, therefore, urge that this motion be defeated. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:53 p.m. 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable)  
Return No. 5  

Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................. Error! 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2179 

Return No. 6  
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2179 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2179 

Return No. 7  
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2179 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2179 

Return No. 8  
Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2179 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2179 

Return No. 9  
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2179 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2180 

Return No. 10  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2180 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2180 
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2180 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2180 

Return No. 11  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2181 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2181 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2182 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2182 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2182 

Return No. 12  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2183 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2183 

Return No. 13  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2183 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2183 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2183 

Return No. 14  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2184 

Return No. 15  
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2184 

Return No. 16 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2184 

Return No. 17 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2184 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2184 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2185 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2185 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2185 

Return No. 44 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2185 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2185 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2185 

Return No. 41 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2186 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2186 

Return No. 18 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2186 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2186 
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2186 

Return No. 19  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2186 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2187 

Return No. 20  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2187 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2187 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2187 

Return No. 21  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2187 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2187 

Return No. 22  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2188 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2188 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2188 

Return No. 23  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2188 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2188 



 

Return No. 24  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2188 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2188 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2188 

Return No. 25  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2188 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 

Return No. 26  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 

Return No. 27  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2189 

Return No. 28  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 

Return No. 29  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2189 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 

Return No. 30  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2190 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2190 

Return No. 31  
Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2190 

Return No. 32  
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2190 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2190 

Return No. 33  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2190 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2190 

Return No. 34  
Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2191 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2191 

Return No. 35  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2191 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2191 

Return No. 38  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2191 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2191 

Return No. 40  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2192 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2192 

Return No. 39  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2192 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2192 

Return No. 42  
Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2192 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2192 

Return No. 44  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2193 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2193 

Return No. 45  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2193 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2193 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 2193 
Belanger .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2194 

Return No. 46  
Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2194 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2194 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2194 

Return No. 43  
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2194 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2194 

Return No. 47  
Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2195 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2195 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2196 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2196 

Recorded division ........................................................................................................................................................................ 2196 
Return No. 48  

Krawetz ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2196 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2197 

 


