
















































March 12, 1996 Hansard


   LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 187 

   March 11, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I once again rise on behalf of 

responsible firearms owners in Saskatchewan who pray as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will be pleased to challenge Bill C-68 in court, 

refuse to allow the federal government to take over 

enforcement in Saskatchewan, and not allow the 

implementation of Bill C-68 in Saskatchewan while the 

Bill is being challenged in court. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by people from Moose 

Jaw, Yorkton, Melville, Esterhazy, Ituna, Kamsack, Neudorf  

virtually all over the province, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions 

are from Moose Jaw, Regina, but all over southern 

Saskatchewan; Shamrock; quite a few from the member from 

Elphinstone’s constituency, and the member from Regina 

Albert South, who should have stood up before. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present more 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Moose Jaw; they’re from Regina, Swift Current; they’re from 

Asquith; they’re from Shaunavon;. they’re from practically all 

over Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

such places as Radisson, Bienfait, Regina, Moose Jaw, Slave 

Lake, Estevan, Weyburn, and a number of others. Thank you. 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions from 

throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. 

The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Moose Jaw, Regina, Craven, Gull Lake, and throughout 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

mainly from the Regina and the Windthorst area. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Montmartre, Windthorst, and all over Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

present petitions of names from all across the province 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by names from all across the 

province, including Regina, Estevan, and southern 

Saskatchewan. 



188  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Windthorst, Regina; also from Grenfell and Wawota, just to 

name a few. Thank you. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Val Marie, Bracken, Orkney, 

Regina areas of the province, Mr. Speaker; Unity; across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

present petitions to this Assembly, and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions I have in my hand are signed by individuals 

from the Glaslyn, Val Marie, Saskatoon, and Aberdeen areas 

and other areas in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present some 

petitions; reading the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that you Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 

And these come from places such as Southey, Earl Grey,  

Strasbourg, and other places in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 

present petitions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. I’ll 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party review committee is in place in order to debate, 

review, and revise any utility rate increases in the future in 

order to restore fairness to the utility rate process in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These names all come from the beautiful community of Unity, 

Saskatchewan, and a few from Biggar. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

challenge the implementation of Bill C-68, the federal 

firearms legislation. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investment 

Corporation: (1) How many tenders has the government 

put out under the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

to date; (2) how many of these tenders apply to rural 

Saskatchewan; (3) how many of these tenders apply to 

urban Saskatchewan; (4) what are the specifics of the 

projects tendered; and (5) what is the total cost estimated 

of all tenders combined? 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall ask the government the following questions on 

Wednesday next: 

 

To the Minister of Labour: could you provide a list of all 

public sector job classifications that are not gender neutral; 

if there are any, why is a gender distinction made; if pay 

equity is negotiated with the public sector unions, what 

procedures will be used to evaluate the work value for 

gender specific jobs; in negotiating pay equity in the  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  189 

public service, will the government identify jobs which 

tend to be held by one gender; what will the criteria be for 

judging the gender tendencies of a given job classification? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 

Enable Direct Reduction of the Provincial Debt; short title, The 

Direct Debt Reduction Act. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I look 

around the galleries in the House today there are very many 

special people that have come to see our proceedings today, and 

I’d like to welcome each and every one of them. However I 

would like to welcome two very special people in my life, 

people that have supported me and helped me a great deal along 

the bumpy road of life to allow me to achieve this achievement 

by being here in the House. I’d like to introduce in the 

opposition galleries my wife Barbara and my daughter Kim. 

Please welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you a member, a former member, 

of this House, Mr. Speaker, Anita Bergman behind the ropes. I 

would ask everyone to welcome Anita back here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to add my welcome to the member, former member 

of Regina North West, Anita Bergman; and as well introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly two very 

special guests today in your east gallery  Calvin and Noreen 

Mills, if you would stand please. They’re from Fleming, 

Saskatchewan which is in the Moosomin constituency, have 

been ardent and very hard-working supporters of the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Party for many, many years. Please give 

them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and to other members of the Assembly 

two very special people seated in the gallery opposite, Peter and 

Sophie Krawetz. Peter is my father and Sophie is my 

stepmother. And I’d like to inform the Assembly that my dad 

has been involved for decades in rural municipal government 

and urban municipal government and has been a tremendous 

inspiration to me. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

join the member from Saskatoon Greystone in welcoming the 

Mills’s to the Assembly here this afternoon. And certainly I’ve 

appreciated just the many opportunities I’d had to meet with 

Mr. and Mrs. Mills, and they’ve been certainly an interesting 

couple to work with. Even though they may have different  

political views we certainly have had good relationships, and I 

thank them for taking the time to come and join us. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature my 

daughter Ingrid, and my other daughter Solveig; and my parents 

Tom and Randi Nilson; my constituency assistant Elaine Wood; 

and faithful worker and member of my constituency, Mr. Garry 

Carlson; and Deanna Christensen, another person from our 

constituency. I’d like you all to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: And I would further also like to welcome 

some other constituents who are seated in your gallery: Mr. 

Arvid and Donna Fonkalsrud and also Mr. David Brundige. 

And I would like to point out that Mr. David Brundige has not 

yet quite seen the light but his wife is a good member of our 

constituency. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I realize there are many other guests 

in the galleries this afternoon but I noted with interest one other 

individual sitting up in your gallery, Mr. Jeff Bartlam, who 

comes from the Whitewood area, was involved with crop 

insurance for a number of years. I’d like to welcome Mr. 

Bartlam to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Country Music Awards Winners 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Meadow 

Lake has good reason to be proud of its country music 

entertainers. I was present last night to see our very own Lorrie 

Church, who picked up top honours in five categories at the 

Saskatchewan country music awards handed out here in Regina. 

 

Lorrie won in every category for which she was nominated. 

They include female vocalist of the year; entertainer of the year; 

single of the year, with “Baby, Don’t Go”; most promising 

entertainer of the year; and video of the year. Also to her band, 

Last Train Out, went group of the year. 

 

Congratulations to Lorrie and her manager, who is, incidentally, 

her husband, for an impressive showing at the awards 

ceremony. I know her parents, Walter and Freda Church, and 

her 15 brothers and sisters were very proud. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the Cokrum sisters of Meadow 

Lake for being nominated in two categories. 

 

Some of the other award winners were Brenda Chute of Prince 

Albert, who won album of the year, and with her brother Jim 

for vocal collaboration. The Johner brothers won for song of 

the year; male vocalist went to Scott Kyle King of Regina;  



190  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

CJVR radio in Melfort picked up the radio station of the year 

award; while Trevor Scott of MX 92 FM won “on air” 

personality of the year. 

 

The international humanitarian award went to Tom Jackson of 

Batoche, Saskatchewan. This award recognizes an individual in 

the country music industry whose selfless contributions make 

this world a better place in which to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the country music awards were being 

presented in Regina, Saskatchewan talent was also being 

recognized nationally. Colin James of Regina received male 

vocalist of the year at the Juno Awards held in Hamilton, 

Ontario. 

 

To everyone, congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canadian Women’s Basketball Award Winner 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with pleasure 

that I rise today to offer congratulations to one of my 

constituents. 

 

Last week you will remember that it was announced that 

Andrea Gottselig of Findlater won the title of CIAU (Canadian 

Intercollegiate Athletic Union) rookie of the year for women’s 

basketball. Mr. Speaker, in winning this award, Ms. Gottselig is 

now recognized as the best new player in all of Canadian 

university women’s basketball. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, you take pride in hearing this as well, as 

Ms. Gottselig spent several years playing high school basketball 

at Peacock institute which I believe is in your constituency. 

 

She took her forceful presence on the high school court to 

become a major contributor to the University of Regina Lady 

Cougars. Playing as a guard, Andrea scored 13.1 points per 

game and got 7.1 rebounds in her first season. She is a good 

enough player to make any team and we’re glad she chose to 

play for one in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our pride in her achievements is certainly shared 

by her team-mates, her coach Christine Stapleton, as well as by 

her family. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the other members of this 

House will join me in offering our heartfelt congratulations to 

her. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Research Centre Opens 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An unsolved and 

unfortunate mystery in our province is the abnormally high 

occurrence of multiple sclerosis in Saskatchewan. I have a sister 

and a cousin afflicted by this as yet incurable neurological 

disorder; so it is with personal interest and hope for a cure that I 

bring this important announcement to the House’s attention. 

 

On Friday in Saskatoon the Cameco MS (multiple sclerosis) 

Neurological Research Centre was officially opened at City 

Hospital. This is the only research facility of its kind in 

Saskatchewan and the only place in Canada that allows 

researchers and medical personnel to work together in one 

facility to treat patients with MS and with other neurological 

disorders. 

 

This is the result of a successful fund-raising campaign, Quest 

for a Cure, which raised $1,647,219, all for equipment and 

related research costs for the centre. Many people and 

organizations are to be congratulated and thanked for these 

achievements: Saskatoon City Hospital Foundation, 

Saskatchewan division of the MS Society of Canada, the 

Kinsmen, over 4,000 clubs, individuals, and corporations, and 

most particularly Cameco. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this centre, a centre of hope, will make a lasting 

contribution to our people and people all around the world 

affected by neurological disorders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rehabilitation Centres 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mallard Industries in 

Wadena and south-west ability centre in Shaunavon have been 

chosen to pilot the process of accreditation and standardization 

of rehabilitation centres in this province. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres acts as 

an umbrella organization for the 36 workshops in the province. 

Last year individual boards for these organizations approved a 

proposal to create a provincial committee to work on the 

project. The committee was made up of staff and board 

members, and they will directly make policy and supervise 

various teams that are working on areas of policy relevant to 

their expertise. The policies will be formulated in accordance 

with proven methods and provincial guidelines. Mallard 

Industries and south-west ability council plan to be fully 

accredited within one year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the staff and committees at both Wadena and 

Shaunavon have committed themselves to volunteer the extra 

hours of work required to formulate the policies. I would ask 

the other members of the Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating these communities and their staff at Wadena and 

Shaunavon on their commitment to their clients and their 

communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Seniors’ Fitness 

 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of taking part of 

an important event in Swift Current last Thursday that’ll have a 

positive effect on senior citizens in Saskatchewan. 

 

At a media conference, an agreement was signed between the 

Swift Current, Saskatchewan, seniors’ fitness association 55 

Plus provincial games committee and the Saskatchewan  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  191 

seniors’ fitness 55 Plus association. 

 

The Saskatchewan Games Council, in partnership with the 

Department of Municipal Government, strongly support the 

SSFA (Saskatchewan seniors’ fitness association) 55 provincial 

games Plus, which will be held in Swift Current in mid-July. 

Also, at this media conference the games council provided the 

grant of $25,000 from Saskatchewan lottery proceeds to assist 

in the organization and operation of the games. Mr. Speaker, 

this agreement demonstrates the importance of these kinds of 

partnerships that enhance the lives of Saskatchewan residents. 

This is the fifth year that the provincial 55 Plus games are being 

held, and over 700 senior athletes from the eight game zones 

will be competing in the 19 games’ events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only does this form of cooperation benefit the 

groups and individuals involved, but it also fits in nicely with 

the concept of wellness in Saskatchewan. I extend my best 

wishes for a successful games and look forward to the start of 

the competition on July 16. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mainline Rural Development Corporation 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take a moment today to recognize the hard work and 

efforts of many people across this province, specifically in the 

area of rural economic development. On Saturday I had the 

pleasure of meeting with the Mainline rural economic 

development committee and was quite impressed with the 

number of projects that they have been working on. And 

presently . . . or at this very time, they are selling shares in an 

ethanol feedlot program or plant scheduled to be built in the 

Grenfell area. 

 

The interesting thing about this, Mr. Speaker, is we all have 

thought about ethanol as an additive to gasoline. They are 

looking at ethanol just going one step higher for the medicinal 

purposes, and certainly they have looked at going beyond just 

one specific area. They’re also looking at the by-products and 

other by-products that can be used for human consumption. 

 

I would like to say that this group have certainly shown us that 

RDCs (rural development corporation) can work, as along with 

the Mainline and Moose Mountain RDCs in my area. The 

people in my constituency have shown that rural economic 

development can work. The concern that was raised is that 

larger may not be better. Allow them to work without forcing 

them into . . . (inaudible) . . . Thank you. 

 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

Education Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, this good news story is 

about a teacher from northern Saskatchewan who is going to the 

NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) Space 

Centre. Linda Helmke, a middle-years teacher at Precam 

Elementary School in La Ronge, has recently been chosen the 

winner of the Kirkpatrick Travel Award for 1995-96. 

 

With this award, Ms. Helmke will visit the NASA education 

program in Florida. She is choosing NASA because she 

believes the information she brings back will enable her to 

prepare her students for career choices in science. 

 

She has already developed a multi-disciplinary space unit in her 

classroom in response to her students’ natural interest in space. 

The students in La Ronge are from varied cultural backgrounds 

and Ms. Helmke believes it is particularly important that all her 

students gain a knowledge of the options science provides. In 

more ways that one, Mr. Speaker, the sky is the limit for Ms. 

Helmke’s students. 

 

The Kirkpatrick Travel Award is named for Dean Emeritus J. 

Balfour Kirkpatrick, and is administered by the U of S 

(University of Saskatchewan) education department, the U of S 

Alumni Association, and the Saskatchewan teachers’ 

association. 

 

I congratulate Ms. Helmke on the excitement she generates in 

science, technology, and education. I know that while at NASA 

she will keep her feet on the ground and her head in the stars. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenue Sharing 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question, Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister responsible for the Liquor and Gaming 

Authority, or as we call him, Gaming minister number two. 

 

Last January, the ex-minister of Municipal Government 

promised cities, towns, and villages around this province they 

would receive a 10 per cent share of VLT (video lottery 

terminal) revenues. In the last few months, we’ve seen this 

government back-pedalling from this promise. And this 

morning we hear reports the government has indeed withdrawn 

the money. 

 

Will the minister stand up in this House and tell municipalities 

in Saskatchewan he will live up to his government’s promise 

and return this revenue? Or are we going to add this to the long 

list of broken promises made by this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to have the 

opportunity to answer that question. Last year in January the 

minister of Gaming and the Minister of Municipal Government 

made a joint announcement that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities), and SAHO (Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations) would be engaged in a 

round-table process to give advice on how 10 per cent of the 

municipal . . . or the VLTs’ revenues could be put back into 

municipalities. 

 



192  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

During the course of those meetings, the high priority that they 

could agree on that was identified by all was the 

implementation of a provincial 9-1-1 service. So what we did is 

we paid $2.4 million for the electronic mapping system that has 

to be in place as a forerunner to the provincial 9-1-1. We then 

recently dedicated $3 million to the enhancement for the RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) radio system which will 

enable them to be in the front line of response. SaskTel, 

meanwhile, has spent some 5 to $6 million on their share of the 

package for provincial 9-1-1 implementation. 

 

So that totals, Mr. Speaker, for anyone who can add, more than 

$9.5 million. This is a three- to five-year initiative, and further 

announcements and further commitments will be made as the 

plan unfolds for provincial 9-1-1 service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear that a 9-1-1 

system will be in place in rural Saskatchewan. Unfortunately 

that’s in place of all the hospitals that have been shut down and 

health care services that have been cut back. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, this government has chosen again 

to talk about SAHO, SUMA, and SARM for the fact that this 

money has not been returned, or it’s been redirected to other 

areas. Mr. Speaker, this is only another convenient excuse from 

this untrustworthy government. 

 

In reality, this government did not provide any leadership on 

this issue because it never intended to return the money. Mr. 

Speaker, has the Minister explored other avenues to return some 

of these millions besides the 9-1-1 to those municipalities and 

in order they might use them for their hospitals, or is that 

money going to be kept into general revenue, forsaking the 

people who are actually counting on it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I think the member may 

not have heard me in reply, when I said that we did spend more 

than the $9.5 million dedicated towards the 9-1-1 service. 

 

The other thing that’s changed since last January, Mr. Speaker, 

is the federal claw-back, the federal claw-back of transfers for 

health, education, and social services. That’s changed since that 

announcement, Mr. Speaker, and it is now necessary to take that 

money; return it to the consolidated revenue fund to put it into 

health, education, and social services. 

 

The federal Liberal’s budget of last week cut . . . 73 per cent of 

its total reductions were in health, education, and social 

services. We have to make allocations to enhance those services 

in Saskatchewan. If we didn’t, the local tax bill would go up to 

pay for the shortfall in education and health funding. In that 

way, Mr. Speaker, we are returning every dime of that money 

into every local community in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, the people in this province are 

getting sick and tired of this government whining and snivelling 

about federal cut-backs. The government has taken over $220 

million since 1993 through VLTs, more than enough to offset 

any cut-backs. But the fact of the matter is this government 

knew about the cut-backs while you were campaigning on this 

promise. It was only after the election when it suddenly became 

a problem. Clearly it was only another empty election promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did this government make this promise to the 

municipalities if it had no intention of keeping it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, this is a government that 

does keep its commitments to the people of this province, and 

we are returning that money to the people of this province for 

use in health, education, and social services. I’d like to ask the 

members opposite what would be their priorities? Those are our 

values. What are yours? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 

Premier. Last week in this House, I questioned the minister in 

charge of Municipal Government about the issue of 

amalgamation. Because of the mixed signals being sent out by 

the government on this issue, I asked her to assure 

municipalities that forced amalgamation is not part of this 

government’s plan. The minister replied on March 6, and I 

quote: 

 

. . . I certainly can confirm that there is no plan to force 

rural local governments to amalgamate. 

 

However this morning the Premier is quoted as stating, there 

will be change one way or another. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain if the comments are 

meant as a threat to local governments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I think this sounds like 

instant replay; I think this is the exact question that we got last 

week, and I could give the same answer because if you always 

tell the truth, Mr. Speaker, if you always tell the truth you never 

have to remember anything. So I’m sure I could give the same 

answer today. 

 

We have committed that local governments in this province, 

whom we have the utmost of respect for, know what their needs 

are at the local level better than anyone else does. We have 

invited them to talk to us about how to help them strengthen 

their capacity to respond to the challenges that are coming our 

way in the next couple of years. Some of them come from the 

federal level, abandonment of the Crow, privatization of 

railways, which leads to consolidation of elevators which 

affects the tax base in the towns and villages of this province. 



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  193 

So while you are firmly mired in the past, we are working with 

municipalities to strengthen their capacity to respond to those 

challenges so that they will be the best they can be into the 21st 

century. Where do you stand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the 

minister and the Premier are coming from completely two 

different directions, and the municipalities see that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in the communities of Saskatchewan 

want and deserve to know this government’s true intentions. On 

one hand the minister professes there is no top-down plan, yet 

the Premier said there will be change one way or another. Mr. 

Speaker, this government cannot have it both ways. Will the 

minister explain why the Premier appears to be contradicting 

her commitment to municipalities that they will not be forced to 

amalgamate/ 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I am more than pleased 

to have the opportunity to address this issue, where the 

Premier’s responses and mine are not at all at odds. What we 

are saying is that we want to help municipalities, urban and 

rural, in rural Saskatchewan, be as strong as they can be to 

respond to these challenges. We are saying that our first option 

is absolutely to listen to them, to work with them to develop a 

vision and a design for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

If we can’t do that, and I see no reason why we can’t because 

we have made arrangements to sit down with them in a 

cooperative mode to talk about it . . . But we will come into the 

21st century stronger, one way or another. Hopefully it will be 

the Saskatchewan way of cooperation and compassion and 

community. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, delegates at this week’s 

SARM convention have a resolution which calls on delegates to 

oppose provincial legislation that would force municipalities to 

amalgamate. 

 

Municipal councils agree that service districts Act legislation is 

not needed to allow amalgamation to occur and suspect this 

legislation opens the door to forced amalgamation. 

 

Madam Minister, what is the purpose of this legislation if 

municipalities are already sharing many services that 

amalgamation would include? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the 

opposition members have a secret agenda for some kind of 

forced, top-down approach. We have said before that we don’t. 

We have the proposed service districts Act; it is an Act to help 

municipalities to provide inter-municipal cooperation of 

services more easily than they do now, but is not about  

amalgamation. 

 

Those municipalities out there, Mr. Speaker, know better than 

the members opposite. There is all kinds of inter-municipal 

cooperation  fire agreements, gravel tendering, 

administration, recreation  you name the service; waste 

management. There’s cooperation all over this province. We’re 

all cooperating with each other. The only people who aren’t in a 

cooperative spirit are the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

High-risk Offender Identification 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for 

the Minister of Justice. Mr. Minister, parents in Saskatoon and 

parents all over Saskatchewan are very concerned about a child 

molester who was recently released from custody. He was 

convicted of molesting five little girls under the age of 10, and 

police in Saskatoon consider him a high risk to offend again. 

 

Many parents would like the police to release a picture of this 

person. In fact many parents in Saskatoon have already signed a 

petition to that effect. Police cannot do this, however, because 

the province has no policy to protect them from being sued. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you immediately implement a policy which 

allows police to release photographs of high-risk sex offenders? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

hon. member for that question. This is obviously a difficult 

issue, and we need to deal with sort of the balance between the 

rights of privacy of individuals and the protection of the 

community. 

 

Protection of the community is the main goal in any kind of 

legislation that we have. As it relates to this particular area, we 

have a working committee within our government which 

includes Department of Justice lawyers along with people from 

some of the other departments, health and mental health issues, 

and they are carefully reviewing what is going on in other 

provinces in Canada as it relates to this specific issue. We are 

asking them to provide us with recommendations so that we can 

come up with the appropriate legislation for Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s a very tricky issue and the concern for families and for 

children is uppermost in our mind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it isn’t a 

delicate balancing act between the rights of the public and the 

rights of the sexual offender. I don’t think it’s a delicate balance 

at all. The rights of parents to protect their children far 

outweigh a child molester’s right to privacy. 

 

Mr. Minister, the province of Manitoba has a policy in place 

that is doing an excellent job of dealing with this problem. A 

special committee of police, justice officials, correction  



194  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

officials, and psychiatric counsellors has been formed to 

evaluate an individual’s risk to offend again. If this committee 

considers a sex offender a high risk to re-offend, the police may 

publish his name and photograph. 

 

Mr. Minister, before orders of the day I will be introducing an 

emergency motion to immediately introduce an identical policy 

here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, will you and your 

government support this motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank the hon. member for the 

second question about this issue. And I’m very pleased that he 

raised the situation in Manitoba. 

 

The situation in Manitoba is that they have developed a 

protocol to deal with this. This protocol creates a system of 

review by a community notification advisory committee which 

is comprised of police, corrections, mental health, and justice 

officials. All of the police requests for release of information go 

to this particular committee. 

 

To date they have reviewed 11 cases. In one case they 

recommended full public disclosure, which is what the member 

opposite is requesting. In seven others, there were some limited 

forms of public notification. And in the other four cases, they 

recommended no notification. 

 

So I think what that reflects is a balanced approach. Yes, we 

will look at the kinds of things that are going on in Manitoba, 

also in British Columbia and other places in Canada and the 

United States, but we are going to do it in a Saskatchewan way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenue Sharing 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

responsible for the Gaming Authority. Mr. Minister, it’s another 

day and it looks like we have another broken promise by our 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government. We had that 

commitment by them to provide 10 per cent of VLT revenues 

 approximately $10 million a year  to Saskatchewan 

communities. Now you’re apparently going to claw those back. 

 

We talk about expenditures of 9-1-1 and RCMP. I would like to 

tell you that you spent the money. It was VLT money that 

belonged to the municipalities. SaskTel money does not replace 

VLT money. 

 

My question to the minister is this. Will you discuss the plan by 

SARM to cancel the hospital revenue tax in place of taking 

their money away from them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, this question is along the 

same lines as we previously answered. The one different 

dimension that the member has raised is the offer of the local 

government group to trade off VLT money for part of the health  

levy. The problem with that is that the health levies, the health, 

social assistance, and public health levies are considerably more 

than the commitment of 10 per cent VLTs, so it wouldn’t solve 

the problem. 

 

We have assured municipal associations that we are working 

diligently to address the problem of the 2 mill levy and the 

public health levy, the social services levy on the local tax base, 

and we will keep that promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to remind the 

minister what the former minister said when this $10 million 

was promised. He said, and I quote: 

 

I want to make it clear that the commitment we are 

announcing today is to share 10 per cent of the 

government’s net income each year. Our objective is to 

place this money into the hands of local people to serve 

community needs in more direct and tangible ways. 

 

It seems amazing, Mr. Speaker, that this department seems to be 

so inept that it cannot in fact give the money away. And I 

suggest that maybe if they can’t give the money away, they find 

someone else to run the department. 

 

My question to the minister is this. Will you make a clear 

commitment today to live up to that promise to give that money 

to those communities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I have here the same 

press release that I assume the hon. member is reading from. 

And the paragraph previous that he didn’t read said: 

 

The provincial government has asked the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association, Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities, and the Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations to advise us on how 

best to distribute 10 per cent of government’s annual VLT 

revenues to maximum benefit to local communities. 

 

In a year of consultations, with the exception of the 

identification of the 9-1-1, we were not able to receive that 

advice, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to point out that it 

doesn’t matter which pot the money is in, whether it’s VLT, 

GRF (General Revenue Fund), SaskTel, it’s all money that 

belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. It will be spent to meet 

the priorities and the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, and 

that is our promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Health Services 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker .The health care 

dollars for northern Saskatchewan should be looked at carefully 

because there’s such a low level of funding. While northern 

Saskatchewan appreciates a continuing commitment to health  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  195 

care, there are still many deficiencies in health services. Right 

now there are no mental health workers for the entire west side. 

 

Several people have come to me expressing concerns about how 

workers are hired, the lack of probationary assessment, who 

decides who will be hired, and what area will receive funding. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the Minister of Health to explain 

the criteria for allocating staff and funding for northern medical 

services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

for the question. As the member will know, over the past three 

years there have been four new positions funded in the North to 

better meet mental health needs in northern Saskatchewan. But 

as the member also knows, one of the things that we want to do 

in the North is to set up health boards like we have in the South 

and to move toward elections. 

 

And I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to meet with the 

member about that just a few weeks ago and the member 

expressed his enthusiasm for that approach. And the member 

and I agreed at that time that it would be good when we get the 

health districts going in the North so that we can put local 

people in control and better meet the health care needs of 

people in the North, including their mental health care needs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, my second question is also to 

the Minister of Health. 

 

There’s also much confusion over the organization of the health 

districts for northern Saskatchewan. There is confusion over 

how many districts will be formed. People want to know what 

type of role and power the new boards will have. Many people 

still don’t even know if board members will be elected or 

appointed. 

 

Can the Minister of Health explain what stage the organization 

of health districts is at for northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, as the member knows, Mr. Speaker, 

since I’ve had the opportunity to meet with the member about 

this issue, people in the North have been meeting and planning 

the new health districts. And they’re forming a consensus on 

the number of districts, the configuration of the districts in 

northern Saskatchewan. And I’m confident that, over the next 

short while, we’ll be making an announcement with respect to 

the consultations in northern Saskatchewan and announcing the 

district boundaries that are proposed. 

 

We’ll be appointing health boards initially. And before the term 

of this government is ended, we will be having people elected 

in northern Saskatchewan, and I welcome the member’s 

continued input in that process. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Government Investments in Cuba 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, my question today is for the 

Minister responsible for Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation. In light of the events in Cuba and the U.S. 

government’s reaction to those events, I believe the people of 

Saskatchewan have a reason to be concerned. 

 

On January 19 of this year the minister announced that SOCO 

(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) had invested 

$250,000 in a Cuban venture through York Medical of Toronto. 

Mr. Speaker, I assume the minister is aware of the political 

instability in Cuba at this moment. Just last night on CBC 

(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) television’s show 

Venture, there was a lengthy segment on the risk that companies 

investing in Cuba are facing. It came as quite a shock to see the 

president of York Medical on the show discussing his concerns 

over the risk his company now faces. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, is what steps has the 

minister taken to ensure that this risky investment, made with 

hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars, is indeed secure and does not 

jeopardize our relationship with the United States? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member has taken 

the approach. . . and I’ve heard her comment on our approach to 

economic development in Saskatoon at Innovation Place — that 

she believes that only companies that are presently in 

Saskatchewan should be invested in or should be attracted to 

that centre. 

 

We’ve taken a very, very different approach. In fact many of the 

companies who now do research in Saskatoon come from other 

parts of the world. Limagrain, a company from France, now 

does their canola research at Innovation Place. Plant Genetic, 

from Belgium, is now working in Saskatoon; AgrEvo, from 

Germany, as well as Monsanto from the United States. The 

agreement with York Medical out of Toronto is a similar 

agreement that will move equipment and research from Cuban 

labs through York Medical to Saskatoon. 

 

We take the approach that this deal is no different than other 

arrangements being made to make Saskatoon a world-class 

centre for biotechnology and pharmaceutical research. The deal 

that has been arranged with York Medical is being done in 

close cooperation with the federal government. And obviously 

the concerns that you express today are also very much being 

monitored by the federal minister, and I would imagine you are 

in contact with him. But they are of the view that companies 

should . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the minister, I hope, is very 

aware that Saskatchewan people work very, very hard to make 

ends meet. It is frightening to see the minister make an 

investment that he and his government say, we hope that York 

Medical and future developments in Cuba will lead to economic 

opportunities for Saskatchewan. 



196  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, it is not good enough for the minister to only hope 

that a quarter of a million dollars of taxpayers’ money will lead 

to economic opportunities. 

 

To date, there has been well over 1,100 Saskatchewan firms 

inquire about assistance through SOCO and only 11 have been 

approved. This leads me to believe that this government is more 

willing to expose taxpayers to high-risk investments out of the 

province than they are to helping businesses in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister table the criteria used by SOCO 

that resulted in the approval of this risky investment, rather than 

approved investments by ventures of Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the criteria of SOCO 

have already been approved by the Assembly. The legislation 

was brought through the House; we appeared before Crown 

Corporations. If the member opposite doesn’t have a copy of 

that, I’ll get that for her. 

 

But I want to say clearly to the member opposite this. That the 

arrangement made with York Medical has the blessing and the 

approval of the mayor of Saskatoon, who worked closely in 

conjunction with Economic Development and SOCO in making 

these kind of arrangements. The economic development 

authority in Saskatoon is very much involved and believed this 

to be a good deal. These are the same criticisms we hear about 

Partnership for Growth, which business people put together. 

 

My view is, Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of input from 

business people and REDAs (regional economic development 

authority) on this arrangement, as with Partnership for Growth. 

And if I have a choice of taking the advice of that group in the 

opposition versus the business people of the province, I’ll stick 

with the business people any day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, the minister said, when speaking 

about the Cuban investment, that this is an area where our 

province expects to see further job and economic growth. Mr. 

Speaker, we have seen the result of the minister’s job creation 

strategy. We lost 4,000 more jobs in the one-year period from 

February ’95 to February ’96. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister if he prefers to base his job 

creation strategy on risky ventures such as the one in Cuba, 

rather than on the proposals made by the business people of this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll conclude again by 

saying that we do business with many countries and many 

companies from around the world, especially as it would apply 

to ag biotech and pharmaceutical. We are huge exporters and 

we will continue to deal, not only in the borders of the 

province, but around the world. 

 

But there is one area where the member opposite could give us 

assistance and that is on the transfer that is occurring in staff in 

the federal government Department of Health and Welfare. Mr. 

Axworthy has decided to move about 50 employees from 

Regina to Winnipeg, to his own constituency. We will be 

calling on you to back us up in fighting to keep those jobs in 

Regina, and quit playing the politics that Mr. Axworthy is doing 

in draining Regina and moving jobs to Winnipeg. And we’d be 

very, very interested in seeing your support for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The University of Regina Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Education Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Community Bonds Act be now read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 7  An Act to repeal The Industrial Incentive 

Program Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

repeal The Industrial Incentive Program Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  197 

Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act to amend 

The Direct Sellers Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10  An Act respecting Marketplace Practices, 

Consumer Products Warranties and Unsolicited Goods and 

Credit Cards 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill, An Act respecting Marketplace Practices, Consumer 

Products Warranties and Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker:  The Speaker has two items he’d like to deal 

with and then I’ll acknowledge the hon. member. 

 

Before orders of the day, it is my duty to table letters from the 

office of the Lieutenant Governor regarding the composition of 

the Board of Internal Economy. These letters are dated 

September 7, 1995; December 13, 1995; January 17, 1996; and 

March 6, 1996. 

 

(1430) 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Commonwealth Day Message 

 

The Speaker:  I wish to remind members that today is 

Commonwealth Day and to mark this day I wish to present the 

Commonwealth Day message from Her Majesty, the Queen. I 

ask members to please rise. 

 

The theme for Commonwealth Day this year is “Working 

in Partnership”. 

 

This theme reminds us that we can achieve much more if 

we work in a team, making use of each other’s different 

skills and experience, than if we are all separately trying to 

do the same thing. A successful partnership depends on 

mutual respect and friendship, and what matters is not 

what people are but what they can contribute to the 

common purpose. Partnership builds on experience, 

drawing lessons from the past and cementing shared 

friendships; and it looks to the future as it tackles the 

challenges of the present. 

 

The Commonwealth is an excellent example of this kind of 

partnership. The fifty-three sovereign nations who belong 

to it have vastly different social and ethnic traditions, but it 

has been able to fashion unity out of this diversity and to 

become a working partnership of governments and 

peoples. One of the most valuable aspects of this 

partnership is the network of Commonwealth 

Non-Governmental Organisations which link members of a 

wide range of professions and activities  architects, 

engineers, journalists and broadcasters, doctors and vets, 

magistrates and judges, and so on  and help them to 

benefit from each other’s experience and to work together 

for the common good. 

 

There are thriving partnerships between the universities, 

the parliamentarians, and the trade unions of the 

Commonwealth countries. In the arts, literature, and music, 

there are Commonwealth links which enrich the cultural 

life of all the members. And there is also a friendly rivalry 

in a wide range of sporting activities. 

 

The heads of government of the Commonwealth set out its 

fundamental aims and principles in a statement adopted at 

Hararé in 1991. And last November in New Zealand, they 

agreed on an important Action Programme to give that 

mission statement a real cutting edge with the emphasis on 

democracy, development, and consensus building. Those 

aims, like so many others, can best be pursued in 

partnership both within the Commonwealth and on a wider 

global scale. 

 

Young people learn early the value of taking part in teams 

and tackling projects in partnership. I hope that you will 

carry these lessons into later life and, with the idealism and 

clear vision which the young can offer, help to build 

lasting partnerships to make the world a better and safer 

place. 

 

Members may be seated. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Before orders of the day I would ask leave of the 

Assembly, pursuant to rule 46, to debate an issue of urgent and 

pressing matter. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The Leader of the Third Party, 

pursuant to rule 46, has asked for leave to present an issue of 

importance. I will ask that he will describe very briefly the 

reason for that and acquaint the House with the motion that he 

proposes. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

High-risk Offender Identification 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, families  



198  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

in Saskatoon are frightened about the release of a dangerous sex 

offender who has been released recently from the Saskatoon 

psych centre. This pedophile, authorities  city police in this 

case  believe he will likely reoffend. This individual molested 

five girls under the age of 10. Yet parents, grandparents, owners 

of businesses centred around families and others aren’t even 

able to see a photograph of this man. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not an isolated case, and therefore I believe 

it’s imperative that the Government of Saskatchewan take 

immediate steps to protect Saskatchewan families and children. 

 

The province of Manitoba has a community notification process 

which deals with such situations and has proven extremely 

successful, Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan should follow suit. 

 

I would ask leave of the Assembly to discuss this very 

important matter as well as a fair and viable solution. 

 

The motion is as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That the Assembly urge the government, in order to protect 

Saskatchewan families and children, to immediately adopt 

the province of Manitoba’s community notification process 

which has proven effective at improving safety in 

communities and which establishes a committee to review 

and make recommendations regarding the release of sex 

. . . recommendations regarding the release of sex 

offenders considered to be dangerous to the public. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The answer to this . . . and perhaps I 

may save a little time by tabling the answer to both questions 

while I’m on my feet. If I could have a page? 

 

The Speaker:  The answers for items 1 and 2 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murrell, seconded by Mr. 

Thomson. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

continue with my remarks about the Speech from the Throne. 

And today I am going to talk about Saskatchewan people and 

change. I am going to talk about some people in this legislature, 

people in my constituency, people in my family, two people 

who have influenced my political life, and then some general 

comments about people and change. 

To start, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate you on your 

election as the first elected Speaker of the legislature of 

Saskatchewan. This has obviously involved much change for 

you in the role that you must now play as you work with us. 

And I personally promise to be respectful of your rulings and of 

your demeanour as you lead us in this legislature. 

 

I’d also like to congratulate the elected Deputy Speaker, the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. I think 

congratulations are also in order on the hon. member entering 

his fifth decade this week. And I think that his years of wisdom 

will be of great assistance to the Speaker as he works with his 

deliberations. 

 

I also would like to thank the member for Regina Victoria for 

letting his name stand, as he provided many years of valuable 

service to this legislature and he was a participant in this 

election when it was important for us to have another candidate. 

 

Today I would also like to make a special point of thanking our 

leader, the Premier. And I guess my thanks for him goes to the 

way that he has over so many years led us in the change that has 

taken place in Saskatchewan. 

 

As I prepared for this speech today, I went back to the first 

speech that our Premier gave to this legislature on February 23, 

1968. This was a response to the throne speech of the then 

premier, the member from Moose Jaw, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, my generation wanted to hear in the Speech 

bold new ideas. It wants a Government with imagination, 

aggressiveness and foresight. 

 

He then went on to say he wasn’t interested in a pussy-cat 

government or a timid government. He wanted a government 

that would make change. And I guess I’m pleased to say that 

here we are almost 30 years later and our Premier is still on the 

agenda of transforming Saskatchewan and preparing it for the 

21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are some other people in this 

Chamber who have also experienced a lot of change, and those 

are all of us who are the new members. And I’d like to 

acknowledge all of the new members opposite, and the six of us 

who are sitting on this side. I note that the two smallest of the 

new members were the ones that were chosen to move and 

second the throne speech. That left the remaining four big guys 

to defend them if they ran into any problems. 

 

There’s one more person that I would like to talk about in the 

sense of transforming change but also in the sense of providing 

some stability for those of us who are new in the process. And I 

would like to acknowledge the member from Regina Victoria 

for all of the guidance that he has provided to all of us new 

people, especially as he embarks into some new areas himself. 

 

Now I’d like to talk a little bit about the people in my 

constituency. All of us represent areas of Saskatchewan that 

cover a certain amount of territory, and we can draw the lines,  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  199 

or I guess the electoral office can draw the lines. But when we 

really think about it, it’s the people that we represent that are 

the most important part of our life and what we do. 

 

I represent the constituency of Regina Lakeview. And this 

constituency includes this legislature and many government 

offices, and also many of the things that people identify with 

the Government of Saskatchewan. It’s a great pleasure for me to 

do this because it gives me a chance to understand how the 

decisions that we make directly affect a lot of my constituents. 

 

I’d also like to thank my predecessors in my new constituency 

 the hon. member from Regina Centre and the two retired 

members, Mr. Serge Kujawa and Ms. Louise Simard. Their 

legacy for me was many people who were hard working and 

willing to pull together with me as we work and represent the 

people of our area. 

 

A number of the institutions that we have in Regina are located 

in Regina Lakeview, but I think rather than go through and talk 

about all of these different institutions, I want to talk about a 

couple of the people that are in my constituency. There are 

people who live on low incomes in rental housing who 

continually remind me that what one sees when they think 

about Regina Lakeview is not just larger houses and people 

who have good incomes. There are many seniors in my 

constituency who continually ask me about whether there will 

be any changes in the types of costs that affect their life. And 

there’s continually a reminder that these questions are more 

important than the questions that we get in question period. 

 

There’s also a concern that’s raised because part of the 

university is located in Regina Lakeview. And when we look at 

and listen to the concerns that come from the students and from 

the professors and from many others who are located at the 

university, we recognize that they are the transforming edge of 

any change that’s going to happen in our community. 

 

The constituency also is composed of many individuals who are 

what I would call the creative force  maybe the dreamers. 

And as I saw quoted in the last few days: How can you have a 

national dream or a provincial dream if you don’t have the 

dreamers. And the dreamers in our constituency include writers, 

poets, painters, the dramatists, the inventors, the engineers, all 

kinds of people who are looking just past the horizon and 

they’re looking to see if they can see what our next century will 

be like for Saskatchewan. Anything that we can do as members 

of this legislature to be of assistance to them should be kept 

right at the head of our agenda because there’s nothing that we 

can do here as legislators if we don’t have the people who have 

the foresight to divine what is happening in the future. 

 

I’d like to speak briefly about some of the people in my family 

that have allowed me to participate in this place. First off I 

would like to mention my wife, who wasn’t able to be here 

today. She’s been a steady support in going on 22 years of 

marriage. And the thanks that I have for her is that no matter 

what adventure, what change I try, she’s willing to be there with 

me. 

 

I also am continually reminded about why it is that we are here  

when I go home and visit with my daughters, Ingrid and 

Solveig, who are here today. Because what we are doing is we 

are planning for them what kind of Saskatchewan we need and 

what kind of Saskatchewan we want. And I think all of us have 

those individuals in our lives that do that for us. 

 

I’d also like to thank my parents, Tom and Randi Nilson, who 

are here as well today, because they have through many, many 

years provided an example of how to deal with the issues as 

they arise as we moved from different parts of western Canada. 

My father is a Lutheran minister; my mother is a dietician. As a 

Lutheran minister, that allowed me to go into new communities 

on a regular basis and learn what it was like to deal with 

change. And I think it stood me in good stead. 

 

One interesting comment that I had the other day when we were 

talking about our educational system in Saskatchewan. I 

realized that I had not spent a single year in education in 

Saskatchewan. But here I am in this legislature as a 

representative saying that what we need for my children is a 

good education system. 

 

But I think what we need to remind ourselves of is that there are 

many people with roots in Saskatchewan who are not here any 

more but would be willing to come back and contribute. And 

some of those roots may be one or two or three generations out. 

And anything that we can do that would encourage that would 

be of great value. 

 

I’d also like to acknowledge my brother Ralph and his wife 

Suzie and their girls, Bethany and Anna, who live in Regina. 

And my sister JoAnn and her husband, James Lokken, and their 

three boys, Nils, Olaf, and Torbjorn, who live in Saskatoon. 

Also my wife’s family in Everett, Washington, who are a solid 

support for our family as well. 

 

As I’ve travelled Saskatchewan as Minister of Justice, I’ve 

realized that I have relatives in every corner of Saskatchewan 

and that always keeps me on my toes, including in this question 

period. 

 

This chance at a speech in the legislature I think is a chance to 

acknowledge why we are here and what we need to do. And in 

talking about my family, I need to tell you four short stories that 

are very important to me, but I think even more important to my 

parents. 

 

(1445) 

 

My mother was born at Macrorie, Saskatchewan, and her father, 

John Oscar Farden, was born in Minnesota and had come to 

Saskatchewan in 1904 with his father, Ole Jens Farden, and his 

two cousins, Charlie and Knut Farden. Their family roots were 

in Valdres in Norway. But they came up here after having 

homesteaded twice in Minnesota, so that they were experienced 

homesteaders. They came here for a reason; they were looking 

for some change. 

 

A couple of years after they were in Saskatchewan my mother’s 

mother, Anna Martha Risdahl, came to Canada. She had made a 

good friend when she was working in North Dakota who in turn  



200  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

moved up to Saskatchewan. She came up to visit and met my 

grandfather. Things didn’t quite click at first, and she ended up 

going off and working in Winnipeg and at the Banff Springs 

Hospital, but eventually she made it back to Macrorie and 

married my grandfather. 

 

In that community my grandfather and all of his relatives were 

very much the people who built the school and the church. They 

were people who put up money to start the Lutheran high 

school in Outlook, and they very much had a sense that what 

they were building was a new Saskatchewan. 

 

On my father’s side I need to also talk about my father’s 

mother. She was born in North Dakota and her parents had 

come to Iowa and then moved to North Dakota. Her name was 

Josefine Jacobson, and she came to Canada and to Regina on 

July 4, 1912. She told me about this because she remembered 

that this was only about five days after the Regina tornado and 

there was a great deal of destruction in this city and her whole 

family wondered what they had come to. 

 

She eventually settled at Parkbeg with her parents and with her 

siblings. While she was there her sister ended up meeting a 

young fellow from Norway whose name was Andrew Grasdal. 

His best friend was my father . . . my grandfather, Andrew, or 

Andreas Mikkel Vigestol Nilson, or that was the name he took. 

This friend, Andrew Grasdal, ended up writing a letter to his 

best friend in Norway. And I have the letter here with me today, 

because I think that it’s a bit of an example that all of us have 

about what it’s like to make some decisions on some fairly slim 

information. 

 

This letter was written in Parkbeg, Saskatchewan on January 

23, 1914. And it goes: 

 

Gode Kammerat! 

 

Tak for dit brev som jeg har modtaget. Jeg ser du er 

kommet til Norge igjen. 

 

Just that little piece in Norwegian. I’ll read the rest of it for you 

in my translation in English. 

 

Good friend, thank you for the letter that I received. I see 

that you have returned to Norway again. I suspect that you 

are no doubt having a lot of fun at home. It was my 

thought also when I travelled to America that I would be 

back in Norway this winter, but that was not to be. I came 

to travel to Canada and took up land. 

 

I see that you would like to know how it is up here. I am 

enjoying myself very much in all ways. I do not know if 

there is any land here near me, but there is a huge amount 

of land all over in Canada. If you are up here, it is easy to 

obtain a quarter section of land. A homesteader has to live 

six months out of the year for three years and break 30 

acres before one can prove up, and it costs $10 to file. 

 

And when one has proven up, then you become a citizen at 

the same time. The lifestyle is almost the same as in the 

States. Different things are more expensive and many  

things are cheaper. Farm machinery is more expensive up 

here than in the States. The best kind of soft coal costs 

from $7.50 to $8 a ton. You ask if it’s a good time here for 

work? Yes, that I can assure you. One can find work 

almost anywhere and with good wages too. 

 

I worked out last summer for six and a half months. Then I 

earned for five and a half months $40 a month, and for one 

month I earned $60. And after I moved onto my 

homestead, then I was out for a few days threshing, so I 

earned $300 in the summer. 

 

The two summers I have been up here have been the 

easiest since I came to America. I wanted to travel back to 

Dakota to work if I got $10 more a month. Last spring I 

was offered $45 for seven or eight months, but I cannot 

hire out for longer than six months in the summer. 

However, a homesteader may work out threshing because 

the time will be calculated as if you have lived on the 

homestead. 

 

You asked if there are longer winters up here than in North 

and South Dakota. Last spring I began working on April 1. 

We began to work in the field around April 10. And the 

winter began on January 10 this year, so we have had little 

snow. The coldest day we have had was yesterday when it 

was 15 below zero. Last year we had the finest autumn that 

I’ve ever seen. Last winter we also had an outstanding 

winter. There was not enough snow to drive with a sleigh. 

So the climate is just as good as in North Dakota and I 

cannot see any difference. 

 

The only thing I regret is that I did not travel up here 

before so that I could have been an owner of a good half 

section of land and maybe a good amount of money as 

well. But I believe I shall not do so badly anyway. When I 

have proven up my homestead, I will go and take out a 

second homestead. 

 

Employers begin to hire April 1, the same as the rule was 

in North Dakota. So if you come directly up here, you can 

get from 40 to $45 a month, depending on how long you 

hire yourself out for. There is no mixed farming here 

where a hired man must milk 50 cows evening and 

morning before and after you are in the field. And corn is 

not grown so there are not so many hundred hogs to feed 

on each farm. 

 

Yes, now I believe you have got all of the information that 

I can think of for the moment. 

 

To finish, a friendly greeting from your comrade, Andrew 

Grasdal, Parkbeg, Saskatchewan, Canada. Be so kind as to 

greet my parents and write back soon. 

 

I begged your indulgence to read that letter because this is the 

letter that’s the reason that I’m in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  And as I say, it was somewhat slim  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  201 

information but the net result was that my grandfather came and 

he met my grandmother. His best friend married my 

grandmother’s sister. Andrew Grasdal had 12 children and my 

grandfather had 8 children and there are all of these 

connections, especially in Moose Jaw, as the Speaker may 

know. 

 

Now the importance of that kind of a letter, I mean, it’s still 

important for us today because I think we sometimes forget that 

people are our most valuable asset. And it’s not as if there are 

people from Norway that are going to come, but we have 

people from many parts of the world that would be very willing 

to come and help us build Saskatchewan, and I think we need to 

remind ourselves that we have to include all of those people. 

 

I have a couple of brief comments about two people who 

influenced me and my politics. And some of my lawyer friends 

may wonder how I ended up as a member of the New 

Democratic Party when that doesn’t necessarily seem to fit with 

being a lawyer, although my comrade-in-arms here has got a 

similar defence problem sometimes. 

 

But when I was in high school a man came to visit us, our 

family. We always had many guests in our home when we lived 

in Burnaby and I went to high school in New Westminster. This 

man’s name was Chester Ronning. And I was only . . . well it 

wasn’t . . . maybe it was only recently that I was reminded that 

Chester Ronning was the first person ever elected as a member 

of the Canadian Cooperative Federation in 1933, the fall of 

1933, as the member for Camrose, Alberta. 

 

At the point he came to our house, he was there talking about 

recognizing China and all of the issues surrounding that. He 

was trying to change Canada’s vision of whether communist 

China, as we knew it then, should be recognized by Canada. 

This man had a great influence on me in the way that he 

analyzed issues and I never forgot him. 

 

About the same time when I was in high school another 

political person was more important than I thought. We lived in 

Burnaby and our Member of Parliament was Tommy Douglas 

and he used to stop by after school at high school and visit with 

some of us students. And that was an interesting way of getting 

a bit of a touch of somebody who was a figure in the news. And 

I was reminded of that when I was campaigning last summer, 

that the children have a very clear image of what a politician is 

and to be able to talk to that politician and share some of their 

dreams is really important. 

 

Now the last area I’d like to speak a little bit about is sort of 

people and change. The place where we’re living now is a 

totally unprecedented time of change. One of the characteristics 

of our society is that we have finally institutionalized rapid and 

continuous change. And one of the things that I think the throne 

speech recognizes is that whatever we do as we prepare for the 

next century we can’t be doing the same things in the same way 

and expect that we’ll be meeting the problems of the day. 

 

When we look at some of the issues that are here today, and 

especially the ones that confront me in my new portfolio, you 

recognize that it’s important to look at new ways and new  

ideas. 

 

As Minister of Justice, as some of you have heard, I’ve raised 

some of the issues and said look, can we do things in another 

way that allows for community responsibility within our 

correction system; that allows some kind of personal 

responsibility and community responsibility as we deal with 

offenders. 

 

And I guess I ask this legislature to be supportive as we grapple 

with some of these kinds of issues because there is no question 

that it is easy to score political points or media points when you 

can dwell on the suffering of some individuals in our 

community. But that really has no place as we build our 

community, that we abuse people. 

 

And one of the things that we talk about is going to our friends 

in the aboriginal community and ask about some of their ideas 

of healing. And I think it is very important that we remember 

the wholeness of life, and they can continually remind us of 

some of these things. 

 

I have had the pleasure of reading through a book that has been 

written by one of my constituents, Deanna Christensen, who is 

here today. She has been writing a history of Chief 

Ahtahkakoop and all of his descendants. And one of the most 

beautiful images that’s come out of this book for me is that the 

name Ahtahkakoop means blanket of stars or, as many of you 

heard, Star Blanket is the southern relatives. 

 

I wonder how many of us know that that means Milky Way? 

Star Blanket, blanket of stars, Milky Way. And it’s basically the 

image of all of the people who have ever lived and who ever 

will live. And I think that we end up needing to recognize that 

that’s what we are part of as well, is this great expanse of lights, 

little lights that are going to build for our descendants based on 

the work and the things that have been provided to us from 

before. 

 

(1500) 

 

I think this throne speech does that as well. It ends up giving us 

a basis by which we can move forward and work at building for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, I want to read a poem. Now this poem may be 

somewhat  well I’m not sure  out of character. Maybe 

that’s not the word. 

 

As I’m reading this poem today, I want to acknowledge two 

people, and I’ll tell you a little about the poem in a minute. The 

first thing is that my father is here, and two days after I was 

appointed Justice minister in November, he had open heart 

surgery. And so many issues of life and death were dealt with 

within our family and by me. Also I had the sad news this 

morning that the father of the member from North Battleford 

had died and that the funeral is this afternoon. And it reminds 

us again of sort of life and death issues. 

 

The poem that I want to read to you is a poem by another 

Norwegian descendant, Glen Sorestad from the Buchanan area  



202  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

of Saskatchewan, who lives in Saskatoon. And it’s about his 

father: 

Father Talked 

 

On his deathbed my father spoke 

of all the things he’d do 

when he was out of hospital. 

The tubes that moved the fluids 

to and from his cancerous body 

restrained his voice to a whisper. 

But he talked, never once of death, 

always of the days that lay ahead, 

of all the things he’d left undone. 

 

The surgeons had already opened him, 

had closed him and his file together. 

This we knew as Father talked; we nodded 

approval of his endless plans. 

A voice in me hated this conspiracy, 

would have cried out, “Father, it is over.” 

But something stilled that voice, 

some fear I’d never met before. 

I nodded at his words instead. 

 

I believe now that Father knew. 

Never one to dwell on his past, 

he looked ahead to what could be. 

This is what he left me. No feeble boasts 

of past achievements, no whimper 

of failures, just this: there remain 

always those illusive things we ought 

to do before we go. This was all 

he had to leave me. I have borne 

his words these many years and now 

I’m glad I bit my tongue 

while Father talked. 

 

We and the Saskatchewan people are ready for change as we 

build for the 21st century, and thus I will be supporting the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great honour for 

me to deliver this, my first speech, in the legislature. I also want 

to take this opportunity not only to once again offer my 

congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, but I also want to 

congratulate the new Deputy Speaker, who hails from a 

constituency that neighbours my own. 

 

I also want to acknowledge the hardworking staff of this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. In particular, I want to congratulate Pat 

Shaw for assuming the role of Sergeant-at-Arms for this House. 

It’s nice to see the friendly face of a fellow veteran of the 

RCMP every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with your leave I’d also like to once again 

welcome all my friends and supporters who were good enough 

and so gracious to come today to hear my speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, it’s now been over eight months 

since the election, an election that brought so many new 

members to this place. And before I go on, I’d be remiss not to 

take note of all the new members on both sides of the House. I 

know how difficult it is to wage a campaign and all the new 

members in this House should take pride in their 

accomplishments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t speak for all the new members, but I want 

to relate to you my feelings when I first entered this building as 

a member of the Legislative Assembly for the Melville 

constituency. I felt greatly honoured the people of the Melville 

constituency had placed their confidence in me to speak on their 

behalf in this House. In fact every member in this House should 

share with me that sense of honour, for to be elected an MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) is indeed an honour. 

 

At the same time, I was humbled by that responsibility. How 

can any of us say we have the wisdom to act on behalf of one 

million Saskatchewan residents? I certainly don’t have all the 

answers to cope with the problems that face our province and, 

Mr. Speaker, there are very serious problems in Saskatchewan 

today of which I will speak later in this address. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other than the great sense of responsibility I felt 

when I first entered this place, I must admit to you I also felt a 

hint of profound sadness  a sadness that came about as a 

result of my travels throughout my constituency during the 

election campaign. So many of my constituents greeted me with 

such cynicism about government, about politics, about 

politicians, that I wasn’t always sure I’d done the right thing in 

entering this world myself. 

 

This was something I had not faced before. I was proud to have 

served as a member of the RCMP, which I might say without 

fear of prejudice was and remains the finest police force in the 

world. During my career in the force, I never thought of myself 

as anything other than a servant of the people  first, last, and 

always. It was the people I served in the RCMP, and it was the 

people I worked for. And you know what? The people I served 

and worked for treated my colleagues and me with respect at all 

times. To be a member of the force was something to be proud 

of. It was something to aspire to. It was something children 

wanted to be when they grew up, and I hope it still is. In fact 

I’m sure it is. 

 

I carried this attitude with me when I took a job with the 

Saskatchewan civil service following my retirement from the 

force. While with the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 

Corporation, I still thought of people as my boss. I worked to 

improve their lives the best I could, and I believe I earned our 

customers’ respect through straight dealing and honest talk. 

 

Why then is it so different for all of us sitting here today? Why 

is this Chamber and the men and women who sit here held in 

such disregard by so many residents of this great province and 

of this country? Unrealistic expectations on the part of the 

voters? The rocky transitional period we find ourselves in 

economically? The lack of integrity a small number have shown 

when they were members here? Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  203 

answer probably lies in a combination of all three. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we may not be able to do anything about our 

voters’ expectations and we probably can’t do much about our 

ever-changing world and the economy other than to ensure we 

keep it on the right track. But what we can do  no, what we 

must do  is to show the residents of Saskatchewan we are 

men and women of integrity. We do have their best interests at 

heart. We are not here simply to line our own pockets or to do 

favours for our friends. 

 

I may be accused of being naïve, I may be a babe in the woods 

when it comes to politics, I may even be a political amateur, but 

is it so much to ask that we never forget the people who have 

sent us here? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Is it so much to ask we remember who are 

servants and who are the masters? Is it too much to ask we treat 

the people of Saskatchewan with the honesty and integrity they 

should be able to expect from those who are fortunate enough 

to sit in this House? Because if it is too much to ask, if those 

are unrealistic expectations, this place and those who sit here 

don’t deserve the people’s respect. It’s probably been said 

many, many, many times on this floor, but it’s worth repeating: 

we work for the people; the people do not work for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will remember that as long as I sit in the 

legislature, and I challenge each and every one of my colleagues 

in this House to remember that simple rule as well. 

 

The residents of this province have been really let down so 

many times by their elected officials, it’s very difficult for them 

to believe what any of us have to say. Far too often in the past, 

politicians in this province have played political games with 

people’s lives rather than coming up with sound policy. 

 

I saw that first hand at Crop Insurance. I worked under three 

different governments, starting with the Blakeney government 

in 1981. Throughout my 11 years at Crop Insurance, I saw time 

and time again how elected officials in this province used their 

power and manipulated the corporation and its decisions for the 

benefit of the politicians, not the people. Or in some cases, 

ludicrous decisions were made to help the ministers’ friends. 

 

I fought against this action the best I could. And the politicians 

did not like it. Perhaps that’s why I’m sitting here today and not 

in the Crop Insurance head office back in Melville. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, we have too many politicians in this 

province today who think they’re next to God. The people do 

not matter to them and they don’t want to hear from those who 

are willing to stand up and fight for what’s right. Too often the 

people have been shoved aside, forgotten by the politicians as 

they try to score the political hit on the 6 o’clock news. Too 

often they’ve had politicians promise them the world, only to 

see those promises broken as fast as the votes are counted. Can 

you blame them for being cynical of us, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Can you blame the people for mistrusting their politicians when  

you see a dozen or more of them in court? The disgrace the 

Conservative Party has brought to this building and to those 

who sit here is tragic. Because of the actions of that bunch, it’ll 

be a long, long time before people will look at this place with 

respect. 

 

And now we see this new Conservative Party sit here acting like 

they’ve seen the light on the road to Damascus. Now they’re all 

for balanced budget legislation, free votes, direct democracy, 

ethics in politics. Wouldn’t it have been wonderful if they’d 

just practised what they preached during their years in office? If 

they’d only followed their own advice . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  If they’d only followed their own advice, they 

might have some credibility left today. But no. Instead, the 

Conservatives took advantage of their position. It wasn’t 

enough they were openly spending this province into 

bankruptcy; they had to rob the people as well. 

 

It is because of corruption like this that it’s vital that this House 

pass the private member’s Bill proposed by the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone. This type of legislation unfortunately is 

necessary to ensure this province never again faces the 

corruption of the Conservatives or a situation such as the 

despicable actions taken by the Premier’s colleagues in British 

Columbia. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Can you blame the people for losing faith in this 

place when they see former ministers of the Crown brought up 

on charges of misusing the very tax dollars the people of 

Saskatchewan worked so hard to earn, only to turn more and 

more of it over to the government? Can you blame the voters 

for turning their backs on government when the very 

government they elect breaks promise after promise after 

promise, as the government opposite has done and looks like it 

will continue doing? 

 

I certainly don’t blame them. But what I can do is try to the best 

of my abilities to keep their interests ahead of my own. That’s 

the least and the most that can be asked of any of us. 

 

Yes, we may get thrown off track once in a while. We might 

lose touch with the feelings of our voters now and then. The 

parties represented in this House may even have to overcome 

internal strife now and then, though I know that this will never 

happen in the Liberal Party. But if we are at least to try to focus 

most of our energies on the needs of the people perhaps then we 

will earn their respect, and I certainly hope so. 

 

Before I continue let me speak a little bit about my 

constituency, as is a tradition in members’ maiden speeches. 

Mr. Speaker, I may be biased, but the constituency of Melville, 

I believe, is one of the very best in the entire province. It is one 

of the most representative ridings in Saskatchewan with a mix 

of urban and rural interests. 

 

Like all of Saskatchewan, Melville depends greatly on the  



204  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

farming economy. When farmers are hurting, we’re all hurting. 

Thankfully in the last number of years we’ve seen a turnaround 

in the agricultural economy. Of course as we all know or as we 

should know, a strong rural economy in Saskatchewan 

translates as well to a strong urban economy. We in rural 

Saskatchewan are very mindful of that. I’m not so sure that all 

the members opposite or those who work for them are aware of 

this. 

 

(1515) 

 

But when the province turns its back on rural Saskatchewan, it 

necessarily also harms our villages, towns, and cities. That is a 

point this opposition party and this member, Mr. Speaker, will 

never stop driving home to the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Because I truly believe some of the members on 

that side of the House do not understand this. And those who 

do understand it sit voiceless on the government’s back 

benches. 

 

Apart from agriculture, Melville also enjoys a manufacturing 

sector as well, with businesses such as Babcock & Wilcox in 

the city of Melville and Excel Fiberglass in Balcarres, we have 

seen firsthand the importance of diversifying the economy in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Business plays a very important role in ridings such as Melville. 

Also in Melville you’ll find something that shows the 

entrepreneurial spirit that exists in this province. Melville is the 

home of the community publishing limited which several 

community newspapers in the region set up in a cooperative 

effort to combat rising costs and falling advertising revenue. 

This venture and others like them will ensure that these 

newspapers, which are the lifeblood of communications in rural 

Saskatchewan, thrive long into the future. And I congratulate all 

the publishers involved in this venture for their forethought. 

 

And you can’t speak of Melville without talking about the city’s 

largest employer. CN (Canadian National) Rail makes Melville 

Saskatchewan’s rail city. And though the company has been 

cutting back over the last number of years, it remains the 

backbone of the city’s economy. And it gives the city a 

distinctive flavour of which its residents are fiercely proud. 

 

Melville also enjoys a wide variety of people. Many of our 

citizens are immigrants or descendants of immigrants from 

eastern Europe. I know my own eastern European heritage is 

something I share with many members of this House, including 

the Premier himself. 

 

I’m also proud to say my constituency includes six Indian 

reserves — Peepeekisis, Okanese, Star Blanket, Little Black 

Bear, and Standing Buffalo, as well as a portion of Sakimay. 

 

During the last few years we have heard constant talk about 

redefining our relationships with our first nations community. 

We’ve even heard some of our provincial politicians use some 

native issues in a cynical, political way designed only to get  

votes through inflammatory rhetoric designed to appeal to the 

lowest common denominator in our society. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know firsthand from my many friendships 

in the first nations community the only way to change the role 

our Indian people play in our society is through conversation; 

it’s through negotiation, and most importantly, through 

cooperation. The last thing this province needs is a political 

party playing the politics of race. And those who do should be 

ashamed of themselves and should rethink their qualifications 

to sit in this House, a House that should be one of honour and 

integrity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Our first nations and Metis citizens ask only that 

they are treated fairly by our society. They have a large 

contribution to make in Saskatchewan. It’s time someone 

started listening to them. It’s time the government began 

addressing their long-term goals. One-time projects that are 

simply designed to make it appear the government is doing 

something is no longer good enough. 

 

The Melville constituency is also lucky enough to enjoy a high 

level of recreation activities. We enjoy the lakes of the 

Qu’Appelle Valley. And in the winter my riding is lucky 

enough to be the home of two Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 

League franchises. The Lebret Eagles are currently in the league 

playoffs. And the Melville Millionaires, while having struggled 

this past season, are one of the cornerstone teams in this great 

league. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said previously, there are many serious issues 

facing this province, this government, and this opposition. 

Number one on the list of priorities in Saskatchewan must be 

job creation. For too long governments in this province have 

either thrown millions and millions of taxpayer dollars on 

megaprojects that turn into political boondoggles, or they only 

pay lip-service to the entire issue as this government continues 

to do. 

 

It really doesn’t matter which course government follows here; 

it ends up with the same result. No new jobs are created. This 

has plagued our province for many years now, and I must say 

that I’m happy to see in the throne speech this government has 

made job creation and economic development a priority. 

 

The trouble is, of course, this same government made the same 

commitment in 1992. We all remember it  30,000 jobs. Now 

we hear the same promise. The Minister of Economic 

Development tells us through his astute leadership 10,000 jobs 

have been created in the last four years. Well I don’t know what 

kind of jobs these were or where they were created or even if 

they still exist. But I can tell you our province hasn’t seen the 

effects. I suspect in fact the minister accidentally added a zero 

to his job creation number, possibly borrowing some of the 

Minister of Finance’s smoke and mirrors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  What truly saddens me however, when this  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  205 

government talks of economic development or job creation, is 

they really believe they are the ones who create the jobs. Mr. 

Speaker, you and I know, all of us know on this side of the 

House that government doesn’t create jobs. The Premier 

himself admitted that. 

 

Government can however kill jobs with an atmosphere 

unfriendly to small business, and unfortunately that’s the course 

this government has chosen to follow  oppressive labour 

legislation, unwarranted regulations, union preference policies, 

unreasonable tax rates. All of these things are job killers, Mr. 

Speaker. Yet time after time, this government moves to stifle 

initiatives in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on April 22, 1991, in this House, the then leader 

of the opposition and the current Premier laid out what he said 

was his five-step financial management plan. I’m going to take 

a few moments to detail that plan, Mr. Speaker, because I think 

it goes a long way in showing the hypocrisy of the New 

Democratic Party and its leader. 

 

Step number one of this plan: an attack on waste and 

mismanagement. The result: a larger cabinet and more political 

appointees. 

 

Step number two: approach taxation from the point of view of 

fairness and only where needed. The result: tax revenue is up 

over half a billion dollars since 1991. 

 

Step number three: to rejuvenate our economy and to create 

jobs. The result: zero job creation between January 1992 and 

January 1996, and close to 2,300 business bankruptcies under 

this NDP government compared to only 1,400 bankruptcies 

during the same period in Manitoba. 

 

Step number four, Mr. Speaker, was to stand behind farmers in 

rural Saskatchewan. The results: tearing up legally binding 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts, breaking the 

GRIP overpayment promise, and boarding up Crop Insurance 

offices and rural service centres. 

 

And finally, step number five: to improve the quality of life, 

especially in the fields of health and education. And the result, 

Mr. Speaker: a gutted health care system, closed hospitals, and 

closed schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all I can say about the Premier’s 1991 five-step 

plan is that I’m glad it didn’t have ten steps or there really 

would be nothing left in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, in my own constituency about four 

years ago the local Economic Development Authority was hard 

at work on a plan that would have created hundreds, hundreds 

of jobs in the area. And, Mr. Speaker, these were not part-time 

jobs; these were not minimum wage jobs; these were real, 

sustainable jobs that would have brought people back to the 

area. 

 

This plan would have seen a private company build an  

environmental centre that would have helped rid a large area of 

its garbage. This in turn would have relieved some of the need 

for new landfill sites. And one of the by-products of the centre 

would have been generation of electricity. 

 

All this private company asked of the government was that 

SaskPower would purchase this electricity for the same price as 

it takes for the corporation to generate its own. That’s all they 

asked. They did not ask for grants; they did not ask for loans; 

they didn’t ask anything of the government or the taxpayers. 

 

I remember attending the meeting where the proposal was 

spelled out for the current Minister of Finance. And what was 

her reaction? She said, and I quote her directly because it stuck 

in my memory, Mr. Speaker, she said: This is a Finance 

minister’s dream  no taxpayer money, lots of jobs being 

created. The Premier also spoke very positively of this project. 

 

So what happened? The government and Jack Messer said no to 

the project. That’s what happened. And the cabinet did nothing. 

The Premier and the cabinet turned their backs on my area of 

the province and the huge economic boost this would have 

been. They said no, or at least they allowed Mr. Messer to say 

no. 

 

If that is a sign of how committed this government is to 

economic development in rural Saskatchewan, you’ll excuse 

me, Mr. Speaker, for being somewhat sceptical when I hear 

about this new found commitment to creating jobs in 

Saskatchewan. And you’ll also excuse the residents of my 

constituency for sharing in my scepticism. 

 

This is only one of the reasons the area once known as red 

square has turned into the red dot. We’ve got the member from 

Yorkton surrounded and in the next election, we plan to sweep 

every seat in the region. And, Mr. Speaker, the policies of the 

government will make that very easy indeed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is supposed to 

bring some sense of hope to the people of Saskatchewan. 

However, I submit, unless the speech is finally backed up by 

some concrete action on the part of this government, I fear that 

hope will be dashed just as this government has dashed so many 

hopes over the last four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if our province is to grow, if our province is to 

succeed, if our province is to prosper, we need a new outlook. 

We cannot possibly succeed when we have ministers of the 

Crown decrying the fact that we are losing equalization 

payments because our resource and farming sectors are doing so 

well. 

 

That type of welfare mentality does not breed wealth. It breeds 

nothing but stagnation. And stagnation is fatal today in this 

changing world. Without new ideas, without a new way of 

doing things, Saskatchewan will remain a have-not province, 

and, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan do not want to 

be classified any longer as one of the have-nots. 

 



206  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

Wouldn’t it be wonderful if Saskatchewan got to the point 

where we never saw another equalization payment? Wouldn’t it 

be wonderful if we could finally stand on our own two feet? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think so and the people of Saskatchewan 

think so. They are hard working; they are innovative; they are 

willing to offer their blood, sweat, and tears to build a better, 

stronger province. If only we had a government to encourage 

them. 

 

But sadly we don’t, Mr. Speaker. All this government can come 

up with in terms of economic development is gambling. It’s a 

sad state of affairs indeed when we see a government of this 

province pointing to gambling expansion as one of its great 

achievements. 

 

Since VLTs were introduced into rural Saskatchewan we have 

seen hundreds of millions of dollars drained out of our 

communities  hundreds of millions of dollars. It’s truly mind 

boggling that these members across the floor cannot see the 

devastation their reckless gambling policy is having in our 

villages, towns, and cities. 

 

Every day thousands of dollars are being taken out of every 

town in this province. Money that would have otherwise stayed 

in these communities and helped keep a small business afloat. 

But does this government think about this? Absolutely not. 

They have forgotten their principles, if they ever had any to 

begin with. 

 

And I look over to the government side and I see the few 

members from rural Saskatchewan they have and I wonder why 

those members aren’t standing up and defending their 

communities. 

 

Why aren’t you telling this Premier and the cabinet they are 

killing rural Saskatchewan with their thoughtless policies? Why 

aren’t the back-benchers over there willing to stand up for their 

constituents and tell this government they are wrong? They are 

wrong about gambling. They are wrong about GRIP. And they 

are wrong to write off rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Osika:  I know some of the rural members on that side 

personally, and I know they too are saddened about what is 

happening outside of our cities. I beg them to find their voice. 

Speak for the people that sent you here. Speak out for what is 

right. Do your jobs. Show some integrity. Tell the Premier it is 

not right for this government to renege on its promise to return 

some of the VLT money to the communities. 

 

Tell the Premier he has to do more for the people in rural 

Saskatchewan than to cut their services, close their schools, and 

take away their hospitals. It is incumbent upon this Premier and 

this government to work for all of Saskatchewan, not just those 

who live within the city limits of Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 

Mr. Osika:  You can’t count on the civil servants to do that 

because they too are unfortunately as short-sighted as this 

cabinet. I say to those rural back-benchers, finally stand up and 

speak for the people, Mr. Speaker. They are paid far too much 

money to stay silent any longer on these issues. Take off your 

muzzles. Do your jobs. That’s what you’re here for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech  despite its warm, fuzzy 

language, despite its promises  I’m afraid will not encourage 

the people. They have seen this government go back on too 

many of its promises to take any comfort in the words contained 

in the throne speech. 

 

In its first term, this government blamed all the troubles of the 

world on the previous administration. Admittedly, that crew did 

and still does have a lot to answer for. But, Mr. Speaker, any 

government has to take action to quell its problems, not to just 

blame others. But as we’ve seen in the last few weeks, this 

government plans to continue to blame others for its own 

mistakes, its own decisions, its own choices. 

 

Now the finger of blame is pointed at the federal government as 

it tries to get its own fiscal house in order. Suddenly we hear all 

these tales of gloom and doom that were conspicuously absent 

during last June’s election campaign. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this opposition will hold the government 

accountable for its actions. We will not let the government 

slough off blame onto others any longer. It does not wash with 

us, and it most certainly does not wash with the voters in this 

province  not any longer. They elect governments to act on 

their behalf. They elect governments to take swift actions when 

problems arise. They most certainly do not elect governments to 

point fingers and bellyache. 

 

Whenever I hear the Finance minister crying about offloading 

by the federal government, I think back to the last few years, 

and I wonder how she can keep a straight face. For its last term, 

the government offloaded millions and millions of dollars onto 

the backs of local governments, school boards, universities, 

farmers, and taxpayers in its cynical attempt to balance the 

budget in time for the election. All the time they were forcing 

local governments to either raise taxes or seriously cut services 

to meet shortfalls. And, Mr. Speaker, these municipal 

governments do balance their budgets; they have to by law. 

Now this government has the audacity to stand up and point 

fingers at these very local governments as a source of waste. 

Give me a break. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker? The most surprising element 

in all this is that I really believe there are some on that side of 

the House who have bought into this garbage. I think even some 

of the cabinet might actually believe it because, Mr. Speaker, 

there is something very familiar with this government and the 

one that was in power when I returned to Saskatchewan in 

1981. 

 

Fifteen years ago, 15 years ago we had an NDP government in 

this province that had forgotten they worked for the people. 

They forgot the people altogether in fact. In their arrogance, that 

government decided it knew better than the voters and  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  207 

stopped listening to them. They were so full of themselves; they 

called an early election in 1982. And what happened? That 

government that was overwhelmed with arrogance was wiped 

off the map. The people saw the politicians were not listening, 

and they punished them for that. In fact the then attorney 

general was caught up in the wave. He more than anyone 

should know what happens when governments stop listening. 

The Premier should know that there’s always another gas 

station attendant out there ready to knock him off. 

 

So will this government finally start listening? Well I hope so, 

but I’m not going to hold my breath. I don’t think they’re 

willing to take my advice because they’re not willing to take 

anyone’s advice. They’re too far gone. Just as in 1982, they’re 

arrogant to their core. For that reason they feel they are right to 

break promises, to tear up legally binding contracts. These 

members are not people of their word, and the people of 

Saskatchewan can see that. They are seeing it more and more 

every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech is nothing more than hollow 

words on expensive paper. It will not restore Saskatchewan’s 

hope because the people cannot believe this government’s 

promises  not any longer. And for that reason, this opposition 

caucus will vote against the government’s motion. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great pleasure 

that I rise today to speak in support of the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  The speech outlines the direction of my 

government as we prepare to face the challenge of preparing 

Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people for the 21st century. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the 

Lieutenant Governor on his presentation of the throne speech 

and on the important role that he so ably fulfils as the Queen’s 

representative. 

 

I also want to congratulate you on being chosen by your peers, 

the members of this Assembly, to undertake the very important 

role as Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. The Speaker is 

very important to us all. You, sir, will without a doubt conduct 

the business of this Chamber in a manner that will bring a great 

deal of respect and dignity to this Chamber and to yourself as 

you serve your term in this very important position. 

 

I would also like to congratulate my colleague from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood at being chosen by this Assembly to 

serve as Deputy Speaker. I have known for some time of the 

member’s desire to serve this Assembly in this particular role. I 

am confident that the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 

will also serve us well as he undertakes his new responsibilities. 

 

In addition, I would be remiss if I did not take this opportunity 

to compliment my colleague, the hon. member from the  

Battlefords-Cut Knife, on her moving of the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  In addition, I wish to extend congratulations to the 

youngest member of our caucus, the member from Regina 

South, who did a commendable job of seconding the motion to 

accept the Speech from the Throne. These two individuals did a 

superb job of launching this debate, and I am proud and pleased 

to welcome them as new colleagues in our NDP caucus. 

 

I would also like to welcome the new Sergeant-At-Arms as well 

as the pages who will serve the members for the duration of this 

session. 

 

This is my second term, having been elected to serve the 

Assembly in 1991 as a government member representing the 

people of Redberry. Last June’s election saw my return, this 

time representing a somewhat different area now known as 

Redberry Lake. Redberry Lake is composed of large portions of 

the former Biggar and Redberry constituencies. In addition, 

Redberry Lake includes a portion of the former Rosthern 

constituency, containing my largest town, which of course is 

Langham, with a population of just over 1,100 people. 

 

My constituency, like all others in the southern part of the 

province, is made up of over 17,000 people. Unlike many 

others, Redberry Lake is 45 to 50 miles wide for the most part 

and 93 miles from the south end of Pike Lake to the northern 

end of Mistawasis Reserve. According to my calculations, my 

constituency covers an area in excess of two and one quarter 

times the area equivalent of Prince Edward Island. 

 

While Redberry Lake is primarily a mixed farming area, a great 

many people live on acreages and in the small towns and 

villages. The people who live on these acreages are often 

self-employed or employed in neighbouring cities such as 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and The Battlefords. A great number 

of residents are employed in potash production in the southern 

portion and in the oil and forest industries in the western and 

northern regions, with some commuting to Saskatchewan’s 

North for employment in the uranium industry. In addition I 

have two Indian reserves within the boundaries: Mistawasis in 

the far north end and Muskeg Lake a few miles further south. 

 

As is true in all areas of rural Canada, Redberry Lake is an area 

of ageing population. So their concerns are often related to the 

needs of the elderly. Often when I talk to my constituents, their 

interest is in health care and housing as matters of great 

concern. 

 

Last June the residents of Redberry Lake, as did most of the 

constituencies in the province, they spoke out loud and clear. 

During that campaign they made it known that they trust and 

support my government’s direction in such matters that have 

such a significant impact on their personal lives. In addition it 

was quite evident that they agreed with and support our 

initiative on job creation. 

 

The one overlying issue that is almost universal is the  



208  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

overwhelming support for our Premier and our Finance minister 

in the handling of the province’s finances. It is a great fear 

among my constituents because never again do they want to 

have our province totally devastated like it was allowed to  in 

fact was encouraged to  happen to us in the 1990s. That total 

incompetence, to say the least, is and will remain for many 

years a burden that my constituents along with all 

Saskatchewan people will have to bear. 

 

However, with the responsible management of the business of 

government, Saskatchewan people have more reason to face the 

future with optimism. Not only Saskatchewan people, but also 

people from across this nation discuss government management 

and recognize that the record of our government during its first 

term in office is outstanding. Our Premier is regarded as one of 

the outstanding statesmen of all time. 

 

The Speech from the Throne outlines the plans that this 

government has to continue on the road of responsible 

government as we approach the new century. The CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP 

governments have shown how, during 36 of the last 52 years, 

that a provincial government can through good management 

govern with a social conscience. Only with prudent 

management and a vision of the future can governments serve 

the needs of the people. 

 

Due to careful planning, I fully expect this month’s budget will 

be able to deal with the federal offloading and still maintain the 

finest health and education standards on the continent. 

 

When we consider the loss of the Crow benefit and the changes 

in rail service, my farmers and residents of the small towns are 

going to face major changes, not only in road maintenance but 

also in their entire community. When you consider the 

extensive changes to the rail line guarantees and federal 

funding, the railways can and will redraw the map of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

The people of Saskatchewan find themselves dealing in a new 

climate of world trade with its obvious challenges. Our 

government is striving to help cope with the uncertainty that 

this situation provides. Value added processing, local 

manufacturing, and more suitable production for a competitive 

market are the direction that we must and are going to follow. 

My government is focusing on such opportunities and assisting 

whenever and however possible. 

 

It is interesting to me to watch and, as a farmer, to deal with the 

daily problems created by higher input costs including, but not 

exclusively, freight rates. We all remember all too well how the 

federal government projected great growth and wealth in the 

livestock industry if only the Crow was gone. Well it is like the 

Newfoundland song about the cod-fishing industry; only in this 

case it is the Crow rate: she’s gone, boys, she’s gone. And let’s 

never forget it was a federal Liberal government that did this to 

us. Well it’s nothing to sing about, and the price of beef is a 

disaster. So the federal government’s promise of riches seems 

elusive. 

I often think of our neighbour who in 1952 hauled out four 

finished steers into North Battleford. He sold them and walked 

over to the Ford garage and bought and paid for a brand 

spanking new Crown Victoria. Well the other day a farmer from 

my constituency phoned me to tell me he had received $1.29 a 

pound dressed weight for his steers. If you do the math on that, 

it will show you that today he would need 40, not four, steers to 

buy that same model of car  40:4, that’s where his purchasing 

power is gone. 

 

So this creates a situation that the farmer, through his own 

efficiencies, has survived but now needs our help as a 

provincial government to encourage and assist him to be able to 

market his product at low cost through value added processing 

right here on the prairies, so he can continue to produce with 

some hopes of survival. 

 

One such project that can benefit such farmers, and also young 

people looking for jobs, is being considered in the Blaine Lake 

area in my constituency. A group of industrial individuals in the 

area are promoting a state-of-the-art processing and packing 

plant. They’ve done a lot of preliminary studies including the 

start of a feasibility study. Should such a project be successful 

in becoming established in Redberry Lake, it would bring with 

it a minimum of 300 jobs. 

 

This is just an example of the kind of project my government is 

encouraging with communities, businesses, and governments 

working together to create jobs and business opportunities in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I have been particularly pleased over the pilot project that my 

government introduced last May to train young farm people. I 

have been striving for several years to have an apprenticeship 

course for agriculture made available for young Saskatchewan 

people. With the full support of the present Minister of 

Agriculture, the green certificate program is under way. Initially 

this apprenticeship program was established out of necessity to 

have a trained workforce to fill important jobs in such places as 

feedlots and dairy operations, but more significantly to prepare 

young men and women to own and operate their own farm 

business. 

 

At this time, approximately 50 young Saskatchewan farmers 

have enrolled in the program with the first certificates to 

individuals who have completed the first level required to 

receive a certificate. My congratulations to the graduates and 

my thanks to the fellow caucus members whose support made it 

possible to establish this very important trial project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess:  I have talked to many people who are looking 

forward to the review of the crop insurance program. It is quite 

apparent that the crop insurance, as it has evolved over the 

years, has developed some growth disorders. Perhaps some of 

those disorders are now involved in the political game. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture is to be complimented on his 

efforts to conduct a meaningful review of the program. The 

crops, the cost of production, the communication have changed  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  209 

so much since the program was introduced some 35 years ago 

that it is crucial that a review be done. These meetings will 

provide an opportunity to evaluate, discuss, and recommend 

program adjustments that will enhance crop insurance and its 

delivery to the farmers involved. I am looking forward to the 

meetings in my area so that I have a direct opportunity to meet 

with the farming public as it is presented to the minister for his 

consideration. 

 

My constituents are telling me they want a simple, clean-cut, 

responsive program that provides them emergency support at a 

reasonable price. We as farmers in this province are very 

fortunate to have a Minister of Agriculture who not only 

understands our needs but lives them himself. 

 

I for one want to thank him for this review process which gives 

us as farmers a chance to design a program to better serve our 

needs. With higher input costs, the basic insurance of risk 

coverage is more important to us than ever. With the improved 

grain prices and a provincial economy that is well managed, a 

great deal of optimism is apparent among the farmers of the 

area. 

 

My constituents will also be pleased by the proposal to 

complete the twinning of the Yellowhead highway, which will 

soon be four lanes from North Battleford to Saskatoon. This 

beautiful new road will be much safer and more pleasant to 

drive on for residents and tourists alike. 

 

I am looking forward with enthusiasm to this session as we 

introduce, debate, and pass progressive legislation that will 

improve the quality of life for Saskatchewan people as we 

approach the 21st century. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate you on your 

new position and I will be voting in support of the Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this stylized form of 

non-mortal combat that we have in this legislature, there are 

certain traditional things. The first traditional thing of course is 

to congratulate the guy in the funny hat, and then of course to 

thank the voters of the constituency. And I do indeed 

congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, and I do thank the voters of my 

constituency. 

 

I would also like to thank the people who ran against me  Mr. 

Wally Lockhart for the Liberal Party and Mr. Marcel Guay for 

the Conservative Party. 

 

I also want to congratulate all the veteran MLAs who were 

returned to this House and to congratulate most particularly the 

new MLAs. You will find that it is a difficult time, being an 

MLA, but it’s also a wonderful time. Despite the lack of privacy 

that we have, despite the fact that our friends are always 

questioning what we’ve done and why we’ve done it, and 

despite the paradoxes that we have to cope with between being 

people who are members of a political party as well as part of a 

social movement. Nevertheless being a politician is an  

honourable profession. And I’m very pleased that I ran again. 

 

I’m also very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to be in the back benches, 

and some people may find that a little bit funny for me to say. 

But I want to say that one of the things I have as a back-bench 

member of the government is a lot of flexibility, a lot of 

freedom, and most particularly, a lot of time to consider my 

political philosophy. And I believe the politicians are better 

served by having that time to consider their political philosophy 

so that they can be consistent in their principles and in the 

things they champion. 

 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, all across this world we are seeing that 

social democratic thought is under attack. We are seeing that it 

is imperative for social democrats to come to grips with the 

necessity to change, with the necessity to redefine traditional 

forms of interventionism, to move it from the central state level 

down to the community level. We are also seeing that social 

democrats have to come to grips with the fact of the 

market-place, the ascendancy of the market-place, and yet the 

absolute, imperative necessity to ensure that social democratic 

principles of compassion, fairness, and social and economic 

justice guide and inform that market-place. 

 

We are grappling with change, Mr. Speaker, unlike the 

members opposite who come to the House talking about the 

same old things over and over again, complaining about 

hospital conversions, complaining about GRIP, talking about 

integrity, and yet demonstrating the opposite. Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, what we are doing on this side of the House in the 

New Democratic Party, indeed in the social democratic 

movement all across this world, is we are recognizing that 

change will be the norm for the next while. We recognize that 

we have to be strong, probably stronger than ever. Once we 

thought we had almost tamed the market. Now we’re seeing a 

return to pre-industrial times, almost, in terms of democracy. 

 

The capitalist economy is now becoming turbo charged, and we 

seem to be returning to the unfettered times of the mid-1800s 

where influence was $1 equals one vote rather than the 

democracy of our times, which we wish to champion, where 

one person equals one vote. 

 

To that end, Mr. Speaker, I would point out a headline in the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, on Saturday, entitled, “Market 

meltdown: Good news on job front brings bad news for 

investors.” What a strange kind of capitalist society we’re into 

when the fact that there are more people employed in the United 

States should cause a market to develop the heebie-jeebie 

jitters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing the end of the nation state. We are 

seeing forces that are pulling us either towards the direction of 

tribalism or towards the direction of Mc-junk, where everybody 

becomes the same amorphous consumer. It is our duty and our 

mission as social democrats to kindle social hope and to point 

out that there can be  that there is  a third way of coping 

with the end of the nation state. 

 

We need to rise above the notion of the nation state and talk 

now about the community values that inspire us as social  



210  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

democrats. We need to talk about how these values can help the 

world cope with changes. We need to talk about the fact that 

society has a responsibility to give people the hope for a better 

life. And in return, the people have a responsibility to give 

something back to their community and to obey their 

community’s rules. We need to deal with the crucial issue, as 

we enter the next century, of finding the balance between 

obligations and entitlements. 

 

(1600) 

 

In that sense, Mr. Speaker, I would quote from an ancient 

philosopher; his quote of thousands of years ago is as relevant 

today. Aristotle said: “It is the duty of the statesman to create 

for the citizen the best possible opportunity of living a good 

life.” “This is not to degrade morality”, he said, “but rather to 

moralize politics.” And that is the job that we, all of us in this 

legislature, have  to moralize politics. 

 

We have now a global economy. We have to accept it, but we 

do not have to accept the fact that everyone constantly talks 

about a global economy but forgets to talk about a global 

community, a community where the voices of the citizens 

prevail and where the voices of the citizens are not stifled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have developed in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan, wonderful social programs, programs that are 

the envy of everyone in the world. But we need to recognize 

that our programs, while they may be wonderful compared to 

the poverty and squalor we may see in other parts of the world, 

have not totally helped all the casualties of the market system. 

 

So we need to figure out ways to find specialized programs to 

look for assistance for people in our community to take their 

rightful place as fully functioning, fully contributing members 

of our community. I’m talking about single parents; I’m talking 

about first nations people; I’m talking about the people who 

have been crunched by the new economy — the middle-aged 

and older long-term unemployed workers; the people in rental 

accommodations; and the disenfranchised and under-educated 

youth. We need to figure out ways to divert funds and programs 

to them in a specialized way, beyond universality but still 

universally beneficial. We also need to figure out ways to 

convince the privileged that it is in our own best interests to 

support these specialized programs. 

 

The key issue, it seems to me, for social democrats for the 

future is security  security municipally, provincially, 

nationally and internationally. The old certainties of church, 

club, and coffee klatch are disappearing and we need to ensure 

that people do not simply, in this new information age, climb 

into artificial, counterfeit, cyber communities as a way of 

coping with the changes. 

 

As New Democrats, we know that we cannot build economic 

and social security with a strong sense of community unless 

people feel a strong sense of stake and belonging in their 

community. Therefore we need a moral purpose, a noble 

purpose in politics, with the individual family and social values 

to sustain that noble purpose. 

 

From my point of view, Mr. Speaker, speaking obviously as a 

biased member of the government, only the social democratic 

politics of the NDP has that noble purpose. Certainly, it seems 

to me, it has a much more noble purpose than the politics of the 

members opposite, where the purpose seems to be to chip away 

at our collective institutions, all for the sake of maximizing 

individual profits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are in a period of transformation. Therefore 

our job as politicians, as members of the government  our 

job, our mission, our purpose — is to ensure that the 

transformation is positive for all. And we have to also ensure 

that people have a sense of security during this time of 

revolutionary and evolutionary change. 

 

Today everybody talks. They natter on about jobs, jobs, jobs, 

when they’re not muttering about taxes, taxes, taxes. But it is 

imperative that we also talk about stability, about security, and 

about values. That is why in the last provincial election we 

talked about how we would handle any budgetary surpluses. 

We said that it would be one-third for jobs; one-third for tax 

reduction; and most importantly, one-third for program help for 

the casualties of the changing times. That’s why in the Speech 

from the Throne we have introduced things such as the redesign 

of social assistance. 

 

The old, left, rigid solutions, Mr. Speaker, of centralization, 

dogmatic economic planning, and state control won’t work any 

more, even if they ever did work. Neither will the hippy-dippy 

1960s new-left solutions of confrontation, picket politics, and 

the championing of particularistic interests. 

 

As social democrats, in the last century we tackled outdated 

attitudes and prescriptions. We won many major battles for 

women, for the environment, and for oppressed people. We 

were fighters on their behalf. We achieved results through those 

fights. Now we have to move beyond fighting. We have to 

build; we have to create. We need to make sure that all the 

people who are involved in particularistic politics start to see 

that all of us in this province and in this country, that we, all of 

us, have common cause. That common cause right now in this 

age of transportation, the transformation, is how to achieve 

security amidst change. 

 

The choice is not between resisting change and just letting it 

happen. We can work in partnership with traditional foes and 

our friends. We can achieve a government that is not primarily 

interventionist. Our active government will have a sense of 

purpose and mission as we work to build social order and 

stability with strong community values and respect for diversity. 

 

We will build a more open, pluralistic style of government with 

more honesty from politicians about what is doable and what is 

just cream puff, feel good promises. We will work with the 

community to make sure that the voices of the citizens prevail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what you will see in the Speech from the Throne 

are various tools that will help us achieve greater participation 

in community decision making, that will help communities have 

an increased flexibility so they can deliver services to  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  211 

meet local needs and, most importantly, that will provide 

communities with the support, the skills, and the needed 

legitimacy as we move into this age of transformation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I would say, in these paradoxically 

volcanic and prosaic times, two things are in short supply: the 

faith to imagine a better world and the political ingenuity to 

bring it about. Mr. Speaker, New Democrats have both, and so 

therefore for that reason it is my great pleasure to support the 

Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me begin 

my intervention in this debate, Mr. Speaker, by saying that it is 

a great honour to have the opportunity to speak in this throne 

speech debate in this first session of this legislature as a 

member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as is often the tradition in this House, I am 

tempted to make some comments on the remarks made by 

members opposite, particularly the Acting Leader of the 

Opposition. I am tempted to make some remarks, Mr. Speaker, 

because as I listened to the comments by the member from 

Melville, particularly his comments about integrity, I had this 

feeling and this urge that it could be a speech in itself. But I 

shall show respect for the fact that he is a new member, as I 

think is also a tradition of this House, and I shall not comment 

at any length on the comments that he made, other than to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that I think it is of some interest to note that the 

member who just spoke as the Acting Leader of the Liberal 

Party about integrity is the member who once was a Progressive 

Conservative and then a Reformer and now a Liberal. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, that says something about integrity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one could speak about integrity when one 

watches the machinations of the Liberal caucus since the last 

convention of the Liberal Party in the month of November. But 

that is all I intend to say, Mr. Speaker, about comments by 

members of the opposition, from both the official opposition 

and the third party, because I would prefer to say some of the 

things that I think are particularly relevant in this debate. And 

there won’t be another opportunity to make comments on 

comments made by members from the opposition. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, for those of us on both sides of this House 

who are given the responsibility by our constituents in each 

election to share a privilege that only a very few people in our 

total population get to experience, is really something very 

special. This is a very special opportunity and with it comes a 

very onerous responsibility. 

 

I can remember when I was first elected in the constituency of 

Humboldt in 1971 as a very young individual, and at that time I 

was convinced without any shadow of a doubt that there could 

be no greater service that a man or a woman could give than 

that of an elected parliamentarian or legislator. 

 

And I believed then, Mr. Speaker, as I do now, that to take part 

in the political process, to take part in the political party of 

one’s choice, was an honourable and an important thing to do.  

And today, Mr. Speaker, after being here for quite a few years 

and in spite of the attempts by some to discredit the political 

process, to discredit the legislative process, to discredit the 

democratic political process, and in spite of the fact that I think, 

not necessarily always intentionally, the cynical in which some 

of our media report on the work of this institution, I believe 

more than ever that there is no greater service that a person can 

provide to one’s society or one’s country or one’s province than 

in the legislature or the parliament of one’s country or one’s 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, to be 

elected to the legislature is a very special honour that very few 

experience. And so I begin my remarks today by expressing a 

very sincere thank-you to the constituents of Regina Dewdney 

who for the fourth time have entrusted me with the 

responsibility of representing them in this legislature. 

 

Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker, is a constituency where people 

from every walk of life live. There are business people and 

working people and farmers and people from most professions 

in the modern society, and seniors and young people and people 

of aboriginal background, new Canadians, people who are 

waiting to become Canadians, as well as some of our pioneers, 

all of them endeavouring to make a living and contribute to 

their community, their province, and to their nation. And I 

consider myself to be indeed very fortunate to be able to have 

the benefit of the advice and the opinion and the ideas and the 

confidence of these people who live in Regina Dewdney. 

 

They represent a cross-section of Saskatchewan people. They 

care about the province and its future and they expect their 

government to make the changes needed to provide for that 

future. The people of Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker, are also 

part of a larger community which is the city of Regina. And its 

also an honour to be a member of a group of members of this 

legislature representing this capital city in the legislature. 

 

One could say many things about the merits of our capital city 

and its people, but I think it can all be illustrated by saying that 

it took Regina  with its volunteers, its hospitality, and its 

ability to organize  to organize the best Grey Cup in the 

history of the CFL (Canadian Football League). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, to everyone who 

contributed to this tremendous national classic, I say thank you 

and congratulations. You not only did Regina proud, but you 

made a tremendous contribution to Saskatchewan and to 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1972 I had the honour to second the address to 

the Speech from the Throne, and so I kind of had a sense of 

what the movers  the members from Battleford-Cut Knife and 

the Regina South constituencies  what kind of feelings they 

must have gone through as they prepared and then delivered 

their speeches here in the House in reply. I could share some of 

those feelings. 



212  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

And I want to at this time congratulate both of them for the 

exemplary way in which they presented well prepared, 

thoughtful addresses. Their constituents, I know, can be proud 

of what they presented here today. And they can be reassured, if 

they had the opportunity to listen or to read the speeches in 

Hansard, that they chose well in the last election when they 

remembered . . . when they elected those two members to this 

legislature. 

 

(1615) 

 

Briefly, Mr. Speaker, I also want to make a very short comment 

on my time as a member of the Executive Council in which I 

served for some 14 years. It was a time which was very 

rewarding. I served with many colleagues, some of whom are 

here and some of whom are no longer here. We faced many 

challenges, and I like to think that I was part of some 

accomplishments that were significant to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it was an honour to have 

served with those many people during those many years and 

have taken part in many of those decisions that were made. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss in making those comments 

if I did not take the opportunity to acknowledge the very 

important role that the public service played in that as well. And 

I say that, Mr. Speaker, because too often we neglect to do that 

in this legislature. And too often political parties in opposition 

choose to attack these people who serve the public in much the 

same way as anybody else does, working very hard in order to 

provide the services that the public expects. 

 

And I want it put on record, Mr. Speaker, that during those 

years that I served in the Executive Council, the reason 

governments of that time, whenever I was there, were able to 

accomplish the things that they did was because of the hard 

work and the dedication and the seven-day, 

don’t-take-a-holiday attitude that’s taken by many of our public 

service, by our public service in general, as those decisions are 

made. And I want to say to them, Saskatchewan people have 

every right in the world to be proud of the public service in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, and finally on that I want to 

say that I’ve stepped out of cabinet twice. In 1982 I stepped out 

of cabinet at the express wish of my voters; in 1995 I stepped 

out of cabinet as my own personal decision. And to all members 

of the House on both sides of the House, I would commend the 

second alternative. It is a great deal more satisfying. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, today as I considered the 

Speech from the Throne and looked to the session agenda, I am 

more confident than ever that the agenda of the people of 

Saskatchewan is going to be well served. I want to make 

specific comment on the comments that have been made in this  

House by the members who have been elected here for the first 

time, and particularly the members who are new to the 

Executive Council. 

 

And I listened to the member for Wascana today, the Minister 

of Justice, who made a very thoughtful speech about a very 

important issue. And as I sat here and I listened to him  and I 

consider him representing all of the other first-time members 

here  truly, Mr. Speaker, I felt totally assured that the 

provincial agenda and the needs of the people and the future of 

this province were in very good hands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Now as members of this legislature have 

been elected and were elected in June, Mr. Speaker, you too 

were recently elected by your peers. And I want to say to you 

that you will do your job, I know, as well as any Speaker before 

you. I have no doubt that you will be one of the Speakers who 

will set a legacy in the true tradition of Speakers of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  You’re going to oversee the rules which 

the members of this House make for themselves, and I’m sure, 

Mr. Speaker, that you will make sure that those rules are 

adhered to in order that this House can function in the way it’s 

supposed to so that those very important issues of this province 

are debated appropriately. So I congratulate you on your 

election, and I look forward to serving with you. 

 

I also want to congratulate the Deputy Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, and I commend to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that in the more difficult times in this House, 

you may vacate your chair to him because, if nothing else, his 

just sheer physical stature, I think, will help to bring some 

decorum to the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  But seriously, Mr. Speaker, I do, having 

known the member for a long time and have spent some time in 

his constituency, I know the tremendous job that he is going to 

do and the contribution he will make. 

 

The other point I want to make about that election, Mr. Speaker, 

is that you are a member from urban Saskatchewan; you have 

an urban riding. The member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 

is a member from a rural riding. And I don’t think that that 

point should be passed by in this legislature because I think this 

legislature should be represented in the whole composition of 

this province: rural and urban and northern. And the 

composition of the people . . . and the fact that we have the two 

people who will be chairing this House representing both rural 

and urban Saskatchewan is significant, and it’s the way it ought 

to be in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  I also want to congratulate the members 

who got elected in the last election and particularly all of the  



March 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  213 

new members. I’ve had the opportunity to listen to most of the 

new members who have spoken in this debate, and I must say 

that they look a lot more comfortable than I felt when I first 

rose to deliver my speech in the legislature in 1971. 

 

Over the term of this legislature, I suspect when there will be 

times when I will be less kind to members opposite, as is the 

case in debate, but they can be assured of one thing. They can 

be assured that they will always be considered to be legislature 

colleagues, even though we might be worlds apart in our views 

and on certain issues. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because for a 

time in the 1980s, this sense of the parliamentary process 

disappeared here in this legislature, I believe to the detriment of 

this Assembly and its processes and its debates. 

 

But slowly it has been returning and all members should be 

encouraged to help that process on its way. The public expects 

all of us to have strong views, to state them strongly, to point 

out what we think and what is wrong and what is right, and to 

point out how we disagree with each other. But while we do 

this, Saskatchewan people want most of all for their legislature 

to work for them. They expect a high level of debate and 

actions by politicians based on integrity and honesty and 

commitment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, the time is short and I was 

wanting to comment briefly on the federal budget but I will 

leave that at another time. I know we will have budget debates 

and other times at which we can do that so I will not at this time 

comment on that other than to say that it deserves a lot of 

attention because of the impact that it is going to have on 

Saskatchewan in a very dramatic way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we are here, debate on the throne speech 

presented last Thursday, I stand in my place and proudly say 

that I will be speaking in favour of and will support the Speech 

from the Throne. It is a statement of vision for the future. And 

as this session progresses day by day with the presentation of 

Bills, the budget, and the debate of estimates, it will become 

clearer and clearer that what was presented on Thursday last, or 

sometime before that, was a blueprint and a visionary blueprint 

on how our province will be positioned as well as possible for 

the next century. 

 

This was not a document prepared by individuals working 

together as a government who are afraid to take on the 

challenges before us. It is a courageous statement which says 

clearly: here is what must be done in order that the best possible 

future can be provided to our families, our children and future 

generations. 

 

Now because I’ve been there, Mr. Speaker, I can say here in the 

House and I want to say for the record, that the work that was 

done by Executive Council members in preparation of this 

document and this blueprint and the agenda for this legislature 

needs to be recognized because I know the kinds of hours and 

the energies and the stresses that come with doing that. And I 

want to say to the members of this cabinet in this government: 

job well done on a very difficult time in spite of the fact that  

there is no help coming from the Liberal government in Ottawa 

in that respect. 

 

If anything the federal Liberal government is standing away in 

the progress that the provinces have made with regard to deficit 

reduction and good financial management. 

 

You, Mr. Speaker, and members, are familiar with the extensive 

public consultation which took place prior to this throne speech, 

probably the most extensive consultation in the history of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 

because of that, this Speech from the Throne is not just a vision 

of the future of this government, it reflects the vision, the 

hopes, the aspirations, and the desire for change for all of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now of course, Mr. Speaker, it won’t please everyone, and in 

my view, nor should it. Because any government or any 

political party  and I commend this point of view to members 

opposite  that think they can always please everybody on 

every issue is a political party or a government that is not doing 

its job. Because our role, Mr. Speaker, is to put together 

policies which are public policies that are good for the public 

good and not good for any particular interest group or lobby 

group or any narrow-interest group. We’re here to develop good 

public policy and that’s what this Speech from the Throne I 

think shows better than ever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Cognizant of the time, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to conclude by saying this. As we debate the issues, the 

legislation, and the budget during this session, I say to all 

members of the House through you, let us not forget the events 

of October 1995, which rekindled a Canadian consciousness 

that I have not seen before. As the Quebec referendum 

approached, more people in every city, town, and village began 

to talk about their country and its greatness than has been heard 

for a long time. And there was an emotion which could be felt 

in the streets and in the workplace and at social gatherings, an 

emotion of Canadianism which we don’t often experience. And 

although there was worry, people felt good about their country; 

they were proud, and they wanted a Canada to stay united. Why 

would anyone want to break up a country which throughout the 

world is seen as the best place in which to live and raise a 

family? 

 

And so I say, let us do everything that we can to keep that 

emotion and that pride, that love for Canada, alive and growing. 

And just as we reject racism, of which I was going to speak but 

because of the time will speak at another time, so must we 

reject the temptation politically to take advantage of the serious 

situation that sometimes exists in Canada to try to make 

personal or political gain for any particular party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  Mr. Speaker, we know that in order for 

this country to stay together some change is necessary. To keep 

Canada strong, some change will be needed, just as changes are 

needed in our province, changes which this Speech from the  



214  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 11, 1996 

Throne speaks about. We need a vision for the future of Canada 

and we need a vision for the future of Saskatchewan. And this 

Speech from the Throne speaks about a vision for the future of 

Saskatchewan. It speaks of preparing for the 21st century. It 

speaks of reform of many programs and policies that were 

created for another time. It offers hope for the future. 

 

For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I see no reason why every 

member in this House, other than for partisan political reasons, 

would not vote for this Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski:  And I say, Mr. Speaker, I intend to 

proudly stand when the vote is called, in my place, with my 

colleagues, and vote in favour of this Speech from the Throne 

because it is one of the best blueprints for a positive future for 

the province of Saskatchewan that we have seen in a very long 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:30 p.m. until 4:37 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  31 

 

Van Mulligen Mitchell Wiens 

MacKinnon Lingenfelter Shillington 

Tchorzewski Whitmore Goulet 

Kowalsky Crofford Renaud 

Koenker Trew Bradley 

Lorje Scott Teichrob 

Nilson Cline Serby 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Wall Kasperski Ward 

Sonntag Jess Flavel 

Thomson   

 

Nays  15 

 

Osika McLane Draude 

McPherson Belanger Bjornerud 

Julé Krawetz Gantefoer 

Boyd D’Autremont Heppner 

Goohsen Toth Haverstock 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 

from Regina Dewdney: 

 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 

Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

Ways and Means 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 

from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 92, hereby appoints 

the Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be 

granted to Her Majesty and to consider the ways and 

means of raising the supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:42 p.m. 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 187 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 187 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 187 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 187 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 188 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 188 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 188 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 188 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 188 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 188 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 188 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 188 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 189 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 189 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 189 
Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................. 189 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 189 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 189 
Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 189 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Country Music Awards Winners  

Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 189 
Canadian Women’s Basketball Award Winner 

McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 190 
Multiple Sclerosis Research Centre Opens  

Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 190 
Rehabilitation Centres 

Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 190 
Seniors’ Fitness  

Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 190 
Mainline Rural Development Corporation  

Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 191 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Education Program  

Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 191 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenue Sharing  
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 191 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 191 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 192 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 192 

High-risk Offender Identification 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 193 
Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 193 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenue Sharing  
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 194 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 194 

Northern Health Services  
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 194 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 195 

 
 



 
Government Investments in Cuba 

Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 195 
Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 195 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 196 
Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 

Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 196 
Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Education Act 

Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 196 
Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 196 
Bill No. 7  An Act to repeal The Industrial Incentive Program Act 

Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 196 
Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................................. 197 
Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 197 
Bill No. 10  An Act respecting Marketplace Practices, Consumer Products Warranties and Unsolicited Goods and 

Credit Cards 
Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 197 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 197 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
Commonwealth Day Message 

Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 197 
MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

High-risk Offender Identification  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 197 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 198 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 198 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 202 
Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 207 
Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 209 
Tchorzewski ................................................................................................................................................................................ 211 

Recorded division ............................................................................................................................................................................. 214 
MOTIONS 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 214 

Ways and Means 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 214 

 


