
























































June 11, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2441 
 June 11, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
 
The Speaker:  I would ask the minister to please introduce 
her officials. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right is the deputy minister, Bill Reader. Everyone else moved 
and played musical chairs on me. On my left is Ken Alecxe, 
ADM (assistant deputy minister) on the cultural side; behind 
him is Larry Chaykowski, director of finance; behind me is Ron 
Styles, ADM for housing; and on his left, Ron Davis, ADM in 
Municipal Government. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Before we 
completed at 5 p.m. I had a question in which you were going 
to respond to. I still await for the response. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I know that just before 
the adjournment the member opposite had asked me to be in a 
position to make an announcement about the provincial level of 
participation in the housing. And I’m not in any position to 
make any announcements today except to say that following 
withdrawal of the federal government from their responsibility 
in housing, particularly social housing, we have been struggling 
to do the best we can with whatever resources are available to 
us to fill the needs that we know exist for housing in Northern 
Saskatchewan, and being cognizant of the effect that housing 
has profoundly on health, well-being, and other values that are 
very important. 
 
We will continue to make what efforts we can to meet the needs 
that are there, but we’re not in a position at this time to 
announce new programing. We will carry on, attempting to be 
flexible within the existing program and resources we have, to 
meet the needs as far as possible. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess some of 
the points that I want to raise is that  and I could be corrected 
on the figures  but over the next four years your government 
has made the commitment to reduce the overall debt from $14.3 
billion down to, I believe, 12.5 billion. And certainly while 
that’s admirable and we also profess to want to reduce that debt 
at a greater rate, I think almost a $2 billion cut over a four-year 
period is going to provide significant challenge in meeting 
some of the social needs of Saskatchewan residents, in 
particular northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So in light of these facts of the budget planning that your 
government has undertaken, do you foresee any type of effort at 
the provincial level for social housing programs for northern 
Saskatchewan coming about as a result of the deficit-taking 
measures that your government has initiated? 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as I responded earlier, 
there have been some ad hoc extensions to federal programing 
in housing repair and maintenance and construction since 1993 
when the federal government and CMHC (Canada Mortgage 
and Housing Corporation) made their almost wholesale 
withdrawal. I’d just like to point out that with a million dollars 
you can construct approximately 14 new residences in northern 
Saskatchewan. So the cuts in federal transfer payments alone 
would build 2,800 houses in the North. 
 
So I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that would fill the need on 
the waiting-list for social housing and more. And as I say, we as 
a province will attempt to do the best we can. There is no 
possible way in any fiscal sense that we are able to back-fill the 
federal government’s withdrawal. And when, Mr. Chairman, 
the member opposite talks about the reduction to the debt in our 
four-year plan, the reduction that we plan to make in the debt of 
the province if one . . . we have to do that. 
 
If $1 million will build 14 houses in the North at approximately 
$80,000 each, imagine how we could meet the needs for 
housing in northern Saskatchewan if we didn’t have to pay 
$850 million or more on interest on the public debt every year. 
We could build infrastructure in the North that would meet 
everyone’s needs with that money. But as long as we don’t 
reduce the debt and the interest clock keeps ticking, then we 
will never have new money to put into new programs in the 
North or anywhere else. 
 
We need to earnestly reduce the size of the debt so that we 
reduce the amount of interest that we pay on an annual basis. 
Then and only then will we be able to do really meaningful 
programing in housing or any other area. In the meantime, we 
do the best to keep together what we can. We do the best to 
prevent erosion of the standards that we’ve been able to set and 
maintain until now. But huge programs involving new funding 
are simply not available to us, and they will not be available 
until the debt is reduced, vanished, and we are no longer 
committed to make those interest payments every year. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And just to 
clarify my point, I did certainly commend the government on 
their cost-cutting measures in terms of trying to reduce the debt. 
I don’t think anybody in the whole province of Saskatchewan 
would argue the fact that we’ve got to reduce the debt; $850 
million in interest each year is certainly killing this province, 
and $850 million can certainly build a lot of roads and build a 
lot of houses and build a lot of hope. And that’s really, I think, 
a point I’m not disagreeing with you in any way, shape or form. 
 
However, Madam Minister, I think the point that you raised, of 
the reduction in federal transfers would build 2,800 houses . . . 
And I believe the figures that were used, and I could be 
corrected on this again, was roughly $114 million reduction 
from the federal government in terms of this fiscal operating 
period when it came to federal transfers. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, I would suggest that the 
hundred-and-some million dollars that the provincial 
government receives from the VLT (video lottery terminal)  



2442  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

revenues can more than offset the decrease from the federal 
government. 
 
And no, I’m not supporting the federal government’s efforts of 
reducing the transfers to the province of Saskatchewan. That of 
course is always a challenge for all of us. However for you to 
suggest that the federal cuts would build 2,800 houses, you 
know, I guess the other question I would have for you is the 
CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement) policy that 
your government has initiated. What cost-saving measures 
could be arrived at if we were to scrap the CCTA and put that 
money into housing construction in northern Saskatchewan? So 
really it’s an issue of looking at both perspectives. 
 
So I’ll go back to my earlier point of the debt reduction plan 
that your government has in place; 1999 is the target year to 
have it reduced by almost $2 billion. We know that where the 
cuts are, a direct result of is this debt reduction plans that you 
have. But my point is exactly the question I asked earlier: does 
that mean over the next four-year period that social housing will 
not receive priority from this government? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I have said that we will 
give social housing and housing in the North the highest 
priority that we possibly can. However, the people of 
Saskatchewan have told us in our consultations that overall 
their very top priorities are the maintenance of health, 
education, and social services. And those are the areas in which 
the federal government has made substantial cut-backs in 
transfer payments. 
 
And the number that I refer to as the two-year accumulative, not 
one year, it was the amount that was actually cut last year and 
the amount that is announced for next year, for ’97-98. So I 
mean, I guess that’s something that has been announced. It is a 
given. 
 
We will do the very best that we can to do whatever we can 
within the flexibility that we have in our provincial portfolio. 
And as the federal government has said, not only have they got 
out of financing new housing and new programing off reserve, 
they have in fact announced that they want to devolve 
responsibility for the total housing portfolio that exists in 
Saskatchewan for Sask Housing to manage. 
 
So they’re withdrawing in a big, big way. And we don’t want to 
make no bones about it  we don’t have the dollars to back-fill 
their leaving. They’re leaving programing in a big way. We will 
do the best we can. I think from the comments that I’ve made, 
you appreciate that I have a solid understanding of the 
challenges that are there; a solid understanding of the needs and 
the implications of those on the whole social fabric and 
economic fabric of northern Saskatchewan. We are acutely 
aware of that. We will do the best that we can to alleviate 
problems and to meet needs. And more than that I cannot 
promise. 
 
(1915) 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess the 
fact that . . . again I refer to the article of today in reference to  

the reserve housing deal endorsed. I was just wondering, and 
this is my final comment when it comes to the housing 
situation, as to how the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations), with their limited budgets, are able to convince 
the federal government to continue to contribute $2.4 billion for 
on-reserve housing, yet the provincial government, in spite of 
its ability to talk on certain matters, aren’t able to do anything in 
the least bit to try and match what is being done by the FSIN. 
Could you explain that for me, please? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it is not a fair 
assertion to say that we are doing nothing. As I pointed out 
earlier, we have spent between 1992 and 1995, $1.4 million on 
the RRAP (residential rehabilitation assistance program) 
program for repairs and maintenance in the North. 
 
We have spent . . . I don’t have the number right here, but we 
certainly have targeted, considering the size of the whole 
amount available, substantial amounts to the home modification 
program and the emergency repair program to the North. In fact 
almost all of that program money that’s available goes to the 
North, to inner cities, and to rural areas, in those proportions. 
 
And we did participate in the 75 federal/25 per cent provincial 
program for the remote housing initiative in the North last year. 
The projects that we mentioned earlier that were very 
successful. And we will continue to not only participate in these 
programs, we will continue to seek out ways that we can be 
instrumental in dealing with the challenges of northern housing. 
And we will be proactive in that. And that is about as far as I 
can go at this time. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the 
other point is, on behalf of the people that did receive a lot of 
the RRAP . . . and I must admit many of my constituents 
received some of the benefits of the RRAP program and they 
are sincerely appreciative of the fact that there is some support 
out there. However, I would suggest . . . and I’m certainly 
encouraged that you are going to continue looking at this and 
doing your very best to do what you can to assist the people that 
are having housing problems in northern Saskatchewan, 
especially the elders I spoke about and certainly the working 
people, and the fact that there’s a severe shortage of housing 
right throughout the North. 
 
I guess in reference to that point, when you speak about the 
federal/provincial split of 75 per cent federal costs and 25 per 
cent provincial share of some of the construction programs in 
the past, is there any negotiations going on for the province to 
assume full ownership of these units and full control and 
thereby getting the full value of any of these houses when it 
comes to the fact that the federal government is trying to get out 
of it? Is there any discussions in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
question about the stage of the devolution of the federal 
responsibility for housing to the provinces, there are 
negotiations ongoing but no decisions have yet been taken. And 
even if there were some money to come with the devolution of 
responsibility, you know when you look down the road, any 
profits that might be generated from some of the rental  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

properties where there’s market rent would most certainly have 
to be used for maintenance of the housing stock; because if you 
didn’t maintain it, you look down the road 10 years, 20 years, 
and these homes depreciate . . . well some of them are single 
detached buildings, some of them are duplexes, some are 
apartments. 
 
And if Sask Housing or the province is still in this field all 
alone  as the portfolio is in reasonably good condition today 
 but we don’t have the solution in hand for 10, 20, 30 years 
from now as that housing stock deteriorates and we’re not able 
to generate enough money from the rental value of it to actually 
add to the housing stock. We’re just sort of in a status quo, 
maintenance phase. 
 
And we really need a federal partner, which has been the 
tradition. And as in the announcement with the FSIN today, I 
guess this is one area . . . housing on reserve has always been 
100 per cent federal responsibility, and apparently from today’s 
announcement it’s one area that they have not abdicated yet. 
 
But we will need in the long term, if we are to meet the needs 
for social housing, for affordable housing, for disadvantaged 
groups and seniors . . . I don’t see how, long term, we can do 
that by ourselves as a province. The federal government has 
been our traditional partner, as with all the provinces; and not 
only advancing mortgage funds through the role CMHC; of 
looking at special needs and having targeted programs; of 
setting standards across the country for building standards, 
electrical standards, through the national housing code. 
 
The federal government has been a very large player in this 
whole area, and I feel that it’s not responsible for them to 
withdraw to the extent they have. And hopefully someday they 
will see sweet reason and get back into it again, because long 
term I don’t see a crystal ball in the future that will allow our 
province or any province on their own to meet the very diverse 
housing needs that there are in this country. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I think most certainly I stand 
corrected on the fact that because of the huge costs associated 
with these matters that perhaps we can never expect the federal 
government to be completely free of the responsibility to 
provide housing. So in essence, am I fair to say that what you’re 
saying to me today is the fact that had it not been for the federal 
government involved with the housing program in the past, and 
certainly in the present and in the future, that we as a province 
would not be able to provide social housing, particularly for 
people of northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well I think that is fair comment, Mr. 
Chairman. And if you witnessed  this is not confined to 
southern Saskatchewan  if you witnessed recently, there have 
been press reports about some housing developments, the 
Muttart housing developments, Edmond Heights, Gladmer 
Park, and what different names that they go by. And there are 
other housing units that have not been sold but that are in the 
same position, where the original mortgage that was taken out 
by the original builder has now been fully amortized. 
 
And for that person or a group of residents forming a  

cooperative or a new buyer to maintain the rents that have been 
traditional in that building, in those buildings at that level, they 
can’t do it because CMHC has no mortgage programs with 
reduced interest rates for that type of housing any more. 
 
So any buyer, or even, as I say, a group of the current residents 
forming a cooperative trying to re-amortize that building and 
having to pay market rates, has to triple the rent. And these 
were always 100 per cent federal units. 
 
I mean our portfolio is quite diverse. Some of the housing in 
Saskatchewan is fully federally funded and operated and 
managed. Some of it is fully provided by the province and 
managed from other eras. We haven’t done any 100 per cent 
recently with the province but there is some there that was built 
in the ‘70s that was 100 per cent provincial capital. 
 
Then there are numerous arrangements with 75 per cent federal 
and 25 per cent provincial managed by the province. So it’s 
quite a diverse range of ownership and capital contribution 
arrangements. 
 
But we don’t see within the provincial budget the opportunity 
for us as a province to replace the role that the federal 
government has traditionally played in this area. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much. And just quickly 
closing with the housing matter, I strongly urge you as minister 
responsible to do all you can to increase the funding for the 
RRAP program. I know that PMHC (Provincial Metis Housing 
Corporation) certainly is aware of the incredible demand out 
there. And I believe the people in northern Saskatchewan will 
indeed pay their fair share for their housing services that they 
do get from the provincial government. And I stress fair, 
because many working people cannot afford the conditions in 
which they assume some of these houses. 
 
And that also has a drastic effect and impact on not only their 
attitudes but the general disincentives that are associated with 
living in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve got a few questions for Municipal Government and then 
I’m done. I just wanted to ask, in reference to the Northern 
Revenue Sharing Trust Account, which I believe is under your 
portfolio  I may be corrected on that. But could you explain 
to me . . . back in 19 . . . I’m not too sure of the year, but there 
was $8 million taken from the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust 
Account to provide water and sewer services to various 
communities. And while the communities were appreciative of 
that effort, we were just wondering, or I was just wondering, 
how we’re going to replenish the Northern Revenue Sharing 
Trust Account, because it was depleted by such an enormous 
amount when it was taken out for these water and sewer 
projects. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I was just trying to 
recall. I think that within the last several days, the Provincial 
Auditor’s report, with comments on the Northern Revenue 
Sharing Trust Account, was tabled. And there were some very 
interesting figures in that. And I don’t have a copy of it here 
with me but the member opposite may want to avail himself of  



2444  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

a copy and look at that. 
 
And I think it’s important to note that all the money that is 
raised through local taxation in the North, that’s deposited in 
the Northern Revenue Sharing Trust Account, is spent in the 
North. And substantial amounts have been spent on water and 
sewer and other infrastructure. 
 
And one of the reasons  in the North  one of the reasons 
for the establishment of the Municipal Round Table was to 
engage the input and the comments of the northern mayors from 
all across northern Saskatchewan to give us their views on the 
priorities that should be established for the Northern Revenue 
Sharing Trust Account, and how we can make more use of that 
money and meet the priorities that the people in the North 
identify. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Lorje:  With permission, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you know, we are very 
privileged this evening to have some guests with us in the 
Speaker’s gallery. These are tourists from the United States who 
. . . I believe it’s North Dakota, is it? Some of the tourism 
dollars are flowing northward rather than southward right now. 
These people are here in Saskatchewan for a brief while, 
visiting the legislature and also going to the IMAX theatre. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I met them earlier this evening on the 
steps of the legislature and was very pleased to give them a 
souvenir pin from Saskatchewan. And since he cannot 
introduce these guests from North Dakota because of his 
functions as Deputy Speaker, that gives me a great deal of 
privilege to welcome them to Saskatchewan. I hope they have a 
very enjoyable visit here. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  With leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce 
guests also. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to also welcome the guests from North Dakota. As a 
representative who lives just across the border on the Canadian 
side from Sherwood, North Dakota, I have a good many friends 
and acquaintances across there, some of which sit in your 
Assembly in Bismarck. And I would like to take the opportunity 
to welcome you to Saskatchewan. I hope you enjoy your visit 
and that you leave lots of dollars. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Government 

Vote 24 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I guess on 
behalf of the Liberal opposition, I’d also like to welcome our 
American visitors and I hope that your visit is pleasant. 
 
I guess a couple of final questions here, Madam Minister. Just a 
point: as you’re probably aware, northern municipal 
governments are struggling. They have a high cost of operating 
some of these northern municipal governments. There are issues 
that you look at: the GST (goods and services tax); you look at 
the PST (provincial sales tax) increases; you look at the high 
cost of power; the extra costs for fuel and electricity, and the 
list goes on and on. And the fact that there’s a very limited tax 
base amongst the northern communities. 
 
In reference to the proposed cuts coming up in the next year, 
can the northern municipalities, in view of their challenges and 
in face of their extra costs, can they look forward to not 
suffering some of the costs that you are anticipating handing 
down to municipal governments in general? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as the member 
opposite knows, we did announce in this year’s budget, in 
March of 1996, that there would be a 20 per cent reduction to 
the size of the revenue-sharing pool for 1997-98. And it has not 
yet been determined how those reductions will be applied. 
 
We did write letters to all of the northern communities early this 
year, right after the budget, telling them, in dollar amounts, 
each community by community, what their grant would be for 
this year, to allay any fears that they might have that there’d be 
any reductions for ‘96-97. 
 
But we will be discussing this. It’s part of the memorandum of 
understanding with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), to discuss and reach some 
decisions about how to distribute the remainder of the 
revenue-sharing pool after the reduction. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say it’s highly unlikely, given the 
situation as we know it in northern Saskatchewan, that a 25 per 
cent reduction would be made pro rata to the municipalities in 
the North. We made no reduction this year. We recognize what 
the situation is, and we will be talking with both round tables 
about how to distribute the remaining pool. But it has not been 
determined yet, so I’m not able to make at this time any 
commitments. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess the 
situation that they commonly speak to you on is the fact that 
northern Saskatchewan again hasn’t got no tax base and the fact 
that they never had the infrastructure until several decades ago 
in which proper housing and a few other facilities were built in 
these northern communities. 



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

In essence the northern municipal governments play a much 
larger role in these northern communities. Since business 
doesn’t exist, they try and stimulate the economy. They’re 
involved with health care. They’re involved with social 
development. They’re involved with housing. They’re involved 
with all kinds of different aspects of northern life. And you 
throw in the fact that there’s costs involved and the fact that the 
northern municipal governments are probably the one level of 
governments that’s doing the most to serve people. 
 
And you throw all them factors in and then you can actually see 
that they’re doing a tremendous job on their limited income and 
that there should be no way, shape or form, any type of 
reduction, because their doing their very best with the very least 
amount of money. And that’s something that all levels of 
government should admire. 
 
I guess my final question  and again in closing, I sincerely 
thank you for your comments and your answers and I thank 
your officials for coming here this evening  and I guess my 
final question, Madam Minister, is how soon can Stony Rapids 
see water and sewer? Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, 
Madam Minister, for this opportunity to raise a number of 
questions, and welcome your officials as well. 
 
I want to comment briefly on the statement and the discussion 
that took place about 20 or so minutes ago when you referred to 
the fact that we can’t increase a whole lot of spending until we 
take care of the debt, and I would to underline that statement 
and support that fully. 
 
So the questions that I have, I think will fit in line with those 
sorts of things where we’re going to look for spending and 
concerns that we may have there. The questions, most of them 
that I have, were provided to your office in advance in order to 
speed the estimates process. And we haven’t received all of the 
answers, so some of these questions are the ones that we did 
present to you in that situation. 
 
First of all, could you detail for us the educational leave and 
professional development programs within your department and 
the purposes of those? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, for clarification, I’m 
not just sure that we heard the question correctly. Did you ask 
about educational programing in the department or people on 
educational leave? 
 
I’m advised that we don’t have anyone on educational leave. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I guess I 
would start off by saying that’s probably good, because if we’re 
looking for places to keep expenditures down, that’s a good 
place to start. 
 
Could you give the totals of the payments of RRSPs (registered 
retirement savings plan) and other contract benefits provided to 
any employees that are outside the benefits provided to the 
Public Employees Benefits Agency. 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 
question is that we have none that are outside of those 
provisions. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  We’re just getting some great answers here, 
or at least answers that we rather like. 
 
Could you list in detail, cost of club memberships, season 
tickets, etc., held by the department, and detail the costs of all 
other entertainment expenses incurred by the department. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we have no such 
expenses. Affiliations cover that kind of costs for any 
employees in the department. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you again. I apologize to the minister. 
I asked a question, the last question I asked in reference to 
Stony Rapids, I was cut off by the Chair, and so he’s asked me 
to ask the question again in terms of as to a specific date as to 
when Stony Rapids can expect to see water and sewer for their 
community, Madam Minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not able to commit 
to a time frame for such a project at this time. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Could you detail leaves or 
secondments of department employees for charitable and other 
volunteer events, and state whether those particular leaves were 
paid or unpaid. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 
question is that we have no employees in that category or that 
were given leave for those purposes. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Question. For each terminated employee, 
could you answer whether the individual has been relocated to 
another job within the government or Crown sectors, and if yes, 
what those positions are? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this will be over . . . 
for the fiscal year April 1, 1995 to March 31, 1996, and it 
would be pretty well in the normal course of percentage of 
turnover on an establishment that size. And I’m just looking at 
a list and it says, resignation, resignation, there’s one, two  
two lay-offs in that period. There’s returned to school, work 
assignment completed, but for the most part they’re all simply 
resignations. And there would be about 70 during the course of 
that year in all of those categories. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. A question dealing with SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) and the 
reassessment that’s been taking place, especially in rural areas. 
With the reassessments that are taking place, there would be a 
larger requirement in the agricultural sector to cover the costs of 
municipal operations because of the lessening of the cost to the 
oil industry. And I’m wondering what sorts of precautions or 
things are in place to help those municipalities that are going to 
be caught with fewer dollars? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure yet, not 
confident, that it’s a given that there will be that kind of a shift, 



2446  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

because the tax policy in terms of the assessment rules has 
changed, but so also have the range of tax tools that 
municipalities will be given within the context of the legislation 
to deal with that. Say for example, the assessment in one 
property tax class changes, but there’s a variable mill rate that 
the province has to set a percentage of value for that where that 
work hasn’t been concluded yet, should be very soon. But there 
will be variable mill rates available. 
 
There will be a phase-in available  a three-year phase-in 
period  to assist with adjustments. And together with the 
percentage of value, the variable mill rate, it’s quite possible . . . 
well I think that the shifts will not be of the magnitude that 
some people are predicting. I mean obviously, if the tools were 
used to bring everything back up to the status quo that exists 
right now, there wouldn’t be much point in doing the exercise. 
 
But I don’t think it’s a foregone conclusion that there will be 
those shifts. And I don’t think that we should speculate on them 
until we have all the information and all the tools at hand to 
deal with the changes and challenges that will be presented by 
the renewing and modernization of the system. 
 
(1945) 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I guess estimates that we’ve 
heard on the shift to the agricultural sector range in the 100 to 
200 million, but that could be disputed. 
 
A question I would like some more clarification on, when 
you’re talking about the variable mill rate as it relates to RMs 
(rural municipality) or rural sectors, how much variation might 
there be in the mill rate that might apply, let’s say, to one 
particular quarter section of land on a percentage basis? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, it hasn’t been 
determined yet whether or not there will be caps on the spread 
that municipalities will be able to use. There is one school of 
thought that says there should be caps on the variable mill rate 
to prevent wide swings from one municipality to another. 
 
Then there’s another school of thought that says no, that people 
at the local level have enough common sense to apply the 
variable mill rate, even if it was left wide open, in a way that 
reflects common sense and finds the correct balance between 
commercial, residential, agricultural properties in a 
municipality. 
 
So that’s still an open question, but again I think that we should 
be very careful not to speculate, and most rural municipalities at 
least have expressed the view that if possible, once they get all 
the information, once they have all the information at hand, it 
would certainly be their preference to use a single mill rate and 
not use the variable mill rate unless they feel they have to, to 
find some equilibrium. Their preference is to use a uniform mill 
rate. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Okay, and I guess the variable mill rate is one 
of those sorts of tools that’s out there. Do you see a problem 
with a variable mill rate creating situations where you might 
have, in one municipality for example, hog operations  

being taxed at a substantially different rate than in another 
municipality, which could in fact steer those operations out of 
one RM or into another one? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, of course these 
are the kind of things that we have to guard against. There are a 
number of examples that you could cite where misuse or abuse 
of the tax tools could be very detrimental. Like for instance, if a 
municipality decided  a very small village, for instance, or a 
small town  decided that their main source of revenue, which 
is the truth in a lot of cases, was their elevators, and they 
decided to tax them more, it might be an incentive for them to 
close, in which case they lose the tax base altogether. 
 
Same thing with the example that was cited earlier, of in the oil 
patch. I think municipalities are very cognizant of this, that the 
alternative, if they make the oil and gas activity uncompetitive 
because of property tax rates, one alternative would be for the 
wealth to be shut in, in which case they lose all the economic 
activity and the jobs that they might have for their young people 
and so on for that area. 
 
But I have . . . as I say, the rules aren’t completely fine-tuned 
yet. But I have, in the long term, faith in local people to make 
those decisions in a common sense way. And no doubt there 
will be some exceptions, but I think that most municipalities, 
large and small, rural and urban, will know how to manage the 
system so that they can maintain the balance of activity and 
have the property tax burden as equitably shared amongst the 
constituents that they serve, as possible. I’m sure they’ll be able 
to do that. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I’m probably leaving that line of 
questioning for the moment. 
 
A question on equipment used by your office, the minister’s 
office. The question is, is all the equipment that’s been 
purchased within the last year, is that always tendered? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I mean I would like to 
be able to answer that question, but as you know, the outfitting 
and equipping of the offices in the legislature is a responsibility 
of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). 
So the question of whether they’re leases or purchases for 
equipment and furniture would be more appropriately directed 
to them. I’d answer if I could. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  A question also dealing with the minister’s 
office. If you could detail any and all credit cards, gas cards, 
those sorts of things, phone cards, that are held by the 
minister’s office. And then also, which staff members have 
access to those services, and if they do, how they’re charged for 
those services. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that’s a relatively 
simple question to answer because we certainly have a 
bare-bones operation in that respect. 
 
I myself have one American Express card which is used very 
seldom. It’s the type that has to be paid in 30 days. If I make a 
purchase  say for instance, gasoline or hotel room or meal or  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2447 

whatever  I have to pay it and then submit the receipt for the 
paid account for reimbursement. So I pay it personally first and 
then I’m reimbursed. 
 
I have a telephone credit card which is used only for business 
purposes  actually I have two, as you would probably know 
 you have two numbers, two credit cards. One relates to my 
constituency office in my home constituency and is used for 
calls related to the constituency; the other one relates to 
ministerial office duties and is used only for calls relating to 
that. Of course there’s an itemized bill every month for each of 
those. And the cellular phone service that I use very seldom, but 
have, also is billed on that same card. 
 
My senior staff has a similar credit card related to my 
ministerial office; that too has an itemized account. Then there 
is a credit card, CVA (Central Vehicle Agency), Government of 
Saskatchewan credit card, issued with the car that’s used strictly 
for gasoline and service for that particular vehicle. 
 
And that would be the extent of any credit cards. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. A number of questions dealing 
with your office staff in particular. And the question is, have 
any terminations occurred within the minister’s office during 
the past year, and if those will be hired any place within 
government or Crown sectors. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how far 
back the member wants me to go. I can’t really speak for other 
than my own tenure, and there’s been three ministers in this 
portfolio within the last year. 
 
I have at the moment in my office, six staff  three secretarial, 
and three ministerial assistants. And in keeping with the 
announcement that was made by the Premier, I believe in 
January, where we’re reducing our ministerial support staff by 
15 per cent, as of July 1, I will have five. The staff will be 
reduced from six to five, and it will be maintained at that level. 
 
To the best of my knowledge, any of the people who would 
have served the minister just prior to my assuming the portfolio, 
I don’t know whether the people moved into other positions, 
but I didn’t hire any of them, and as far as I know they didn’t go 
into government positions. They may have gone into other 
ministerial offices because there were six cabinet appointments, 
as you know, at that time. But other than the one reduction in 
my staff, which is about to take place on July 1, there have been 
no changes during my tenure. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  A question relating to your particular staff 
that’s similar to the one that I asked about the other employees 
earlier on. If you could list any payments to RRSPs or other 
benefits outside the Public Employees Benefit Agency that is 
extended to your particular minister’s staff. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I think my answer to 
the . . . in the first instance, as to were there any people on the 
department staff that had such benefits, the answer was no. And 
there’s no one on my personal staff or ministerial staff that has 
that type of a benefit. 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Then moving off to some urban 
questions. Much of the urban infrastructure that exists in 
smaller town Saskatchewan, and I’m thinking particularly of 
sewer and water, those are infrastructures that are extremely 
expensive to update and replace. And those communities, 
whether they’re stagnant in growth . . . that infrastructure is 
deteriorating. 
 
If they’re growing communities, they obviously need to expand 
those. And because of the high cost of that, and the older 
systems breaking down, what kinds of plans does your 
department have over the next numbers of years to help those 
smaller urban communities to maintain their infrastructure, 
especially with water and sewer, and maybe increase in size if 
they happen to be a growing community? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, really in the face of not 
only no new money but declining revenues in terms of revenue 
sharing, the circumstances that the member opposite refers to 
truly are a challenge. And this is one of the reasons why we 
have been talking and trying to engage the municipal 
organizations and individual municipalities in a serious 
discussion about a future vision for Saskatchewan because we 
do have . . . As you know, the landscape of Saskatchewan is 
changing. And we had developed, over the last 80 years, a level 
of infrastructure through the very extensive geography that we 
have in this province that is simply not affordable. 
 
And this is why we need to have municipalities work together. 
We need to have them sit down and talk about what 
Saskatchewan will look like. And will we have a hand in 
designing the future and deciding what level of services we 
want to sustain? Or are we just going to sit back and let the 
future map of Saskatchewan be determined by the grain 
companies, based on where they decide to put their concrete 
elevators? 
 
I don’t think so. I think that there’s a lot of initiative out there in 
rural Saskatchewan, the kind of initiative that our pioneers had 
that built this province. But we truly need to sit down and talk 
about, for instance, the fate of revenue sharing. Should we 
continue to give a base grant to very small communities having 
just, you know, several handful of souls. Good people they are, 
and they should be helped to stay there in their homes, which 
may be their only asset. This is a very sensitive area. 
 
But on the other hand, should we be giving a base grant of 
$3,600 to a community that only raises a $1,000 in taxes on its 
own, and at the same time there’s a growing community down 
the road that needs to rebuild its infrastructure? Should we be 
redirecting what revenue-sharing dollars there are away from 
smaller communities that don’t even have a water treatment 
plant or a sewage treatment or that kind of infrastructure? And 
should we be directing that money instead towards a 
community that wants to rebuild their infrastructure? I mean 
these are the very profound questions that we need answers for 
urgently because you know the landscape is changing very 
quickly. 
 
But we don’t want to arbitrarily make those decisions. We want 
to talk to our partners in SUMA and SARM and the people who  



2448  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

are living and working, and will continue to live and work, out 
in those communities, about the quality of life that they feel is 
affordable there and how we can direct our priorities to make 
sure whatever limited funds are available are spent in the very 
best way that relates to the future vision that we all have for this 
great province. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  And coming from one of those small towns, 
I’m very aware that in my case at least, and I think in many 
other cases, the water supply for example, the RM and the town 
work together and the town has a water outlet which is used by 
rural people, and the RM helps support that. 
 
But back to that particular question, can those communities 
look for some form of financial assistance in upgrading some of 
that antiquated infrastructure, and allowing for that curve that 
you sort of threw, that we may have to look at some 
communities getting possibly a different amount of help than 
others, depending on whatever that consultation process arrives 
at, but can they hope to get some assistance, as they have in the 
past, for that infrastructure? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as I said before, there 
simply isn’t any new money. What we need to do is to carefully 
examine the situation, and together with our partners in 
municipal governments, to determine priorities so that we can 
direct whatever available resources there are to their highest 
possible use within the context of a long-term plan that will 
sustain the highest level of services possible to those 
communities. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Heppner:  So when this consultation process is over 
with, and a round table or whatever we choose to discuss it . . . 
is there a commitment to a new formula that municipalities 
would be able to work with for the next numbers of years as 
they do their planning over 5 to 10 years? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s what we 
are hoping that these discussions will lead to. And as I say, we 
need to make these decisions but we don’t want to make them 
arbitrarily. And that’s why we want to take the time to consult 
with those who will be affected, so that we can have the best 
possible outcome. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Question along a different road 
here for a while. Could you list the charitable and other 
donations given by the department within the last year and 
whether those funds were given as a donation or as a 
sponsorship of a particular individual participant as a 
consideration for a sponsor, or that type of advertising. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in terms of the 
Department of Municipal Government, there would be no 
payments that would fall into that category. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Continue with questions on your particular 
office. Could you detail for us the travel by your office over the 
past year, including most of the main purposes and people 
accompanying. 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, in terms of my own 
travel, for the fiscal year ‘95-96 shows $6,688, of which 2,592 
would have been CVA vehicles, either monthly billing or car 
rentals to make specific trips. Executive Air, $1,158  oh, no, 
sorry, sorry, sorry, that’s the other Carol. 
 
CVA is 3,708; out-of-province expenses is zero; Executive Air 
is 2,980; for a total of 6,688. So the majority of it is . . . well the 
CVA and the Executive Air are pretty well evenly divided, with 
the car winning. There’s a few bus trips in there too. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Could you list for us all the fees and charges 
that your department is authorized to levy, and then also 
whether those fees go into the Consolidated Fund or into 
another source. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, the schedule of fees 
and charges that would relate to the operations of Municipal 
Government would be really fairly extensive, and I don’t know 
that they would be consolidated all in one place, because there 
would be things like inspection fees relating to the public safety 
part of the portfolio, like boilers, fire inspections, elevator 
inspections, the Fire Commissioner’s office, all of those things. 
Not large fees in any case, but they all do go into the 
consolidated revenue fund, as far as I’m aware. So they’re all, 
they’re either . . . there’s not profits on these. Basically to be on 
a cost-recovery basis, and then the revenue flows to the General 
Revenue Fund. 
 
So most of the licences would be things like such as I have 
already mentioned  gas boilers; fire; and then there’s The 
Amusement Ride Safety Act; The Electrical Licencing Act; 
elevators I mentioned. And I’m not sure that there’s . . . there’s 
a budget amount total for all of these fees and charges, each 
relatively small, for a total of $24.455 million for the year. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Would you be able to table that 
document you were reading from as well for our benefit? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there is no problem 
with tabling it. I’d just like to ask a page to make a copy of it 
and then send it over. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Could you detail all the legal actions in 
which your department is presently involved, either as a 
plaintiff or as a defendant? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there is a complexity 
here in terms of privacy of persons when you’re talking about 
legal actions. So if this would suffice, I could tell you this, that 
most of the legal costs, which would not likely exceed about 
$35,000 a year, which is pretty small in a department this big, 
most of them would relate to actions in the housing portfolio 
relating to such things as mortgages, sometimes garnishees 
when there’s a problem with rent collections. 
 
There’s also some fees in . . . from time to time in connection 
with the collections in the home improvement program  if 
you recall the one in the ‘70s, the borrow money and build your 
home. The costs of that are reducing; it’s finally winding down, 
but there are some legal costs there. 



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

But all in all, it’s not very large. I wouldn’t want to . . . the 
document doesn’t exist but I wouldn’t want to pull it together in 
terms of individual actions because of the privacy issue. But it’s 
not major except in the housing portfolio. And really in the size 
of the portfolio, I wouldn’t call that amount on an annual basis 
a great deal. But in the normal course of business, we do use 
the services of solicitors, and that’s about to the extent. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Madam Minister. That basically 
takes care of most of the questions I had. I’d like to underline 
the support that I stated earlier on for making sure that there 
weren’t expenses in some of those areas. It was good to see. 
The member from Cypress Hills has a number of questions, 
after which I believe the member from Saskatoon Sutherland 
also has a few questions. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
welcome to you and your officials. Certainly I can say I think in 
all honesty that you have some good officials with you. Some 
of the faces there, and not to want to point too many fingers, 
but they have been around for a long time. And certainly the 
fact that there are very few problems in the Department of 
Municipal Government probably is largely due to the work of 
the people that you have that are experienced and have the 
knowledge to keep a very steady hand on the matters of 
Municipal Government. 
 
I want to also say this evening that we’re happy to see the 
Premier taking such an interest in municipal affairs and 
Municipal Government. And we know that he does that because 
this is the unsung hero of all of the cabinet positions, most 
important probably to the entire province, although it gets 
probably the least credit and notability. And of course the 
reason you don’t get a lot of notoriety is because you do have a 
good department that has worked well. 
 
Unfortunately though, Madam Minister, we do see some serious 
problems that are going to be challenged and need to be 
addressed in the near future. The SAMA situation that my 
colleague alluded to has far deeper worries and repercussions I 
think than what his questions reflected. And so I think I need to 
delve into that a little bit further. 
 
I need for you to think a little bit about the impact of the 
changes in assessment from production-based assessment to the 
market-value base. Cattlemen  and I’ll give you this as an 
example so you can have something specific to deal with  
cattlemen in my area are very concerned about the switch in the 
way the things are going to be done, because to them it becomes 
very unfair. And it’s easy to see, because a couple of years ago, 
cattle are selling for probably $1.30 to $1.50 a pound for calves 
in the fall. That meant that their incomes were significantly 
higher than they had been for a long time. 
 
On the basis and the strength of those cattle prices, lots of 
people went out and bought a quarter section of grass from a 
neighbour or from someone leaving the industry, and of course 
they would naturally be able to bid a little bit higher and there 
would be competition from the other neighbours. So the price 
of that land went up significantly at that time when the cattle 
prices were higher. 

We also had the Indian land claims situation that has gotten into 
the picture of valuation of lands, and especially in the 
south-west the land claims seem to have concentrated on 
grasslands more than farm lands. 
 
So because those monies were available and because they’re . . . 
always when there are two parties wanting to bid on the same 
lands basically, the price goes up. And we’ve nothing against 
that. But it is a reality then that by moving to the market-value 
system for assessments, the cattlemen that are in our area find 
now that the assessments are going to be based on that period of 
time when they bought some of those lands at very high prices 
as compared to what the market will now reflect. Because we’re 
in a downturn immediately following in the cattle industry, and 
at the moment we are probably 50 cents a pound average across 
the board for cattle, cheaper than they were at that time. 
 
Now the problem being of course that when the new assessment 
comes in, it’s going to be based on when those prices were 
high, yet the cattlemen have this lower price of return for their 
product. How do they manage to pay their taxes based on a 
system like that? And how can you justify that? How fast is this 
system going to roll over so that those inequities get caught up 
with before you put probably half the ranchers in south-west 
Saskatchewan, maybe in the whole province, out of business 
because of the high taxes that they won’t be able to pay? 
 
So could you explain to us how this process is going to work, in 
fairness for those people that get caught in this very 
fast-turning, up-and-down cycle of the markets? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, that’s a very good 
question. I’m really glad to have the opportunity to respond, 
because I think it will really help to clarify some of the 
provisions that will be in the new system, and answer some 
questions for some people out there. 
 
For one thing, the legislation that we’re going to be asked to 
consider within the next few days here, which has already been 
tabled, allows for an update every three years. So when it’s 
passed and when it’s implemented in 1997, next year, it will be 
using data from 1994 as its base. So in the particular example 
that you cite, they would be using 1994 values as a benchmark. 
That would be pretty well before the blip in land values that you 
refer to. I think that that started really maybe a bit later, maybe 
about that time. 
 
But on the other hand, what you lose on the merry-go-round 
you can make up on the swings, because in the year 2000 we’ll 
be using 1997 and so forth. So the system will always be 
renewing itself. 
 
(2015) 
 
And I know exactly what you speak of because our family is in 
the cattle business ourselves, and it’s not just the price of 
calves. Even a cow for instance that four, five, even up to three 
years ago would have brought 12 or $1500 say, in the fall, last 
fall it went down to 450. And so it has been a very profound 
drop in the cattle market. But I think that the three-year renewal  



2450  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

will reflect that and will be of some assistance there. 
 
The other thing is, actually at some point in time, a cattle farmer 
may be in a situation of good profits, but, because of the 
benchmarking for the assessment system being assessed on 
lower land values, then there will be the tools that the local 
municipality can use. And that’s why it’s so important to put 
those tools in the hands of the local people who understand the 
conditions and who understand the farming practices of the 
people that they’ve been elected to serve. 
 
So for example, if there should come a time when high land 
values would be captured as the base year at a time when cattle 
prices were very low, a municipality would have the ability to 
use variable mill rates for the range land category which could 
alleviate some of those problems. And while your colleague 
before referred to municipalities perhaps discriminating against 
a certain kind of intensive livestock development by using a 
higher variable mill rate, but on the other hand  we hope they 
wouldn’t do that  on the other hand, the example that you cite 
is one where the local council could use those tools available to 
them in the variable mill rate to mitigate some circumstances 
for a certain class of producers, in this case cattle producers 
caught at a bad time in the production and price cycle. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Madam 
Minister. the truth of the matter is that each segment of 
agriculture will at some time fall into this cycle and be in the 
wrong turn. 
 
But looking at your numbers, you say you’re going to use 1994. 
And of course cattle prices were significantly high in that 
period of time, so there will be some of that peak livestock 
price influence on the value of lands at that time. You say 
you’re not going to trigger that until 1997, and there’s a review 
in the year 2000. 
 
That seems to me, Madam Minister, to be a six-year cycle, not a 
three-year cycle, and precious little comfort to those ranchers 
who are going to benefit after the six-year turn of that cycle, as 
a result of getting back in on the other swing of the cycles, if 
they are already broke. If they already have had to pay taxes on 
land that can no longer support the value of the taxation, then 
there will be no comfort to them knowing that in the future 
whoever happens to land up with their land might be getting a 
break in the cycle. So the variable rates then are the option that 
might save the day for us, but I haven’t heard you say that you 
are committed to variable rates and that they are in fact a tool 
that is guaranteed to be in place to be available to be used at 
this time. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the provision for 
using variable mill rates for the phasing-in for all of the tax 
tools that we talked about are in the legislation that is not before 
us now, but that has been tabled and that we will be considering 
in Committee of the Whole. We are committed to giving 
municipalities those tax tools. And they are in that legislation. 
When it’s passed, the regulations will be developed, and the 
percentages of value will be set. The property classes will be 
set, and municipalities will have much more flexibility to deal 
with the kind of situations that you cite in the future under the  

new legislation. 
 
And there will be a three-year . . . it will be a rolling average 
because there will be a reassessment; not to the extent that there 
is now. We’ll never be in this box again because now we’re 
catching up for 30 years. But every three years, it will be sort of 
. . . to the extent of the annual pick-ups that there are now, 
where there are, you know, some changes. Somebody builds 
something. Some acres are flooded and weren’t seeded, so it’s 
reduced for that year and that sort of thing. But those 
adjustments will take place every three years from now on so 
that the system will always be renewing itself. 
 
And of course as you know, the production cycles and the price 
cycles are not confined to the cattle industry. I know that’s a 
particular concern in the area of Cypress Hills that you 
represent. But we have the very same thing in grain prices for 
example, where grain prices are moving up and people are 
paying more for land. And it would be nice to think that this 
would be the situation that would prevail for ever and a day, but 
those prices go up and down as well. So this is why the variable 
mill rate and the separate property classes for grain-producing 
land and range land will give local municipalities the tools that 
they need to at least mitigate the circumstances if ever the 
cycles should collide to the detriment of their ratepayers. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Madam Minister. The 
answer does alleviate some of the concerns we have, because 
obviously if this legislation passes that you are talking about 
and if the variable option is then guaranteed in legislation to be 
available, then of course the people will have that right to use it. 
 
But that in itself, while it solves one problem, brings to mind 
questions of other problems. What are you going to do with 
municipalities that may possibly . . . and I’m sure that most 
people never do this. But sooner or later, somebody is going to 
think of using everything for some ill-gotten purpose and racial 
discrimination, a word we’re not supposed to use in politics 
probably, but the reality is that it’s out in the world to some 
extent. 
 
What happens if your variable mill rate suddenly is used to 
discriminate against certain particular groups of people or 
certain industries within our society? How are you going to 
control that? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, we have made 
many statements to the effect that we have complete confidence 
in the common sense of the people who are elected to local 
government in this province to make common sense, rational 
decisions on behalf of the people who elected them and the 
people that they serve. And I certainly continue to have that 
confidence. But there are some checks and balances because the 
property classes are set provincially. So it would not be possible 
for a municipality, for instance, to single out an individual. 
 
But I know what you mean  certain groups. I don’t see why 
that should happen. And of course we haven’t changed the 
municipal . . . provisions in the urban or rural Act. There’s lots 
of other amendments, but we haven’t changed any of the  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

provisions with respect to elections. And as you know, this is 
. . . coming from local government yourself, as I do, that this is 
the ultimate check, is at the ballot box. And in rural government 
particularly, there’s elections every year. 
 
And so I think that we can count on local governments to be 
fair and equitable in the application of these new tools and the 
new flexibility that this Act will give to them. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, certainly we live in 
hope, but we’ll die in despair. Because the reality is that as 
confident as you are in people to be fair, and as confident as I 
am that most of the people will be, there will always be 
exceptions. 
 
And realistically, people like the Hutterites, who I represent a 
lot of in south-west Saskatchewan, have come under some very 
serious attacks over the past numbers of years, not only in 
Canada I guess, but basically wherever they’ve gone in history. 
And it becomes very easy for people to target folks like this 
without any real justification. Because of course they work in 
different ways than many of us understand. 
 
I guess there’s a whole host of reasons why, and that’s not 
important. But we do recall the situations where, at one point, 
municipalities actually passed by-laws, under their zoning 
by-laws, that would stop the Hutterite people from being able to 
move into certain municipalities. That was clearly the intent. It 
ended up having to go to court in order to be straightened out, 
and we respect those decisions. And I think, for the most part, 
those things have been resolved. 
 
However, with a variable mill rate, I’m wondering if that same 
type of situation isn’t going to occur. And is the solution then 
that people are going to have to end up back in the court 
system? Are they going to have to be going to the Human 
Rights Commission? Are they going to have to be calling on the 
Ombudsman or Dale Goldhawk? Are we opening up this whole 
kind of process to a lot of potential abuse? 
 
What are these safety measures that you talk about that you 
believe that you are building in? How effective can they 
possibly be? Where is the check and balance that you talk 
about? And if you put checks and balances in, then also at the 
same time, where is the freedom for municipalities to make 
those choices that they will have to make? And who’s going to 
say which one’s fair and which one isn’t? It looks really tough 
to me. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, this is an interesting 
situation. And I certainly can recall, in my personal experience, 
some of the circumstances that the member refers to. And I’d 
certainly just like to take this brief moment to set the record 
straight. 
 
Because I remember some of the controversies where, 
amazingly enough, a large number of people in Saskatchewan 
were under the impression, somehow, that Hutterite colonies 
didn’t pay property taxes. And I’d just like to say on the record 
that all the Hutterite colonies in Saskatchewan pay their full 
property taxes and their full school taxes like every other farmer  

in Saskatchewan does, based on the assessment of their land 
and based on the current mill rate. And in return, by and large, 
they request very few services from the municipality in which 
they live and farm. 
 
But you see, I still have more confidence than you do. But it’s 
based partly on this too, that property classes will be limited. 
The province will set out what the property classes are and they 
will not be infinite. For instance, there wouldn’t be a property 
class for colonies. There would be at most, and we haven’t got 
this fine-tuned yet, but there would be at most a class for arable 
farm land, a class for range land. 
 
And so in the context of a colony, if part of their land was 
cultivated, then that would fall into the arable land. And if part 
of it was on the side of a bench or whatever, and it was being 
grazed, and they were in the cattle business, then it would fall 
under the range land category. And they would be assessed and 
taxed in the very same way that other equal . . . you know, land 
of equal productivity would be taxed. 
 
So the province will not create a separate category for certain 
users or interest groups, certainly not for Hutterite colonies. 
And by the same token, the municipality, the local council, 
would not have the facility to create classes of their own or 
subclasses of their own that they could apply different variable 
mill rates to discriminate. So there will be lots of flexibility, but 
not the kind that could lead to the sort of abuse that you 
describe. So I hope that puts some of your fears to rest. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And certainly 
while I use the colonies as an example, there are several other 
groups of people that can be clearly identified as sort of unique, 
I guess would be the word, to other types of operations in 
different municipalities. And that can vary throughout the 
province, and of course it can be alluded to the land claims 
situations or to other religious groups or whatever. 
 
And while you have comforted me to some extent, I still 
wonder if this variable mill rate can be used, for example, to 
assess higher. Now you say we’re okay with land 
classifications. A piece of land is good for grass, it’s good for 
growing goats, it’s good for maybe growing cows, and it’s 
maybe good for growing wheat and maybe it’s good for 
growing canola. That’s fine. You’ve got four different 
segregations of different kinds of land or whatever way you’re 
going to do it. 
 
But what about things like numbers of people on one quarter 
section of land? Does that change the ability of the RM to 
change the variability of the mill rate on that particular quarter? 
Or does the amount of land in a land base controlled by one 
religious group or by one individual or by one corporation 
allow for the variable rates to be used to decide different tax 
levels for those people on different sizes of operations? 
 
And what about intensive livestock operations? Are we having 
this variable rate going to be able to be used? Suppose . . . let’s 
use some numbers like 500 hogs per year or less has one rate, 
and 5,000 or less has another rate and 50,000 has another rate. 
Is that the kind of approach that variable mill rates will be  



2452  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

allowed to take? Will those kinds of things be allowed to be 
manipulated by the councils through the use of the variable mill 
rates? 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, in this new 
system, being modernized for the first time in 30 years, it’s no 
doubt that we will have to work our way through some 
wrinkles. And we will monitor it very closely. I mean we’ve 
done the best we can to get it right, so it will be as fair and 
equitable as possible because that is the objective, after all. But 
we will certainly be ready to act if municipalities or 
administrators bring to our attention anything  any wordings 
 that need to be fixed, any untoward abuse because of some 
loophole that has been inadvertently created. 
 
But I’d certainly like to refer to the two examples that you gave. 
For instance, whether density, the number of people on a 
holding and so forth . . . And that wouldn’t be affected by 
assessment; that would be more a question of the type of zoning 
by-laws and what kind of development is permitted in the 
land-use planning area. 
 
And in intensive livestock, I can tell you I sure hope we’re not 
going back to that, because we’ve been through that, as you 
know, where we had the changes to the rural municipalities Act 
in 1989, I believe, that started to assess buildings and then 
facilitate the deduction of the building assessment by the value 
of the land. And that’s when this business of the intensive 
livestock permit price, or assessment if you like, based upon the 
numbers of livestock . . . which put the whole thing totally out 
of kilter. We got rid of that. 
 
And so hopefully we’re going to monitor the operation of this, 
with the view to having it be as fair and equitable to all classes 
of producers and users of land and buildings as possible. And if 
we see any of these aberrations creeping in, then we will 
certainly be prepared to act upon advice to fix any problems 
that may arise. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, I think the simple 
answer there was yes, but maybe I missed something. But 
anyway I think probably that’s what we have to read out of that. 
 
Couple of points I want to make here. Oil prices have varied 
from $16 a barrel probably up to 25 over the last year and a 
half, so the cycles don’t necessarily simply tie themselves to the 
ag industry. Petroleum industry and gas industry certainly do 
work in cycles as well, according to world markets and that sort 
of thing, and they’re probably even a little more sensitive to that 
than we are in the ag industry. And I say we, because I’m 
involved directly with the ag industry, not the oil industry. 
 
But I was talking to an oil man from Alberta a short time ago, 
and he said to me that at $16 a barrel, most oil companies can 
make a pretty decent go of it. At 25, he said, they’re in 
somewhat of windfall situation. And yet I don’t see where this 
new change in the assessment process ties the price of their 
taxes to the value of their product. And if it does, explain how it 
does, because right now we have a situation where we value  

basically the equipment. But in the new process somehow that’s 
all changed. And I wonder if you could explain that to me. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, there are some 
changes. And basically it’s between the balance to be found 
between production and extraction, machinery and equipment 
in the oil and gas industry and the value added, the refining and 
so forth. 
 
Basically what triggered the change is the analysis that was 
done was looking at the competitive aspect. We have a large 
number of wells in Saskatchewan that produce under five 
barrels a day, so it’s not triggered to the current world oil price, 
it’s comparing the viability of a well in Alberta with a marginal 
well in Saskatchewan. And the alternative in some of those  
actually hundreds of wells that produce under five barrels a day 
in Saskatchewan; we have more of those marginal wells than 
Alberta does  and unless we provide a competitive property 
tax regime with the property tax in Alberta, the alternative is for 
those wells to be shut in. 
 
So what we’ve tried to do is to try to find the balance that will 
keep the industry here but still provide an assessment base for 
the local municipality in which it operates, to give them . . . 
maintain their access roads to the industry and so on. 
 
Again, variable mill rates for those property classes will be 
available to municipalities. So I would just urge municipalities 
not to panic but to wait until all the information comes out. 
There will be workshops in the fall for administrators and other 
interested people, and I’m sure that by the time the dust settles 
that it will be agreed that we have a better, fairer, more 
equitable system. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: Well, Madam Minister, I will suggest to you 
that municipalities should panic before they get run over by a 
truck. It’s always better to jump out of the way before you get 
hit. And if they hadn’t panicked on The Service Districts Act 
that would become law this year, and now apparently it won’t 
. . . so I can’t accept your argument that municipalities should 
not panic. I think you should panic, and they should be looking 
at this very closely, and it might be time to panic over the 
SAMA changes because I see some serious inequities that are 
going to develop. 
 
You make a good point when you say that five-barrel wells in 
the petroleum industry should be protected, and that there 
should be some balance in the system, and there’s no problem 
in your argument there. However, again there are lots of wells 
that produce more than 5 barrels. There are some wells that 
produce 100 barrels. There is even a few that produce 600 
barrels a day. So then if you’re going to apply the principle that 
fair market value, and the value of things like productivity, and 
the value of the properties and things like that are good for 
agriculture, why wouldn’t a 600 barrel a day well also apply 
then for the same principle, to be taxed higher? 
 
Now does your variable rate allow that to be done on individual 
wells that are productive over five barrels and at varying levels? 
Is that kind of fairness built into the system, you know, or how 
did you make these decisions? You know, I’ve got a ton of  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2453 

questions, but I’ve got to let you answer one at a time, I guess. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the decisions 
weren’t made on the basis of individual wells, and no, there 
will not be separate property classes for wells of different 
production levels. 
 
But again, there are other tools that we haven’t mentioned. On a 
600 barrel a day well, the flow lines will be taxed. In a battery 
system, the municipality has got the facility to enter into road 
maintenance agreements if it’s a heavily used area. So I mean 
there are a number of provisions. 
 
And again I say that we shouldn’t speculate. We have to assess 
the information as it comes out. We have to listen to each other. 
You do honest consultation, as you referred to the legislation 
that we are not proceeding with this year. It’s because we’re 
sensitive, we listen, we’re responsive. And we would do the 
same thing as we work our way into the new assessment in 
taxation regime. 
 
If problems are created, we will move to fix them. We have 
done the best we can, consulted widely, worked very hard on 
the development of the provisions in the legislation. If we 
haven’t got every tit and toddle exactly right, we will move to 
fix it. 
 
So I think all in all if we work together  don’t get excited, 
you know, keep on evaluating it and talking and listening to 
each other  that we will end up with a fair and equitable 
system and the kind of system that we want. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, you may be using the 
term “we” loosely because I’m not too sure that the people out 
in the municipalities are in total agreement that your changes 
are what they want. 
 
It worries me when you start to circle this thing in a political 
way and say that you have things that you can use as tools to 
correct the problems like road maintenance agreements. Now 
having been involved with municipal things, I’ve already been 
through road maintenance agreements and we find them to be 
not only cumbersome, but extremely hard to put into place with 
any degree of fairness from one individual operation to another. 
It is a nightmare to figure out how to be fair about it. 
 
And not only that, then your school boards had better take a 
hard listen because immediately when you have road 
maintenance agreements, oftentimes they are assessed on the 
value of damage to the municipal problems and there are no 
education taxes collected on that vehicle. Whereas an 
assessment on a well-head or on the production of a well on the 
site, in the past always associated an education tax portion with 
it and automatically the education system got its share of the 
taxes along with the municipal share. 
 
So when you start wandering away from that principle, you now 
open the door for the potential for municipalities to use some of 
these new tools and these new vehicles to circumvent collecting 
taxes for the school units. Is that not correct? And what are you 
going to do to make sure that all of these rules and 

 tools aren’t abused in some way to circumvent those tax 
problems? 
 
And I also want to know, while you’re up, could you tell us 
what are these new tools in terms of a comparison of how they 
differ from the old tools that municipalities had available? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I am very 
surprised, coming from the local governments sector  which 
is the experience in the reeve’s chair that the member opposite 
has  that he would be so suspicious about what councils 
might and might not do. My goodness, when I was a reeve I 
never contemplated doing any of these evil things that the 
member opposite is afraid will happen. 
 
But I really think that there will be . . . For instance, on the 
school tax, I want to clarify that, that the portion of the school 
tax, by a formula that will be or has been developed, at least 
modelled, will be guaranteed. And so there won’t be the kind of 
manipulations that you refer to  will, by and large, not be 
possible. 
 
But I continue to have faith in local governments, and with 
assistance, through the workshops and so on, because it is a 
radically different system, that they will educate themselves. 
They will be conscientious and it will work. I feel confident 
about that. 
 
We have interesting times ahead of us, and it’s going to be a lot 
of hard work, but I guess we shouldn’t get mad at each other. 
We should just ask, I guess, where those people are that should 
have done this 30 years ago. But we’re doing it, and we’ll come 
out of it okay I’m sure. 
 
And as you know, Municipal Government as a department used 
to do assessment. It was public servants from the department 
that went out and did it. It was municipalities who told the local 
government finance review commission in 1984 that they 
wanted to own the system, that they didn’t want Municipal 
Government department doing assessment any more, and that 
led to the creation of the independent agency. So it’s been a 
process of evolution. But by and large, it was, by any 
administration at the provincial level that looked at it, a 
response to what municipalities were saying they wanted. 
 
So this is their system. We will help them fine-tune it, we’ll 
listen to them, but it is their system. It’s what they said they 
wanted and I have confidence that they will use it to achieve 
fair and equitable ends. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Madam Minister. A couple of 
real quick points that I want to make. First of all, I feel no 
animosity towards you so I hope you’re not getting mad at me, 
because what I’m really trying to do is to flush out this whole 
issue in order to bring some direct answers back to 
municipalities who have asked me these questions. Now I may 
not be wording them exactly the way that they have presented 
them to me, but I guess as we proceed we’ll probably get the 
meat of the matter put together so that they can know and 
understand what they’re getting involved in and what to expect. 
 



2454  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

The truth of the matter is that you have used the radical word a 
couple of times and you’ve used the term, revolution and 
evolution, and I think devolution is the word that seems to 
come to my mind. And it just seems like we are getting 
ourselves in a devilish kind of process here that’s going to 
cause just a whole lot of trouble. 
 
Now maybe in terms of your need to create jobs in this province 
so that you can meet your job target numbers for the year 2000, 
you might be on the right track, because I think you’re going to 
have a whole string of new board members on your boards for 
determining the appeals and to hear all the appeals. Because as I 
heard  and I was somewhat surprised earlier today that we 
discovered  that there are 500 appeals presently in the old 
system that are on the books, that are being looked at. And 
while that’s not a lot for a province the size of Saskatchewan, 
truly it is quite a few when you think that the system hasn’t 
really changed all that much for a long time. So what’s causing 
500 people to be upset? 
 
Well if little things are upsetting folks that much that they’re 
going through that much trouble in our present process, I can 
kind of see in my mind’s eye a prediction coming that you’re 
going to have a million cases when you get this new piece of 
legislation into place and start bringing in this new process. So I 
can see why you wanted to pass the legislation earlier today that 
allows you to have only one board member at each meeting 
constituting a quorum for your appeal boards, because 
obviously they’re going to be very busy. 
 
So, Madam Minister . . . and I don’t think that’s a reflection on 
yourself trying to do a good job. But I do think it’s a reflection 
on the need that we seem to be getting into to have some kind 
of a change in order for people to put a mark on the world that 
they existed . . . at this period of time. 
 
In other words, I’m saying we are changing for the sake of 
change rather than for the sake of necessity, and the sake of 
change may necessitate going back into systems that have been 
proven not to work well in other places and perhaps even 
treading into new areas where we really don’t seem to need 
them. 
 
(2045) 
 
I haven’t seen any municipal governments talking to me lately 
about how they see a radical need for a change or a need for 
radical change in the way that assessments are done. It just 
hasn’t come from the grass roots. I haven’t had any reeves or 
councillors come to me and say you know, member, go to the 
legislature and see if you can talk the government into changing 
the way we assess our land. It just hasn’t been there. 
 
I’ve seen some people say we should update and get closer to 
the true values of today, but they didn’t say switch the whole 
formula in the middle from market value . . . or to market value 
from production value, for the direct example. They didn’t say 
that. They said sure, maybe we shouldn’t be at 1935 levels, 
maybe we shouldn’t be at 1965 levels. Maybe we should be at 
1994 and 1996 levels of valuation of properties and that sort of 
thing to be up to date. That I have heard, but these radical  

changes, I believe, are driven more from the top than from the 
bottom. And I see just a whole lot of calamity coming ahead. 
 
Now maybe that is a politically wise thing to do, is to have 
people so confused about these, out in the hustings, problems, 
they won’t be able to concentrate on the financial problems of 
the government at the provincial level. So maybe you’re doing 
your job, I don’t know. But the truth of the matter is that I really 
think that you ought to give this whole matter some more 
serious consideration. And maybe it might even be time to take 
another look at offering municipalities the option of being able 
to go back to having the SAMA matters handled as they were 
before. 
 
Now true enough, the municipalities wanted to have some 
control and they asked for that. And that’s a fact of life. I was 
there when that sort of process went on. I watched it being 
debated in the SARM conventions. But to be quite honest with 
you, Madam Minister, they never got what they really asked for. 
They got a process that they really are not in control of. 
 
They got a process where after they asked to have a system that 
they would have control over rather than have the government 
run their business for them, but now they’ve got a process that 
even though it is one step outside of government, is not 
controlled by the SARM or by municipalities. They simply have 
not got enough representation on there to be able to claim that 
they have any real, direct control over what’s happening. 
 
And the costs in themselves have sky-rocketed so much that 
many municipalities are telling me these days that they want to 
opt out of the whole system. They simply can’t afford it any 
more. And it’s no wonder the costs have gone through the roof 
when we start wasting all of our time making radical decisions 
to make changes that nobody truly, really wanted or asked for. 
 
And so, Madam Minister, I guess I’ll let you respond, because 
this was a kind of a politically rhetoric kind of a comment, so 
you will obviously want to take a shot back, and go ahead. But 
remember, the municipalities are the ones that are listening 
more than I am. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, now that the 
member opposite has described his own words as rhetoric, I’m 
not too sure how seriously I should take them in response. And 
he uses . . . he talks about me, he’s talking about evolution and 
devolution. And then he uses words like calamity. My 
goodness. I think it’s not really that serious, Mr. Chairman. 
 
First of all I want to say, on the question of SAMA, I know 
there is a letter writing campaign; I acknowledge. The member 
opposite has not referred to this, but I know he’s aware of it 
because I’ve received a large number of letters from his corner 
of the province from councillors, from people who are 
ratepayers in that area, but mostly from council members and 
administrators about the costs of SAMA. 
 
Now I think it’s very important to remember that when people 
told, in submissions written and oral, the Local Government 
Finance Review Commission in 1984 that they wanted the 
assessment function moved out of government and into an  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2455 

independent, arm’s-length agency, they got what they asked for. 
Last year 85 per cent of the local municipal representatives at 
the SAMA annual meeting voted in favour of proceeding with 
the reassessment on track and setting 1997 as the date to do 
that. So it is something that municipalities wanted. 
 
Now what’s happening is the provincial government is making 
a $4 million core contribution to SAMA on an annual basis to 
make sure that the integrity of the database province-wide is 
assured. But the actual field services are being charged to the 
individual municipalities because they are the ones who use the 
field services. 
 
And municipalities that are considering opting out, if they’re 
considering that, must remember that they can opt out of the 
SAMA field service system but they can’t opt out of the 
Saskatchewan assessment system. I mean if they can go and 
hire some other consultant to come and do their field services, 
using the standards that SAMA has set and that the province is 
also continuing to maintain, so be it. But nobody can opt out of 
the Saskatchewan assessment system. They simply don’t; that 
option isn’t available to them. 
 
And we know, on the appeal process as well, always when there 
are changes . . . As you will know yourself, the member from 
Cypress Hills, in the early ‘80s when there was a reassessment 
of farm land in the province and the values essentially doubled 
and the mill rates essentially halved, but people did have a sort 
of a semi-panic and there were a large number of appeals in 
those years. When the dust settled and they realized that their 
taxes weren’t going to double just because the assessment 
doubled, it quieted down. 
 
But I think, based on that experience, that it’s prudent to at least 
prepare ourselves for a number of increased . . . an increase in 
the number of appeals in reassessment year. So that’s what 
we’re doing by appointing some additional members and 
increasing the . . . and providing for an increase in the clerical 
staff at the Municipal Board to make sure that they will be in a 
position to handle whatever appeals come in and not create a 
backlog. 
 
And I guess lastly, I just want to say that we all recognize that 
property taxes . . . and from some of the questions you’ve asked 
and the comments you’ve made, you do understand that 
property tax is the least progressive tax of all. It’s based . . . it’s 
an ad valorem tax, supposedly based upon the value of what 
you own. And somehow or other this is supposed to reflect an 
ability to pay. 
 
But we know it really doesn’t. It’s based upon, okay, what is the 
ability of the oil company to pay when the fluctuations in oil 
prices? What is the ability of the cattle producer to pay as the 
cattle price cycle swings? It varies. But the property tax goes 
on. 
 
Same thing in your house, on your dwelling. I mean it’s not like 
income tax. This is why I say it’s the least progressive tax. If 
you get old or unemployed or sick, the taxes on your residence 
don’t decrease, and those situations are not a basis for appeal. 
And that’s why it is so important that property tax be as fair and  

equitable as possible  because it doesn’t respond to ability to 
pay. 
 
So I think that’s why it’s urgent  and I think municipalities 
recognize that  to update the system, to try and make it more 
fair. And that’s the job that we’ve embarked on together with 
them and that’s the point that we hope to reach. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Madam Minister, now you just made 
my whole point for me, and I’m glad you did that because it 
shows that you understand  you just haven’t decided how to 
solve the problem. 
 
You’ve just said, and stated my whole case for me, that the 
taxes should be fair and they should be based on ability to pay. 
And ability to pay has to be tied to production, what you can 
produce, not the market value, because there are so many 
outside forces that can drive market values out of skew with 
what the production value of product produced on land really is. 
 
And that’s why I’m saying that your system, this new system, is 
fundamentally flawed and I do believe that in the end it has to 
fail or else it’s going to cause so many problems that we’re 
going to just sort of muddle through it from year to year, and I 
guess that’s the direction you’re determined to go. But it’s not 
going to be an easy or pleasant transition time and it’s not going 
to be a pleasant or easy time for people to live through in terms 
of SAMA and assessments and taxation on properties. 
 
I want to just run back though for a minute to the areas that we 
were discussing earlier with regards to how discrimination 
occurs and can occur in real life now. And with the variable 
taxation rate options available, I’m still concerned and I’m still 
worried about the potential for these systems to be abused. 
 
Now my colleague has pointed out to me that in the Humboldt 
area, there’s a hog operations by-law in the municipality. And 
apparently that by-law reads something to the effect that you 
have to have no residences within two miles of a hog operation, 
where it’s built, and you have to have them 16 either miles or 
kilometres apart. Now if you already have, under our present 
system, those kinds of laws, then  believe me  variable 
rates of taxation also become a tool for those municipalities to 
use to further extend their decision not to have certain kinds of 
industry wherever they don’t seem to want them. 
 
That can also then follow through unfortunately  but 
nevertheless it can follow through  to the kinds of people that 
are particularly interested in being in certain spots. And again I 
will allude to the native land settlements and to the Hutterite 
colonies and to other church groups and those people that stand 
out in our society. And I do believe that we’re opening the door 
for an awful lot of trouble. So how are you going to control 
that, and how do you square the things that are going on in 
Humboldt? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all the 
separation distances for instance that the member opposite 
refers to between proposed or existing livestock operations and 
other residences and other farming operations is not a matter for  



2456  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

assessment or taxation. It’s a matter of land use and zoning 
by-laws. And of course when it’s livestock, there are some . . . 
The Agricultural Operations Act has some influence there. 
 
But for instance, in the case that you cite, intensive livestock or 
buildings used, barns used for intensive livestock operations  
be it hogs, poultry, PMU (pregnant mares’ urine), whatever  
they’re not assessed. So they’re not available to the 
municipality to apply those mill rates or tax tools to because 
municipalities can only apply those tax tools to assessments. So 
if something is exempt from assessment, then its tools can’t be 
applied at the municipal, at the council, level. So I think there 
are various ways of trying to make sure that the system is and 
remains fair and equitable. And as I say, we’ll monitor that and 
do whatever is required. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Madam Minister. I guess the 
fact of the matter is that we will agree on many things, but we 
will have to agree to disagree on some things. And I would 
hope that I could be an optimist and think that this whole 
process could resolve itself, and I guess from the point of view 
that I know that people in Saskatchewan are resilient and that 
they have always learned that no matter what comes in the 
morning, the sun comes up in the east and in the evening you 
will call it a day, and go to bed and sleep and refresh yourself 
again and life goes on. 
 
So irregardless of what the political structure is, or what kinds 
of problems we have in the world, life will go on and we will 
survive. However, I believe that there are ways we can survive 
more easily than with other ways. And I do believe that this 
process is a complicated process that is going to make life more 
difficult for people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I also anticipate that there is in this, another one of these 
deceptions that you might as well hear about now because 
another one of these deceptions that one of the local councillors 
brought to my mind, is the fact that he believes that you have 
given this sweetheart deal to the petroleum and gas industry. 
This is his opinion now. He believes that this is a sweetheart 
deal for them that they have agreed to open-heartedly and very 
readily because obviously it is a windfall for them for a period 
of time. 
 
They have done that knowing full well that the royalty structure 
for the provincial government is going to be increased down the 
road, so that the provincial government will have more money 
with which to buy favourable responses from the electorate 
before the next provincial election. So if that is the plan of 
government, one of my council friends out in rural 
Saskatchewan has figured you out and he wants me to let you 
know that we’re on to you. Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
(2100) 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to ask a few brief questions about the Trans 
Canada Trail system here in Saskatchewan. As you will know, 
the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association has 
facilitated the development of the Trans Canada Trail system so 
far, and the province has basically, for all practical purposes,  

said that it will remain a voluntary initiative, that government 
will not be putting funds into the trail system in our province. 
 
What I’d like to explore a bit with you though tonight, is the 
need for a mechanism within government to respond to the 
many different issues that are . . . that need to be dealt with in 
terms of putting the trail system together. I understand that 
Municipal Government chairs a coordinating committee within 
government comprised of the departments of Agriculture, 
Economic Development, Environment, Highways, and 
Municipal Government. But it’s very unclear to me, in speaking 
with people in the civil service within these departments, as to 
how this coordinating committee is functioning and when it was 
last convened. Can you enlighten me a bit on this? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, your observations and 
comments are accurate in terms of the coordinating committee 
that has been set up. It is chaired by Bill Werry from the 
recreation branch which would have the relationship with 
SPRA, the Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association, 
which is forming the volunteer umbrella group to shepherd this 
initiative along. So Bill Werry from our department then is the 
chairman, and there are members from Agriculture, Economic 
Development, Environment, and Highways. 
 
They have met once, and there are certain members of the 
committee that are now charged with developing an action plan, 
and they will continue to meet again. 
 
As you can appreciate, it is very complex because, for example, 
part of the trail is proposed to go on abandoned trackage where 
in some cases the rails have already been removed, and it seems 
like a relatively simple thing, but there is no agency in the 
province that has undertaken to take ownership of the railway 
bed. 
 
So there are a great number of complex issues in what seems 
like it could be fairly simple. But this committee will work its 
way through these issues and come up with their action plan, 
and I have no doubt that people of Saskatchewan will be 
hearing more about this. I have spoken of it in some of the 
municipal meetings that I have attended, and I’ve tried to give 
the issue some profile in other venues so that people will 
continue to talk about it and in their own communities and in 
whatever way they see fit, as it is a volunteer effort, to do 
fund-raising and so forth. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  I appreciate the fact that you recognize the 
complexity of this, because in dealing with the situation earlier 
this spring, brought to my attention by a constituent, concerning 
the possibility of using an abandoned rail line where the track 
had been removed, it was very, very difficult to get any kind of 
coordination within government, let alone the local 
municipalities that were affected  the villages, the towns, and 
the RMs that were affected by this abandoned RM. 
 
I would just point out for the public who are listening in this 
regard that the project of the trail impacts on quite a number of 
different public policy areas or issues, and this leads to the kind 
of complexity that I’m concerned about. 
 



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2457 

First of all, we have the potential use of Crown lands or public 
parks. Secondly, we have negotiating the purchase of 
abandoned railway right of ways. We have the issue of 
highways and road right of ways. Safe crossings, in that 
regards. The use of the Borden bridge for example, the old 
Borden bridge, as a possible crossing of the Saskatchewan 
River. We have environmental issues. We have the complexity 
of issues between local government and rural municipalities and 
the province in this regard. 
 
Some people have talked about the possibility of the province 
 and this has apparently been done in Prince Edward Island 
 looking at the creation of a linear park. Do you know of any 
consideration being given to that idea here in Saskatchewan 
whereby in some fashion, for example, the province might 
integrate this into the park system? Not necessarily that it would 
be owned by the province, but that somehow the province 
would facilitate cutting through the nexus of all of these 
complex issues. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, starting with the last 
first. I’m not sure whether the concept of a linear park has really 
been considered, but I’ll certainly pass on your comments and 
consideration of the concept to the committee. 
 
I agree with you that there, you know, are some costs. Like the 
railways want market price, which makes it expensive, for their 
abandoned trackage. Some farmers want to farm the land. Some 
of the areas are subject to environmental review. 
 
But I think, like, we shouldn’t let those barriers get in the way. 
Instead of looking for ways not to do this or support it, I think 
we should look for ways to support it and use our imagination 
because in some of . . . You mentioned Prince Edward Island, 
and then there are some places in Europe that don’t have any 
more favourable climate than we do where there’s a really good 
development of this kind of trail, and it would open up 
opportunities for bed and breakfasts, for rest stops, for tea 
rooms, and all kinds of tourist amenities along the trail. 
 
And I think given the beauty of the landscape in Saskatchewan 
in the summertime particularly  in the winter, they’re often 
used for skiing  that it’s something we should be positive and 
proactive about and start looking for ways to do it. And I think 
if it were possible . . . and I’ve mentioned this to Saskatchewan 
Parks and Recreation Association, that if they could identify an 
area of the province — and as you know, they have identified a 
tentative route across the province — if they could identify an 
area where there was very strong support and where some of 
these hurdles that have been mentioned are not quite so high 
and put together some miles of a pilot project, sort of a 
demonstration project, so that people could see for themselves 
the development that would give them a picture, a vision of 
what the whole project could look like, that it might it easier for 
us to move forward. Just a suggestion. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Well I’d certainly hope, Madam Minister, 
that you could help to facilitate that in terms of cutting through 
some of these issues again on a demonstration basis as you 
suggest. 
 

Finally I’d like to urge you to have the coordinating committee, 
since it’s chaired by Municipal Affairs, by your department, to 
examine the issue of rail line abandonment. There are rail lines 
that are being abandoned as we speak, that are scheduled for 
abandonment, that are golden opportunities for use . . . 
integration into the trail system and that’s part of the tentative 
route that has been identified by the parks and recreation 
association. 
 
And yet there really is no mechanism within government or 
within the parks and recreation association to deal with the 
complexities, forget everything else we’ve talked about, the 
complexities of dealing with the abandoned rail lines. 
 
So I would urge you to instruct your officials to activate a 
particular committee or sub-committee to deal with that rail line 
abandonment issue. I’ve talked to officials in the Department of 
Agriculture who indicate that their relationship to abandonment 
has changed in the last number of years, and in large measure, 
government departments seem out to sea on this issue and need 
to get their sea legs again. And if you could help them do that I 
think it would be very helpful in terms of getting the parks . . . 
the Trans Canada Trail system built across Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, we will undertake as 
the sponsor a chair of the committee to make those inquiries 
and to try and move this project forward. 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you very much for your attention to 
this issue and just urge you to do everything you can. And I 
think your idea of a demonstration project is a very sensible 
one, and hopefully we get something going yet this year. The 
deadline or the target date is to try to have something in place 
by the year 2000. I don’t see, given the obstacles that we have, 
how we’re going to get that done by 2000, but I’d like to think 
that we could get a start. As you say, think positive in this next 
year, in the next six months, and get the ball rolling here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I have some questions along the same line as the 
member from Saskatoon Sutherland, dealing with the 
abandoned rail lines. 
 
What’s the current process? Is the current process one where 
the rail lines are abandoned, the federal government then has 
the option to acquire those lands, they can then be transferred 
down to the provincial government, and then down to the 
municipal government? Is that basically how things go? They 
go through the various levels of government until such point in 
time as they can either be given to  not given, but transferred 
 to the individual landowners or to some other entity? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I suppose these things 
can always be revisited and we will attempt to do that. 
 
But I think that a decision was made some four or five years 
ago that the railways didn’t . . . preferred not to deal with the 
province and wanted to deal with individual clients. And in fact  



2458  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

some sections, if you like, of former rail line where the rail has 
already been removed have been sold to individuals. And I 
guess this is one of the complications, is that they want market 
value, which makes it very expensive for any use. So there’s a 
lot of the rail bed laying there that is idle. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. The 
reason I ask this is because I’m one of those fortunate 
landowners then, perhaps, who had the opportunity to acquire 
the rail bed that went through our farm. And it was simply a 
matter of paying the transfer costs of the title from the 
municipality to ourselves for that. 
 
But at the time when this was happening there was a group 
trying to gain access of this to create a wildlife preserve, or a 
biosphere preserve, that was 99 feet wide and 33 miles long. 
Unfortunately the possibilities arose that if that were to happen, 
the only access across that strip of land  that 99 feet and 33 
miles long  would be at each road allowance. So a farmer 
who happened to live in the middle of a section with the 
railroad track next door would have to drive all the way around 
to get across because it wasn’t his property. And the owners, 
had it been transferred over to someone else, could have denied 
him access. 
 
A further complication was the control of noxious weeds, and 
insects that could be bred and move out from that area. 
 
So I think, Madam Minister, if you are looking at a project of 
providing some other entity, some ecological entity, Trans 
Canada Trail or whoever else it might be, that there are a 
number of issues that affect the local landowners that live along 
those abandoned rail lines and their interests and concerns need 
to be given very serious considerations on that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  We’ll do it. Take it as done. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  I’m glad that the House Leader says, 
you bet; we’ll look after that. 
 
I have one other question then because it seems that the House 
Leader, your House Leader, is in a hurry to get some place or 
something. I wonder, Madam Minister, if you could detail for 
me whether or not your deputy minister or any of your heads of 
departments utilize CVA vehicles, or are they on personal 
mileage for travel? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
deputy minister has a CVA and that the other members who are 
so eligible have opted for the car allowance instead. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  I wonder, Madam Minister, then for 
those other individuals, if you could detail who they are and 
what is the cost for personal mileage for those individuals. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, it only affects two 
employees. And we don’t have the figures here, but we would 
undertake to supply them, if you wish, without any hesitation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Along 
with the costs, I wonder if you could give an indication of the  

number of kilometres driven. I suppose that would be reflected 
in the actual cost, but it would be advantageous to gain an 
understanding of how much usage there is for those private 
vehicles. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  We would undertake to comply with 
that request without any problem, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister and 
to your officials . . . a couple of questions and it comes to the 
road structure that we have in this province. And certainly I see 
it on a daily basis. Now the fact that No. 48 . . . and the Minister 
of Highways has failed to really address the concern about the 
condition of 48 from Kipling to No. 9. 
 
As a result, there’s a fair bit of traffic that has moved on to a 
grid road system that goes right by our property. Madam 
Minister, my question basically comes to this. In view of the 
fact that we are seeing a substantial change in how grain is 
moved and some of the heavy hauls that are now moving on to 
the rural roadbed system — and I believe Manitoba is 
requesting some of the Crow benefit to be put into a fund to 
help maintain that road infrastructure — I’m wondering what 
your government, what Municipal Government, has done to 
date to address some of the concerns that have been raised 
specifically by SARM regarding the rural roadbed and the fact 
that there is going to be heavier traffic on that roadbed. 
 
And whether or not you have approached the federal 
government about some funding or some assistance, or even 
some of the Crow benefit to be put into a program to meet the 
needs of maintaining this road infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, as the member 
opposite will know, while the rural revenue-sharing pool that is 
. . . the money that’s used to distribute to rural municipalities 
for building and maintenance and gravelling and regravelling of 
roads is contained in Municipal Government’s budget, it’s 
really administered by the Department of Highways. And the 
Department of Highways, the Minister of Highways, is engaged 
in consultations with SARM and the federal government on 
those questions that you raise. 
 
And I think that no decisions have been made yet, but I know 
they’re actively meeting and trying to resolve these issues. And 
I know that they’re also talking with rural municipalities about 
coming up with some kind of a rationalization of the planning 
process for the road transportation system in Saskatchewan that 
municipalities will have input into, but we will make sure that 
the haul roads are a priority. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So if I understand you correctly, Madam 
Minister, basically all of this funding for roads comes through 
the Department of Highways, that Municipal Government is not 
involved in managing any of the funds or involved in any of the 
discussion or the debate regarding road infrastructure? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  No, Mr. Chairman, we do have some 
interface with municipalities obviously on the details of it, but  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2459 

. . . And the money, as I say, is in our budget as part of the rural 
revenue-sharing pool, but it is administered by the Department 
of Highways. And the negotiations between the province and 
the federal government on the Crow payment and the future of 
the transportation system, our department is not involved in 
those discussions. We’re aware of them, but we’re not at the 
table. 
 
Mr. Toth:  But I would trust that your department is certainly 
keeping abreast and raising the concerns. Because I’m sure that 
basically you’re responsible for the SARM and SUMA and on 
many of those requests and concerns, I’m sure would be 
brought to your attention. Therefore even though the 
Department of Highways administers it, that you’re raising it 
and are actively involved. 
 
Another question I would have, Madam Minister, is with regard 
to grants in lieu of taxes in view of the changing demographics 
in this province with regards to Indian land entitlements. What 
is your department doing to impress upon the federal 
government that they do have a responsibility, that 
municipalities are losing big time, especially on specific land 
claims versus the reserve status lands? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Chairman, on the previous issue, 
the negotiations with the Department of Highways and the 
federal government  yes, we’re not at the table, but we 
certainly are being apprised on a regular basis of the status of 
negotiations. So as I reported to you, they haven’t reached a 
conclusion yet, but we know that they’re actively talking. 
 
On the matter of the treaty land entitlements and the specific 
land claims, this too, while the negotiations are not within the 
purview of my ministry, because of the profound effect that this 
issue has  or the lack of resolution on this issue, if you like  
for the long-term financing of municipal governments, the 
minister for SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs 
Secretariat), who is involved in this, in the negotiations, and 
myself met very recently, this spring, with the federal Minister 
of Agriculture to impress upon him . . . and ask him to arrange a 
meeting with the Hon. Ron Irwin of . . . I forget the name of the 
portfolio but anyway the Indian and Metis ministry. 
 
And we certainly raised all those points, that the costs to 
municipalities are exactly the same, whether it’s a treaty land 
entitlement, regular type or a specific land claim . . . has the 
same impact on municipalities. We feel that a commitment was 
made as to the level for compensation. We know that it could 
set a precedent for other parts of the country, which creates a 
problem for them. But we are continuing to communicate with 
them and urge them to solve this pressing problem in the 
affirmative for municipalities as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I think it’s 
imperative, Madam Minister, that your department as well keep 
really on top and really impressing the federal government that 
they have a responsibility here. Otherwise the province is going 
to be left with a fairly heavy burden when it comes to these 
specific land claim entitlements and the fact that there’s going 
to be a reduction in the taxes. 
 

And quite frankly, I’m not exactly sure if I’d put a lot of faith in 
the Minister of Agriculture. He may be a representative from 
the province of Saskatchewan, but when I look at what 
Saskatchewan has received in the last couple years . . . I look at 
what’s taken place with regards to the Canadian Wheat Board. I 
see what’s happened in the beef industry. 
 
In a recent article, a study done by the federal government 
where they’ve increased the import of offshore beef by 17 
million tonnes more than what was actually agreed to under 
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement), one has to 
wonder, does the federal government . . . are they really 
concerned about western Canada? And you would think that an 
Agriculture minister from this province would start standing up 
and fighting. 
 
So I think, Madam Minister, while it’s probably appropriate to 
go to Mr. Goodale, it seems to me like you might have to start 
barking up somebody else’s tree in order to let them know that 
Saskatchewan is still part of Canada. It’s not a place you fly 
over from Vancouver to Toronto. 
 
So I just want to impress upon you and your department that it’s 
imperative that, working together with the minister responsible 
for SIMAS, that these concerns are raised and that Mr. Irwin is 
aware that it is a substantial problem to the province and to 
rural governments across the province of Saskatchewan. 
Regardless of how much they endeavour to work together to 
provide services and cut their administration, it still is a 
problem for them. 
 
So I just would encourage you to continue that effort. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I would just comment, Mr. Chairman, 
that we haven’t had a face-to-face meeting with Minister Irwin 
yet, but we certainly have followed up our meeting with the 
Minister of Agriculture with letters to relevant federal ministers. 
And we will continue to do that. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 
(2130) 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board 
Vote 22 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 



2460  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

Vote 22 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Chair:  I will invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
left is Gerry Kraus, the Provincial Comptroller. Next to Gerry is 
Len Rog, the assistant deputy minister of the revenue division. 
On my right is Larry Spannier, the executive director of the 
treasury board branch. Behind Larry is Jim Marshall, the 
executive director of economic and fiscal policy. Behind me is 
David Pratt, analyst for taxation in Intergovernmental Affairs. 
And next to David is Bill Van Sickle, executive director of 
administration. 
 
The Chair:  Thank you, minister. And I remind committee 
members that the Department of Finance has been here on April 
29, May 13, May 17, and May 29, a total of some more than six 
hours. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I might 
remind you that six hours isn’t a lot when you’re talking about 
the type of money we’re dealing with in Finance. But, Madam 
Minister, just recently you reported to this Assembly that there 
was a group who had given the province an upgrade as far as a 
credit rating. And I believe, Madam Minister, you were quite 
ecstatic about it and I certainly . . . I can appreciate that fact as it 
would indicate there is some confidence in the financial 
community. There certainly is some confidence in the fact that 
we’ve got back to where we were at least in 1991. 
 
I’m wondering, Madam Minister, with an upgrade in your credit 
rating, in view of the current debt and what the costs are, what 
would that mean to your department as far as financing costs 
for the debt just by having an upgrade in credit rating? And 
certainly I think interest rates at the present time are quite 
positive as well. What does that mean to the people of 
Saskatchewan and what kind of a savings do we get as a result 
of this? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 
opposite for that question. I think it was a very proud moment 
for all people in Saskatchewan because they all contributed to 
the results that led to the upgrade. The immediate impact is that 
the government saves about $1.75 million annually — that is 
each and every year — on interest costs just from that particular 
decision. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Madam Minister, you mentioned $1.75 million in 
savings. I noticed, I believe, it was about a month ago where 
STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) came out  I 
believe it was STC  had a substantial loss in its 
business-related activities in this province again. 
 
I’m just wondering, Madam Minister, we’ve seen a number of  

the Crown Corporations have had substantial profits over the 
past number of years which have resulted in significant 
dividends that have been paid to the province, to the general 
account, which have certainly assisted you in providing services 
to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What is your department anticipating that you may have next 
year as far as dividends out of the Crowns? And do you have 
kind of a long-term strategy in place as to what you may feel 
would be available on an ongoing basis to . . . that would be 
available to you to use in the general fund and in providing 
services to the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. The dividend from the Crown Investments 
Corporation is estimated to be $50 million. 
 
And I should explain why it is at that level. Because although 
you have Crowns over there such as the big four  SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and 
SaskTel  that do make profits, what also is over on the Crown 
side are the megaprojects which we inherited from the previous 
administration. Some of the deals signed in the ‘80s, which 
have to be subsidized in one way or another, either require 
direct subsidies or you have interest costs associated with the 
debt that the government has assumed. So a lot of the profits 
that are made by the Crowns just actually go into subsidizing 
the deals that we are still managing from the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Toth:  I think, Madam Minister, when it comes down to 
it there are a number of projects that are actually doing . . . 
bringing in excellent revenues for the province. Certainly the 
privatization of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) has 
money directly coming through taxation and royalties that 
wasn’t there before, a losing entity. Weyerhaeuser is a 
substantial job creation in the province, making money, paying 
royalties and taxes that wasn’t there before. Saskferco has 
become a major economic engine in this province. 
 
And we take a look . . . I think when you take a look at it, the 
substantial losses are coming from Crowns such as the STC and 
a number of the other Crowns, Madam Minister. So I don’t 
know if we should just be talking about megaprojects. Certainly 
the Crown sector, I think, is in dire need of review. And as you 
heard in question period today, I trust that the review that is 
currently taking place with regards to the Crowns, that there is a 
whole, objective view being put forward, and that the public of 
Saskatchewan do take the time to come and address the 
concerns regarding the Crowns. 
 
Because I think when it comes down to it . . . a letter just in 
front of me from an individual who is quite concerned about the 
fact that she has a major increase in . . . A pensioner in her 
mid-seventies is facing a major increase in her SaskEnergy bill 
while at the same time she notes the corporation is spending 
over $200,000 in novelty items. 
 
So I think these are some concerns that at the present time, 
where we’re talking about a debt and talking about maintaining 
an infrastructure for the public of Saskatchewan and for this 
dear widow lady who is seeing a major increase, it would seem  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2461 

to me that these Crown corporations should be passing on some 
of their savings and some of their profits to the people they’re 
serving rather than just continually drawing from them so that 
you can use it as an income and as a revenue on one hand and 
then on the other hand tell us that you haven’t reduced taxes. 
 
So I think, Madam Minister, it’s important that we differentiate 
and that we exactly let the people, the public of Saskatchewan, 
know exactly where the funds are coming from. 
 
And with that I really don’t have any further comments. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to answer the 
member’s question. I would point out, first of all, the position 
that I think you’re taking right now is contradictory to the 
position that I heard you taking in question period. That is, you 
said in question period, $50 million on assets of $7 billion is 
hardly a reasonable return. I hear you saying tonight, $50 
million is too much to take from the Crown utilities. I mean you 
can’t have it both ways. 
 
What I would say to the member opposite in terms of a logical 
view of what we’re doing with respect to the Crowns is, in the 
budget, each and every year we publish tables in which we look 
at the cost of utilities across Canada  cost of basic utilities 
and basic cost of living. And Saskatchewan comes out to be the 
least expensive place in all of Canada in which to live. So I 
think the idea that somehow or another our utility costs here are 
onerous has to be taken in context. 
 
I think the other point that has to be made is your point today 
$50 million on assets of $7 billion is hardly onerous, 
especially when you consider that if these were private 
corporations they would be paying taxes that Crown 
corporations do not pay. So in a sense the dividend is payment 
to taxpayers in lieu of taxes. So I think it’s quite reasonable to 
be taking a dividend of that size. And I think the utility rates, 
the basic cost of living that exists in this province, makes it a 
very, very attractive place in which to live. 
 
And you look at some of the commentary coming out across 
Canada. One comment in the Canadian Business magazine: 
 

If you want to invest in real estate in any place in Canada, 
come to Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan — one of the best 
places in all of Canada in which to live. 

 
And I think it’s related to a number of things, including the cost 
of living here. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I passed over a set of questions to the House Leader. I 
believe he’s passed them over to you. I wonder if you could 
confirm that you will be answering these questions for us, 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t see any 
problem with those questions. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance  Servicing the Public Debt 

Government Share 
Vote 12 

 
Item 1  authorized by law. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Votes 175, 176, 177 
 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive  authorized by law. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 
General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
thank the minister and her officials for coming in this evening 
and answering our questions. Thank you very much. 
 
(2145) 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
The Chair:  We’ll start by having the minister introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With me 
tonight I have Brian King to my left, who is the deputy minister 
of Labour. To my right is Noela Bamford; she’s the executive 
director of labour support. Directly behind me is Ted Boyle; 
he’s a special adviser to the deputy minister. And to his right is 
John Boyd, the director of planning and policy. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
the officials. Minister, I would like to particularly thank you for 
the global information that you provided to us and I would like 
to . . . I don’t know if you have a copy of this but I would like 
to draw your attention to, I guess the best designation I can 
make looks like Committee of Finance No. 2-7 on these 
globals. And I notice on the top of new employees, ‘95-96, a 
Shiela Bailey as the chairperson of the family friendly 
workplace, that was hired on January 16, ’96 at what I assume 
is a monthly salary of $8,358. And then I notice on Committee 
of Finance No. 2-4 that what seems to be the same Shiela 
Bailey was terminated by lay-off on March 28, 1996, some 73 
days later . . . 71 days later with a severance package of 



2462  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

$73,000. I am sure that there is a logical explanation for what 
seems to be an illogical situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the way you describe it, it does 
seem illogical but there actually is an explanation for it and I’ll 
endeavour to provide you with that. 
 
Ms. Bailey was appointed as the Chair of the Public Service 
Commission in May of 1992, and she served in that position up 
until the point in time where a number of people, I think maybe 
even including yourself, thought she would come to the 
Department of Labour to work as the director of family friendly 
workplaces, which is a new initiative within the Department of 
Labour. But she decided to decline the job. 
 
The severance is not associated with the job at the Department 
of Labour because she did not actually take that job. The 
severance will be in regard to her work at the Public Service 
Commission and she would receive the standard public service 
benefits. So it wasn’t attached to the Department of Labour 
actually although it may appear like that there. It is actually 
attached to the Public Service Commission. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, you indicated that she came to the 
department and decided not to accept the position. I’m not sure 
then even why she’d be on the department’s payroll for 71 days 
at $8,300 a month. I don’t quite follow that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  It actually works out. There’s a 
mathematical way to work that out. The amount that’s allocated 
to the department is just part of the flow-through of her 
severance from the Public Service Commission. Ms. Bailey 
never actually arrived and worked at the Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Then, Minister, it seems to, aside from the 
severance then . . . I’m putting that aside and accepting your 
argument for that. Was she in the employment of the 
department on January 16 where it showed her as a new 
employee until the time she was terminated on March 28? 
There’s some 70-odd days there that it looks she was on the 
employment and at $8,300 a month; that’s still 16 or $17,000 
for not being there. I don’t quite follow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well technically she was transferred 
over but in terms of her physically coming to the Department of 
Labour she did not come there. She was still performing her 
role and going through her separation at the Public Service 
Commission during that time. So she was in the employ of the 
government. There was technically a transfer to the Department 
of Labour but for her to physically have arrived there, that never 
was the case and she did not perform work within the 
Department of Labour. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. It’s been a fair while 
since we’ve gone nose to nose on labour issues in the province 
of Saskatchewan. But while it has been awhile I suppose some 
might say it’s high time we got back at it, but on the other hand 
the issues really haven’t changed and I suppose the tone of the 
questions probably won’t differ a whole lot either. 
 

Nevertheless the problems are still there so I guess until we get 
the problems resolved we’ll have to keep on restaking whatever 
old ground is necessary in order to get to where we have to go. 
Where we have to go of course, I think probably, is to have a 
better business climate in Saskatchewan, and of course your 
department is what we see from this side of the House the 
biggest deterrent to that happening in Saskatchewan at the 
present time. 
 
I think it would be nice for you to pass this kind of 
responsibility on to one of the other ministers for awhile so I’m 
going to suggest to you that there’s a way for you to have an 
easy out. And that of course would be to cancel the 
union-preference tendering policy. 
 
And if you were to stand up in this House, I would suggest 
maybe about Monday morning, and announce that, I think your 
life might get a lot easier to live and somebody else would be 
seen as the dark and heavy minister in the cabinet. 
 
Now I’m not suggesting that you’re the darkest or heaviest 
necessarily from everybody’s point of view, but certainly from 
the point of view of business who are looking for a level 
playing-field with which to play on in terms of competition in 
the world around us. 
 
Unfortunately times have changed, Mr. Minister. And while 
some of us would like to live back in the 1950s because ’57 
Chevies were great and life was wonderful and mostly because 
we were probably young, the truth of the matter is that times 
having changed; so has the world around us. 
 
And while your policies at the present time might have worked 
in the ‘50s and ‘60s and back in those days when we weren’t 
really concerned too much about international markets and we 
weren’t really considered a competitive province in terms of 
manufacturing and getting business done, really we now are in a 
new age. 
 
We’re in a new age where international competition is a reality, 
where we can’t simply lock ourselves in  isolationism is no 
longer an option that is available to us. If we try to go to an 
isolation status in Saskatchewan, you being a brilliant fellow, as 
you are  otherwise you couldn’t be in cabinet, I’m sure  
you will know that with isolationism you are sentencing our 
province to stagnation; no development, no growth. I don’t 
really think that your government, as it has shown in its 
direction in other policy areas, is really consistently wanting to 
do that. So I’m saying to you that I think your department is the 
department that is out of the consistent context of the direction 
that your government has set and it is attempting to flow. 
 
So you impede the whole possibility of your government 
succeeding in turning around the direction that our province is 
embarking on, and that is to get away from stagnation, to get 
away from simply staying as we are or perhaps even going 
backwards. You have to know that if you recognize that 
international trade and international market-places and 
international competitions  if they are realities  then you 
have to know that our first competitor has to be our closest 
competitor that has to be dealt with, and of course, that’s  



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2463 

Alberta. 
 
I almost get tired of hearing myself say that things are better in 
Alberta, but the reality is that it is. It’s a pure fact of life. Every 
time I go over to visit my kids, and unfortunately most of them 
are over there and so I always have to keep heading that way to 
go see them, and every time I get there they complain about the 
government and how bad things are, and then they take a look 
at what we got and I say, well how about coming back home, 
and they say, sorry but we’re going to stay over here because 
it’s better there. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, having that reality in front of us, we have to 
deal with it and we have to get on that level playing-field, 
otherwise we really won’t in Saskatchewan, grow and develop, 
as I’m sure that all of you people want to have happen. 
 
Now there’s a price to be paid and we recognize that and we 
know it’s not an easy price for you to pay. Offending your 
union buddies puts you into the same position that Bob Rae was 
in in Ontario and that’s not easy. Certainly you don’t want to go 
down flaming to defeat the way he did. But he tied an awful lot 
of things, actually his baggage, to his government other than 
labour relations, and those were the things that sunk his ship as 
much as labour relations. 
 
I believe, quite honestly, that you might succeed to form 
government again after the next election, even if you did the 
right thing in this area. Now I’m not guaranteeing that, and of 
course we’re going to work to try to prove that wrong, but at 
least, I think, you could probably have the province grow and 
maybe people would recognize that as a reason to elect you 
rather than to simply have the old guard of union bosses go out 
and dictate to people how they’re supposed to vote. 
 
So let’s get to work on this Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement with its union preference policy, and let’s discuss 
for a little while what it really is doing to our province and to 
our businesses. And maybe as you explain to me your vision of 
how it’s supposed to work, maybe some place between my 
thoughts and yours, there is a balance that can be struck. And 
I’m looking for a balance and I’m looking for that desperately, 
Minister, because I know that at this point you’ve gone so far 
that you have to find a way to get a compromise that will save 
face for your department, yourself, and your government. 
 
And I understand egos  I’ve got one myself. Everybody likes 
to have their egos stroked a little and everybody wants to make 
sure that theirs isn’t destroyed. You’re no different and we 
acknowledge that. So we’ll try to help you to find a way out. So 
let’s look for that way out. 
 
Next week you’re going to be faced with some meetings, I 
understand. And after that of course, your review has to be 
completed on this agreement. You’ve promised the people of 
this province that there would be a review. You’ve told us in 
the Assembly here during question period in your answers that 
the review is ongoing and that that review will be revealed to us 
and the results of it will be shown to the people shortly. 
 
I suspect that the reason that you’ve had to stall is that you’re  

not really getting people to agree all that readily behind closed 
doors and you’re having some problems. So let’s stand out here 
in public and talk about the problem areas, and maybe that in 
itself will help people to understand the need for some kind of a 
balance and compromise in order for this province to continue 
to go ahead. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in that context I want you to tell us what you 
think you are accomplishing for the province of Saskatchewan 
with your union-preference tendering policy. 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the member, Mr. Chairman, would 
know that the policy to which the member refers is not one of 
the Department of Labour’s. The appropriate place to pose that 
question would be to the Crown Investments Corporation or the 
minister who’s responsible for that. 
 
Having said that, I suppose to respond briefly to what the 
member has asked, the answer would be — is — that we’re 
trying to prepare for a more proactive type of relationship 
between employers and employees within the province. The 
onus within our department over a historical period is one that 
is complaint driven. We want to be more proactive in terms of 
helping provide services to employees and employers so that 
they know their rights and can resolve some of the issues before 
they become issues that disrupt the workplace. 
 
In specific, the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement, we 
tried to achieve a balance there between the business 
community and organized labour within the province. And it’s 
not uncommon to have similar types of agreement. Mind you, 
not every clause is the same, but there were similar types of 
agreements in place to build the Bi-Provincial upgrader which 
occurred under the previous administration. 
 
The generating stations in the province have operated under 
similar agreements for years under governments of all stripes. 
And we tried to find that balance in Crown tendering in terms 
of the capital projects, some of which qualify under the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
There are items in there that are very attractive, things that 
labour themselves have given up. For example, one would be 
that  it’s not talked about, the public don’t hear about it very 
much  is that on a project under the Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement there’s a no-strike provision. While 
they’re in that contract, they cannot go out on strike. The job is 
completed as per the contract. 
 
And is the agreement perfect? Well obviously, from what you 
say and what we’ve heard from other people, it’s not a perfect 
agreement. And quite often when you’re dealing with labour 
legislation you do have to make sure that there’s not 
exploitation of workers within the province, and I think you 
would agree with that. There should be a fair day’s pay for a 
fair day’s work. People should be protected to make sure that 
they have safe workplaces. And I think that the employers in 
Saskatchewan want that in fact to be the case. We want to make 
sure that injured workers are helped. We want to make sure that  



2464  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

employers can’t be sued by injured workers, therefore the 
compensation system. 
 
So I think that what we’ve tried to do is find a balance. It’s an 
agreement that was signed for five years. You’re correct that 
there are negotiations ongoing now to see if we can find a better 
balance within the agreement. I’m not sure whether there’ll be 
changes to the agreement. I can’t make a commitment today one 
way or the other. And again I would emphasize that it’s not 
within the Department of Labour. That particular agreement 
comes under the Crown Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, at least we’ve got a start. 
 
Now I recognize that technically CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) is promoting the 
union-preference tendering policy. However, I think we all 
recognize that you as Minister of Labour are probably, by 
perception at least, responsible for standing up for the working 
people of the province. And that’s your job, and it’s not an easy 
job, but certainly you should, even within your own cabinet. If 
you have to go against your own cabinet ministers, you should 
stand up and fight and work hard for the workers of this 
province. Somebody’s got to do that. 
 
And because that is, by the nature of your job, one of the 
challenges and is probably the most important part of your job, 
union-preference tendering policy, while it may be applied to a 
lot of other folks, becomes more critical to your department and 
more critical to the people that you are supposed to directly 
represent in society because, after all, every one of those people 
that are workers, who do belong to unions, now do of course 
look to your department to defend their needs in society. 
 
And obviously then that would put you in a position of having 
to listen to the unionized workers when they say, we want this 
type of program to go ahead. And you would have to say, well 
okay, give me the reasons why it’s so good for society and you 
would defend that position, and you just have. So we now 
recognize that you are a big stakeholder in the union-preference 
tendering policy, probably as much as anybody, even though it 
directly concerns each minister in charge of whatever Crowns 
there are  in fact all of them. 
 
So now that we recognize that you are a stakeholder and have a 
lot at stake in this process, there’s no question that you will be 
deeply and personally involved in every negotiation that goes 
on with regards to this policy. And recognizing that, then you 
would probably have as good an understanding if not a better 
understanding of the intricate workings of the process, probably 
even better than the minister in charge of CIC. And that’s why 
we have saved these questions for you, because we believe that 
you have studied this thing and that you have a deeper 
understanding, perhaps, of how it works. 
 
So now we have a situation in your home town, the town of 
North Battleford, where a company, I think it was called Peak 
Manufacturing, has just found itself, through the legislated Bills 
that you have put into place over the past four years in your 
government, through that legislation they have found  

themselves a vehicle with which to have their company 
unionized with only twenty-five point something per cent of the 
people actually having bought party cards . . . or union cards. 
And then they went to the certification process and they were 
granted union status with only twenty-five point something per 
cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, how do you go back home and say to the 
owners of that manufacturing company that that is fair? And if 
that isn’t what’s going on, then please take this opportunity to 
correct the record and tell us that this is not so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’ll take your last point first and that’s 
the one with Peak Manufacturing. Peak Manufacturing, the 
employees were put under an organizing drive by United Food 
and Commercial Workers. Where there is a differentiation here 
in terms of what you’re saying is that the law in Saskatchewan 
says that you must have over 50 per cent of the employees to 
certify. If you get over 25 per cent, you can to the Labour 
Relations Board, and if everything’s in order, the Labour 
Relations Board can order a vote. But when that vote occurs, 
unless the union gets over 50 per cent of the employees to vote 
in favour of certification, then the certification cannot occur. 
 
Going to the first item that you were talking about in your 
previous statement and questions in regard to the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement, I would say that the 
government have received complaints from contractors who 
have not got jobs with the government, either because they 
didn’t apply for them or they didn’t meet the qualifications or 
they weren’t the low bidder. 
 
I can tell you in terms of the department protecting the working 
men and women of this province, we do protect the working 
men and women of this province. We have an obligation to do 
that. And I would say that we have not had one complaint on 
wages not being paid, on any of the labour legislation or the 
labour standards. We have not had one complaint from any 
employee since the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
came into place on a Crown construction job where it was 
awarded under the Construction Tendering Agreement. 
 
Some of the benefits I would also say that we need to look at a 
little more closely is, that where there is a union shop in place 
on a construction project, they make sure that the apprentices 
are indentured. And that is not always the case in all 
construction sites in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a skill shortage in many areas within the province, and 
one of the things that a union job site does, it makes sure that 
the people who are working there get credit for the hours that 
they work, and they work towards being indentured, they work 
towards becoming a journeyman in the particular field of which 
they’re working. And they also receive benefits. There are many 
benefits to having a unionized workplace. 
 
At the same time though I can understand the frustration of the 
member and others who are opposed to unions, don’t see the 
usefulness of a union, and they have every right to express that. 
But in my opinion as an individual minister, the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement has not worked all that bad. 



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2465 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’m sure that the business 
people in Saskatchewan will be interested in hearing that kind 
of a comment because obviously there would be a few down in 
Swift Current who wouldn’t bid on your contracts that you put 
up for tender. Nobody would bid on them. And there will be 
some people in Yorkton that probably will be interested 
because they of course did the same thing. They just simply, 
flatly refused to bid on your contracts. 
 
Now there are several of these instances around the province, 
and you’re well aware of them, better than I am; you’ve 
probably go a list of them in your hand. The truth of the matter 
is, Minister, that it’s immaterial how many. 
 
The signal there and the message there is very clear. And that is 
that these people don’t agree with you, they don’t agree that 
your policy is good or fair or right. And if they did agree, they’d 
be bidding on these projects. They would be willing to go to 
work for you and help you to get your government doing the 
things that it says it wants to do, which is to create prosperity, I 
suppose, and to build jobs and all that sort of thing. These 
people are not interested in playing by your rules because your 
rules are not fair. 
 
And the truth of the matter is that when you say that we have 
the right to stand up here and oppose unions and say that 
they’re all wrong and they’re all bad, the truth of the matter is 
that’s not what we stood up here and said. What we stood up 
here and said is that you have allowed unions to become what 
they were never intended to be. They were never intended to 
become the political masters within a society, driving the 
government perhaps, and using the rudder of the ship — 
philosophy or metaphors — in order to accomplish their goals. 
 
The truth of the matter is that unions were developed in the 
world to protect the workers’ interests. They were not designed 
to become the political power of a nation or of a province. So 
they have overstepped their bounds of the reality of why they 
were originally conceived and put into place. No longer do 
unions protect the workers. They more protect the leadership 
power struggles that occur within the union leaderships. It has 
very little to do with the common, ordinary worker. 
 
If you wanted to have a union protecting the workers they 
would be saying to you, let’s work on this union hall hiring 
aspect so that people in towns like Swift Current and Yorkton 
can get workers out of their own communities, instead of 
having to come to Regina or Saskatoon and work through the 
union hall process and take workers for their projects that may 
or may not understand the job that’s at hand, that needs to be 
done; may or may not want to travel to those communities to 
work, but simply will have to because if they ever turn a job 
down they too end up being discriminated against. And that’s 
something that the union bosses don’t talk about much. 
 
They end up being discriminated against because they get put at 
the bottom of the list, or get blacklisted. And that’s a term that 
you people don’t like to use, but the truth of the matter is that 
lots of workers are blacklisted. They’re not allowed to get jobs. 
The process is manipulated so that they are drummed out of the 
process and not allowed to work any more. We even know of  

cases where people at least claim that they feel they’ve had to 
leave the province because of that process. 
 
Now you can argue with that and you can quarrel with it, and 
there’ll be no documentation ever to prove it, because these 
things are all done through the back door and through the back 
of the system. 
 
So, Minister, if your system is so good, how come these 
contractors, how come the people that are supposed to work 
with the process, why aren’t they bidding on your projects? 
What has happened that’s gone wrong? You seem to think it’s 
all great and wonderful, and obviously other people are not. So 
there’s a breakdown in communications or understanding, and 
that breakdown of course is something we have to work on. 
 
And until we do resolve some of those problems, I don’t 
believe that this province is going to go ahead. And I don’t 
believe that we can expand our tax base and all those things that 
would help people out. 
 
So let’s deal with the specific of the union-preference tendering 
policy so that we can get down to brass tacks here. Let’s talk 
about the 21 cent an hour charge that every employer has to 
now pay for each employee for every hour that they work; 21 
cents an hour, not for the unionized workers alone, every 
worker on the project, unionized or non-unionized; everyone 
has to have 21 cents an hour as a payroll tax taken by the 
employer and put into a pot. Where is that pot, Mr. Minister? 
Who gets that money? How much has been collected over the 
last . . . since this program’s been in effect? And where has it 
gone to, and who’s getting it? 
 
(2215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Chairman, really these questions 
are not under the Department of Labour, and I’ll answer as best 
I can. But the questions you ask we don’t have available the 
answers that you’re asking for tonight because it’s not 
something that comes under the purview of the Department of 
Labour. 
 
The questions you ask are all applicable to the Crown 
Investments Corporation. So I will try my best, but I don’t have 
any specifics. My officials could go back to the department and 
they don’t have the specifics that you’re asking because it’s not 
our department’s responsibility. 
 
Having said that, the 21 cents per hour check-off on the payroll 
goes into a training fund for some of the things I mentioned 
earlier. Any respectable union puts on training programs for the 
workers so that they are more skilled, better able to do the work 
that’s expected of them. There are safety programs that are put 
on. There’s a wide range of things that the 21 cents is used for. 
The amount collected, you’ll have to ask Crown Investments 
Corporation that because I don’t have those figures, and neither 
does the department. 
 
The other questions that you ask in that regard about why, if it’s 
so good, why people don’t bid on it. Well there are lots of 
people who bid on these projects. 



2466  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

There are two classifications of people who have construction 
companies who won’t bid on Crown construction jobs that fall 
under the CCTA. The first group put in vexatious bids because 
they’re angry about the policy, and I don’t blame them for being 
angry with the policy. That’s their right to do that if they so 
choose. But they’re vexatious in the nature that they do that to 
prove a point with the government. They know that they won’t 
get the contract. In some cases they low ball their bid, and in 
other cases they know they don’t qualify for the particular 
contract. 
 
The other group of people fall under a category that I would say 
are afraid of unions. They don’t bid on some of the Crown 
Construction Tendering Agreement projects because they’re 
afraid that while they’re on the job, the union people who are 
working within that project will try and certify their company. 
And if they don’t want to go through that, that’s their right. 
They don’t have to bid on the contracts that are available. 
 
As I said earlier, we’ve tried to find a good balance. We’ve 
tried to find a balance so it’s fair for everyone in the province 
who has a construction company to bid on projects here in 
Saskatchewan. And the policy is an attempt to prepare for the 
21st century of relations between the business community and 
the labour community in Saskatchewan. And I wish that more 
people would participate in it with a dedication to seeing how 
well it can work. There are too many people who spread doom 
and gloom on the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
without giving it that chance. 
 
I would also want to point out that unions have not become 
political masters in Saskatchewan. The masters of politics in 
Saskatchewan are the people of Saskatchewan who come out in 
massive numbers, greater than anywhere else in North America, 
to elect members of the legislature, to defeat members of the 
legislature, and in the final analysis they elect a government. 
 
The Crown Construction Tendering Agreement was in place 
before the last election. People chose to endorse our 
government again, rightly in my opinion, maybe wrongly in 
your opinion. But nevertheless, the masters of our society in 
Saskatchewan are no single group, no matter who they are, who 
they represent. The masters of politics in Saskatchewan are the 
people of this great province of ours and I think that they 
always will be. In fact I’m sure they always will be. 
 
And in terms of whether we made the right decision or the 
wrong decision, we feel the people of Saskatchewan elected us 
to make the tough decisions in tough and challenging times; to 
prepare this province and the people who are going through the 
province now, growing up, going to school, filling the job 
market, creating businesses, creating wealth within the 
province; we’re preparing to make sure that they have the 
society the way we want them to have within Saskatchewan. 
 
Some of those decisions are tough decisions. We’ve made 
tough decisions. We’ll continue to make tough decisions, but 
what is of the utmost importance, is that we’ve always tried to 
make the best decision for good public policy for the people of 
this province. 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, unfortunately there are a 
lot of contradictions in what you say. And first of all though, 
we want to get down to some of the specifics because there are 
people that are needing to know some specific answers. Now 
you have alluded to the fact that Peak Manufacturing in North 
Battleford is in a situation where the board has ordered a vote in 
order for the people who work there to become unionized 
employees. The question of course that comes to my mind is 
when is this vote to take place, and who of course will oversee 
the vote, and does the owner of the business have anything that 
he can contribute to this process. What is he allowed to do, 
what is he allowed not to do. 
 
There are probably some rules that he will have to know 
whether or not he needs to comply with in order not to break 
the law. And I’m sure that he will want to be able to do that, 
because as he pulls up stakes and moves his business to 
Alberta, he won’t want to be having any legal charges against 
him still in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so while he pulls up, as many businesses have, and leaves 
this province, we want to help him not to leave under any kind 
of a cloud of legal responsibilities. Obviously I think from the 
statements that have been made, he is not prepared to allow the 
process to go ahead that you are forcing on him with your 
ill-conceived legislation. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, this is just a clear example of many 
things that are happening throughout our province. That’s why 
we’re talking to you tonight, trying to convince you that it’s 
time that we work on getting a fair and level playing-field 
between Alberta and Saskatchewan because that is the first 
comparison people make. And every time that they make that 
comparison they pull up stakes and go to Alberta, wherever 
there’s an opportunity, Even Safeway in Saskatoon is headed 
for Calgary. 
 
I mean we’ve got to face the realities. I know it would be nice 
to duck; it would be nice to run; it would be nice to hide; it 
would be nice to ignore the problems. It would be nice to see a 
million people all of a sudden decide to come to Saskatchewan 
and all start businesses. None of that is going to happen unless 
our atmosphere here is conducive to attracting people and to 
encouraging them to do business here and to stay here. 
 
If we can’t keep the ones that are here, why would we expect 
new ones to stop? They fly straight over and go to Calgary as 
soon as they send a lawyer over to Saskatchewan to find what 
our labour laws are. They send out that same lawyer on to to 
Calgary. He asks over there. He also goes into Vancouver and 
finds out what it’s like in B.C. (British Columbia). Where do 
they end up? In Calgary. Now there’s got to be a message in 
that, Mr. Minister, if that’s where folks are all ending up. 
 
As far as your comments about contractors making vexatious 
bids, I think that probably those contractors should be insulted 
by that comment, unless of course they’re guilty, which I don’t 
believe they are. I don’t believe that contractors spend $10,000 
or more preparing a very complicated, long, and expensive bid 
on a project in order to be, as you say, vexatious. 
 



June 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2467 

How many businessmen do you know that can stay in business 
by wasting their money making bids on projects that they know 
they can’t win, just to play the games? I mean $10,000 is a 
figure that I’ve heard from some people. I also have another 
project quoted to me as $50,000 invested in order to gather the 
technical resource information that went with their bid in this 
province. 
 
I’ve heard of a case as high as that, a case where nobody got the 
job ever. And you say that people would do that just to irritate 
you, just to be mean-spirited? Not a chance, Mr. Minister. 
Business people do not throw their money away like that in 
Saskatchewan when the door to Calgary is wide open. And even 
if the road is bumpy, they’ll still get there. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you’ve talked about a fair day’s pay for a 
fair day’s work. And I’m surprised to hear you say that because 
that’s a philosophy that probably most of the people on your 
side don’t really agree with and probably don’t even consider. 
But it happens to be one that I like and I think it’s a fair way to 
deal with life. And then you, in the same breath, talked about 
how there was an experimental sort of a program that went on 
with the upgrader, where people were actually put under a type 
of contract that’s similar to your union-preference tendering 
policy. 
 
Well I’ll say this about it. I’m no expert on what happened up 
there, but I will say from what I have learned, and understood, 
and been told, and have listened to, that it was nothing  
nothing  compared to your union-preference tendering policy. 
It was an experiment in a contract where people agreed to get 
paid a fair wage in return for not taking strike action at any 
point. 
 
They were simply a contract where people were protected, 
where their interests as workers were protected, but at the same 
time the employers knew that the project would be completed 
without massive strikes or those kinds of problems. And that is 
totally different. 
 
There was no union preference built into it, with people having 
to be dragged out of Saskatoon and Regina to work in 
Lloydminster when there were probably workers that were 
available in Edmonton or any number of other places over in 
Alberta, along with, of course, half the northern part of 
Saskatchewan. And I understand that workers came from far 
and wide. 
 
And so none of the restrictions that you’re talking about in this 
policy applied to that experimental process. So to compare the 
success of that simply defeats the arguments that you’re making 
that we need to have this union-preference tendering policy. 
Because if that worked, then we didn’t need this policy. We 
simply had to continue with that kind of process where you 
entered into a contract with people and agreed to do a job at a 
fair price which would be, of course, a fair day’s pay for a fair 
day’s work. 
 
And that concept is good. There’s nothing wrong with it. And 
we have said . . . and I think all along that the people in 
Saskatchewan who are in the contracting business would be  

very happy to sit down and negotiate with you a binding 
contract. Not the kind of contracts that you people have alluded 
to in the past where you deemed them retroactively to be 
cancelled or non-existent. 
 
These people are honest, upright citizens who would enter into 
a contract with you where they would commit themselves to 
giving fair pay at reasonable rates without all the strings 
attached to it and all the red tape and all the hoops and loops to 
jump through and over and the kind of things that basically just 
drives business out of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you are in a position now where you’re going 
to have your back somewhat to the wall. So why not admit that 
you have gone too far and that a balance must lie some place 
between the two  some place between the contracts and the 
demands of the unionized workers — some place of course that 
only you could lead the province and only you have the ability 
now to resolve the problems that have been created? 
 
So why don’t we take a long, hard look at, first of all, 
identifying some of these little problems. Now you say that the 
21 cents an hour  not a big deal. Well it is a big deal because 
on a major project where you have hundreds of thousands of 
hours of work, you end up with hundreds of thousands of 
dollars of money that are being collected. Now you say you can 
justify that because it’s going into an educational program. 
 
Unfortunately though while your argument and your statement 
is probably correct, the training program, according to the 
people who represent the contractors, only applies to unionized 
workers. The non-unionized workers, who are also required to 
pay that 21 cents per hour on their behalf or have it paid on 
their behalf, they are not getting any training programs. Now 
the people that represent these folks are the ones that have 
delivered that message to us and they say it doesn’t exist. All 
right, where is it? Where is the fairness then? 
 
Well if you can’t resolve the fairness within the simplest little 
part of this program, probably the cheapest little part of it  the 
21 cents an hour part of it  then how would you ever expect 
people to get along and agree on the more complex issues that 
are involved in this whole process. 
 
I think you’ve got to go back to the drawing board and resolve 
these problems or else our province is going to stagnate, as it is, 
and we will never grow again. So, Mr. Minister, we’ve just got 
all kinds of problems. 
 
I know that in the past we tried to resolve some of these labour 
issues with things like spin-off companies. You will know and 
remember the discussions that went on about spin-off 
companies. Unionized people and unionized workers disliked 
the spin-off company concept as much as contractors now 
dislike your union-preference tendering policy. 
 
So what happened? When your government got into power and 
you were somewhat in sympathy with the unions and their 
position, you completely cancelled all spin-off companies and 
everything related to it. As far as I know, not one exists or is 
allowed to exist and I think you even made a law, I guess, that  



2468  Saskatchewan Hansard June 11, 1996 

prohibits them to exist. 
 
What that tells me is that the pendulum swings all the way back 
and forth and never stops in the middle. One government put it 
in; you cancelled it all. Now what are you doing? You’re 
putting in a policy here that for over a year now has been in 
place that does exactly the opposite and it has swung the 
pendulum totally to the other side. Is there no balance in what 
we can do in this province to get people to work together? 
 
One government throws out spin-off companies; another one 
brings them in. One government brings in union-preference 
tendering policies and you know as well as the fact that I’m 
standing here right now that the next government, whoever they 
are if they’re not you, will throw your union-preference 
tendering policy out and you’ll be back to square one and the 
unions will have lost everything. 
 
Now in all fairness to the unionized people who do need 
representation to protect workers, would it not be better to go 
back to the centre of the spectrum, to come up with a balance 
that everybody can live with and work with and have everybody 
more or less a little unhappy but more or less a little bit satisfied 
too, so that they can all keep working together, so that you 
don’t have these extremes of changes every time a government 
changes. Is that healthy for our economy or is that healthy for 
our province, and most certainly, is that healthy for our workers 
and the unionized people? 
 
You’re defeating the very thing that they fight for, which is 
sustained security, and that is the number one thing that I hear 
coming from working people  is that they want security in 
their life. And you can’t blame people for that. We all strive for 
that. 
 
But how are they going to get that security when they know 
very well in their own minds that the policies that they’ve 
gotten won’t last, can’t endure the test of time  can’t endure 
the test of time because they’re so unfair to some other group in 
society that they won’t be allowed to continue when that 
political spectrum revolves and turns around. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, rethink your position for the sake of the 
unionized people. It’s not just for the contractors. But you know 
very well that some day your government will not be in power. 
You can deny that statement as much as you like but we’ll take 
you through history and no government has endured for ever. In 
a democracy, for sure they don’t. Even in a dictatorship, 
dictators get old and die eventually. Or they manage to stumble 
down some stair step somewhere. 
 
(2230) 
 
But the truth of the matter is that as time goes by these things 
change. Here in Saskatchewan, it will change sooner rather than 
later. Do you really want to put the unionized people in this 
province in a position where they will lose, at one stroke of the 
pen, everything that they’ve gained throughout the years? 
 
When people become so irritated and so frustrated with a total 
program that is absolutely leaning in one direction that they will  

just throw the whole thing out and say we’re going to start over, 
and then for a period of time, you will have nothing for people 
to be protected with. 
 
The overkill potential is so great here that I can envision things 
that are as important as safety rules will get thrown out with it. 
Workers’ Compensation Board rules will get thrown out. 
Everything will get thrown out. And there is no way, Mr. 
Minister, that the people of Saskatchewan can grow and prosper 
under these circumstances. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do see that the hour is 
now 10:30 and I expect you will want to say something about 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I do appreciate the comments of the 
member opposite. There is a definite concern that he expresses, 
and I’ll be more than happy to pass those comments on to the 
appropriate minister. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Point of order. Mr. Deputy Chairman, I do 
note that it’s 10:30 and some of us have to get our beauty sleep. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:33 p.m. 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Lorje ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2444 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2444 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  
General Revenue Fund  
Municipal Government  Vote 24  

Teichrob ....................................................................................................................................................................................2441 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2441 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2445 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2449 
Koenker .....................................................................................................................................................................................2456 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2457 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2458 

General Revenue Fund  
Saskatchewan Municipal Board  Vote 22 ..............................................................................................................................2459 
Supplementary Estimates 1995-96  
General Revenue Fund  
Saskatchewan Municipal Board  Vote 22 ..............................................................................................................................2459 
General Revenue Fund  
Finance  Vote 18  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................2460 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2460 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2461 

General Revenue Fund  
Finance  Servicing the Public Debt  
Government Share  Vote 12 ...................................................................................................................................................2461 
General Revenue Fund  
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments  Votes 175, 176, 177 ..................................................................2461 
Supplementary Estimates 1995-96  
General Revenue Fund  
Budgetary Expense  
Finance  Vote 18  

D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2461 
General Revenue Fund  
Labour  Vote 20  

Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................2461 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2461 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2462 

 


