


















































April 2, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 703 
 April 2, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 
itself into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much, Speaker. And again, 
continuing on from our last discussion, I’d just like to kind of 
summarize. 
 
One of the weaknesses of the budget is that the government 
continues looking at northern Saskatchewan as a land of 
opportunity in terms of gaining all kinds of revenues. And I 
think the big problem that governments have is that as long as 
we look at the development of the northern economy based 
solely on the development of the non-renewable resource 
industries such as mining for uranium, mining for gold, mining 
for diamonds, etc., it isn’t a long-term plan. 
 
And in the budget that the minister presented in this House, we 
didn’t really talk about supporting northern people. We’ve 
talked about developing the northern resources, but the key 
resource that we’ve left out, Mr. Speaker, is the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what I hoped the budget would have addressed, and which 
we see it didn’t, was the fact that there was nothing in the 
discussions nor the budget about revenue sharing. And people 
in northern Saskatchewan have for many years requested that 
the government take revenues that they derive from the 
non-renewable resource industries and put that into the 
development of the renewable, community-based businesses 
that could offer a sustainable level of employment and 
opportunity for northern Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I guess trying to understand northern Saskatchewan 
people, we have to look back at the history of the North. And 
we have people that are familiar with the fishing industry, we 
have people that are familiar with the trapping industry, we 
have people that are familiar with basically living off the land, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then when you introduce mining and we introduce 
large-scale forestry, many times communities that aren’t 
involved in the ownership aspect of these particular industries 
don’t participate nor benefit fully from those activities. So as a 
result, the people of the North have been calling for many, 
many years of true revenue sharing in which they can use the 
revenues of these mines to develop economies in their 
community. 
 
And one of the conditions that I had hoped the minister would 
have spoken about, when she talked about the northern  

initiatives, was a new revenue-sharing pool to stimulate the 
community-based economies of communities like La Loche, 
Buffalo Narrows, Beauval, Pinehouse, and so on and so forth. 
 
Again, northern Saskatchewan people do support northern 
development, but they want a say in how that money, the 
revenues of that money, is being used. Now what we’ve always 
said is that if they take revenues derived from northern 
development and hand it over to the community-based 
economic corporations, these community-based economic 
corporations will then decide how they wish to spend that 
money. Direct financing of these local economic development 
corporations is something that they really have been for many 
years fighting for. 
 
And people can ask us, well what economies do you want to 
establish in the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse; what economy do 
you want to establish in the community of Pinehouse or 
Patuanak. Well really what is it, you know, what is there  just 
a group of people living amongst themselves. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a tremendous amount of ideas. And 
I think in essence one of the reasons why the Liberal Party was 
so appealing is not necessarily what we all know we have to 
accomplish, as you leave the how of accomplishing more jobs 
to the imagination of the Saskatchewan people. And in northern 
Saskatchewan, there is no difference. If you tell the people what 
we need to do, leave the how to them. 
 
And ideas that we’ve come up with, Mr. Speaker, is issues like 
training to build . . . or have a road-building crew established to 
maintain and develop roads all throughout northern 
Saskatchewan. The effort of creating and stimulating the fishing 
economy. For many years, in the early years, fishing sustained 
many families, Mr. Speaker, and today we see that it’s not as 
big of an employer as it once was. And so therefore the value 
added processes of fishing  right now, Mr. Speaker, in 
Northern Saskatchewan all the fish that are caught in my home 
town of Ile-a-la-Crosse are packed in ice and they’re kept in a 
semi till the load is full and they’re transported all the way to 
Winnipeg, Mr. Speaker. Now Ile-a-la-Crosse to Winnipeg by 
freight takes about 14 to 16 hours. Now why hasn’t there been 
any effort with government to develop an industry that would 
process fish in Northern Saskatchewan? Why hasn’t there been 
any effort in developing a fish hatchery in northern 
Saskatchewan to stimulate the industries that people in northern 
Saskatchewan are very familiar with? 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, eco-tourism. As you all know, the 
people of the North are all quite concerned on the value of the 
land. They’re making sure that the land is protected. That’s one 
of their primary functions in life, is to make sure that nature is 
preserved and protected. And eco-tourism is an opportunity for 
them once again to take people from Germany, take people 
from China, and take people from Canada, all throughout 
northern Saskatchewan and enjoy the natural lakes and the 
beautiful forests. And eco-tourism hasn’t been given the same 
stimulus that it should have been. 
 
We look at agriculture, Mr. Speaker. Several years ago, look at  
  



704  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

the community of Green Lake. They’ve got close to 4,000 acres 
of land, cleared and uncleared land, 4,000 acres, Mr. Speaker, 
and they’ve got maybe 100 head of cattle there that are just 
sitting there and waiting to be sold and auctioned off. Why isn’t 
there more emphasis and effort put into developing an 
agricultural economy in northern Saskatchewan? We speak 
about animal farming, Mr. Speaker, deer and elk. Again there’s 
no opportunity presented in that area. 
 
Let’s talk about construction, Mr. Speaker. For many years, 
northern Saskatchewan has had housing that has been 
developed. And today we look at the fact that nobody in these 
communities can afford to put the money up to get bonding to 
build houses in their own home community. So as a result, the 
construction industry was never fully developed. And when you 
have 10 or 15 houses being built in one particular community, 
the only people that could afford to build those houses are 
people from southern Saskatchewan that had the bonding and 
had the money in the bank. Northern contractors were unable to 
participate in that part of the construction industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at aquaculture  again a lot of fresh lakes; again no 
effort into trying to develop some kind of industry, you know, 
derived from either wild rice, or again I go back to the fish 
hatchery industry. There’s been very little effort in that regard. 
 
Again I look at the fact that most of the forests and the wood 
supply in northern Saskatchewan are committed to the Forest 
Management Licence Agreement for multinational companies 
that are operating in northern Saskatchewan. What happens 
now, Mr. Speaker, to local saw mills that could perhaps produce 
plywood or perhaps produce two by fours or two by sixes? It 
could create many jobs, sustainable jobs, over the future. And 
these small, community-based saw mills don’t have a hope in 
heck of surviving if they’re going to compete for the same 
wood supply that a multinational company has, with a legal 
document in its hand. 
 
Let’s look at communications, Mr. Speaker: technology, 
television, radio, the whole bit. Even that hasn’t had much 
involvement or support from government. Let’s look at the 
market gardens, Mr. Speaker  all kinds of opportunity. Why 
is it that the northern Saskatchewan communities, as far as 
Stony Rapids, get their vegetables and produce from B.C. 
(British Columbia) when they have all the land, a lot of land 
available, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So I can go on to a number of areas in which we can look at 
opportunities in northern Saskatchewan, but again the budget 
did not address that, Mr. Speaker. Again we have to get away 
from the philosophy that northern Saskatchewan is a problem 
area for the rest of us. The fact is northern Saskatchewan is part 
of Saskatchewan, and like anybody else in any other riding or 
any other constituency, my people also have the aims and 
aspirations for themselves and for their children. 
 
And these ideas I mention, Mr. Speaker, are just a few, and I 
know we have again about 50 million different other examples 
of how they could create an economy at the community level. 
 

I guess the big point here is that I believe northern 
Saskatchewan consists of 140,200 square miles of this province, 
approximately half the land mass of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s a lot of land. That’s a lot of opportunity. 
 
And yet at this day and age, Mr. Speaker, we still have high 
unemployment in northern Saskatchewan. We still have . . . 
And you know it’s not with pride I say that; not with pride that 
anybody says that, that we still have a lot of social and 
economic problems and we have a high level of welfare rates. 
 
But again you go to any parent and any guardian in northern 
Saskatchewan and they’ll tell you, no, we do not want our 
children on welfare. So give us a better solution by allowing us 
to participate in the development of the northern economy. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I did not hear that in this year’s budget, and this is 
one of the reasons why I was quite disappointed. 
 
I guess the other part of the question is, we hear various people 
talking about the northern development fund. We’re talking 
about the Northern Affairs Secretariat. We’re talking about all 
these different initiatives that have recently begun. 
 
One of the things that they’ve talked about was the CREDOs 
(community regional economic development organization), 
which I believe would be a regional economic development 
organizations. And one of the problems with the CREDOs, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they will have limited success. And that success 
is basically due to the initiative of local people. The reason why 
they’ll have limited success, Mr. Speaker, is first of all the 
funding is low  the funding is low. As well, there is no access 
to large tracts of land. 
 
You know, if you haven’t got access to land, Mr. Speaker, and 
all you have is just the limits of your boundary, your municipal 
boundary in which you can operate these CREDOs, you have 
no influence over land, no influence over water, no influence 
over the policies that affect the land and water around you. And 
all you have is your municipal boundary to develop an economy 
on a limited budget. It’s simply not going to do it. So again, the 
CREDOs may be a small, tiny part of the solution, Mr. Speaker. 
Clearly the larger issues have got to be addressed. 
 
I think when people ask me, you know, how about that 4 
million northern development fund that they established for 
northern Saskatchewan, well, Mr. Speaker, we hear of the 
hundreds of millions of dollars that the government puts into 
different companies in southern Saskatchewan. We hear of meat 
processing plants getting some grants. We hear of saw mills 
getting some grants. And we hear so many millions will create 
21 jobs, or so many millions will create 12 jobs. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in half the land mass of Saskatchewan we 
have as the North, and there’s approximately 25,000 people in 
northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we say because of 
your guy’s limited involvement in business, because of your 
limited skills in terms of job skills, we decided to put $4 million 
for 25,000 people in half the land mass of the province to help 
you with economic development. Well, Mr. Speaker, 4 million 
bucks basically comes up to about $60 per capita  $60 for  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

every man, woman, and child. Now if one community had 
access, let’s say for example, Patuanak, they got a population of 
200 people and you times that by the $60 per capita. That’s 
what? Twelve thousand bucks. Now what can a community of 
Patuanak that has a lot of aspirations in tourism do with 12,000 
bucks, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So really the budget didn’t announce any of those plans. It 
didn’t talk about a new, exciting initiative for northern 
Saskatchewan. It didn’t talk about revenue sharing. It didn’t talk 
about any of the above and that’s where basically the big 
problem is with this budget. 
 
I guess to continue on, Mr. Speaker, to more or less educate the 
House on northern Saskatchewan stats, in 1991 my home 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse led the province in growth for all 
villages. That was the 1986 . . . I’m sorry, the 1991 census. It 
indicated that for all the provinces in the community of . . . or 
sorry, all the villages in the community of Saskatchewan, 
Ile-a-la-Crosse led that particular year in growth. 
 
Now what you have in northern Saskatchewan is exactly a 
flip-flop from the southern rural centres, Mr. Speaker, where 
many of the rural communities have an ageing population. In 
northern Saskatchewan you have a very, very young population 
and when I was still living in Ile-a-la-Crosse and I was acting as 
their mayor, I noticed that 65 per cent of our population was 
under the age of 24 years of age. 
 
Now that’s a tremendous strain on the local municipal 
government, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about trying to develop 
some kind of strategy for the community. And what happens 
when you look at the fact that there’s been no commitment to 
training, there’s been no commitment to economic 
development, there’s been no commitment to social 
development, there’s been no commitment to highways, no 
commitment to health, no commitment to any new initiatives, 
you can sense and see the level of frustration that many 
northern people feel with this particular budget. 
 
(1915) 
 
Again I’ll refer to my past job as mayor, Mr. Speaker, of course 
in my home community, because a lot of that, you know, 
background of my history is being basically felt right 
throughout northern Saskatchewan. One of the big problem 
areas again in the North is to do with the lack of economic 
development strategies. That we’ve already addressed. 
 
The second thing is there’s been no effort, no effort with this 
government in cooperation with the communities, to do a 
comprehensive social and economic development strategy. Like 
how much longer must we continue on with the lack of 
approach in terms of dealing with the community problems? 
And again I refer back to the commitment that the government 
talks about to the northern communities, and it goes right back 
to the point  work with northern communities to implement a 
sustainable economic development plan to benefit all northern 
people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s been six years going on to seven years,  

and we’re still waiting, we’re still waiting. Is it the fact that the 
North hasn’t been loud enough? We haven’t been active 
enough? 
 
Well that’s the whole question that we have and I have for the 
House, is where are we going with all this stuff? Is there a plan? 
And I suspect as a result of the budget placed by the Finance 
minister that there is no plan, that there is no commitment to 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
If there was, it would have been clear and concise. We wouldn’t 
go back to a  excuse my language  but a measly $4 million 
fund for 25,000 people. We wouldn’t talk about sustainable 
economic development when we’re not looking at the 
traditional resource industries that we’re familiar with. Some of 
the examples is eco-tourism and fishing and wild rice and so on 
and so forth. 
 
So in essence, the comprehensive social and economic 
development strategy I speak about, Mr. Speaker, was not in 
any way, shape, or form mentioned in the budget. And this is 
what we need at the community level, community based, 
directed to the community, when it comes in northern 
Saskatchewan, so that they can make a difference for 
themselves. 
 
We’re not asking government to come in there and be the do-all 
and be-all, because we know that can’t work. It cannot work. So 
in essence, we’re saying allow us the means to develop our own 
plan. Allow us the means to develop a comprehensive strategy 
for 5, 10, 15, 20 years. Allow us the technical support to put 
these strategies down on paper and to implement them by 
simply giving us our fair share of the northern resources and the 
revenues that this government derives from northern 
Saskatchewan. That is the key point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again we basically identified the fact that we can’t have no 
control over the land. We can’t have no control over the training 
institutions. We can’t have no control over the systems that are 
set up to service the northern people. 
 
And our fourth problem that we have is with housing. Mr. 
Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan, there is no housing market. 
As a result, social program housing has come into northern 
Saskatchewan for the last 15, 20 years, thanks in part to the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government of the early ‘60s and 
the ‘70s, but as well to the federal government in the early ‘60s 
and the ‘70s. But, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan you 
have no housing market. So if you have a house that you spent 
80,000 or $90,000 building, it’s designed for, you know, for 
social housing. So what happens now if I get a house and I’m 
eligible for social housing and a few years later I get a job? 
Great, you know, that’s great for me; I get a job and I get to 
work. 
 
But then all of a sudden the government says, well because 
you’re working now, sir, 25 per cent of your income goes to 
that house. That’s the intent of the social housing program. 
Now if my wife gets a job as well, then she as well has to pay 
25 per cent of her gross income  not net  gross income. So 
here we are a working couple, have to pay 25 per cent of our  
  



706  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

income to house our family if it’s a government house. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is if you do a quick 
calculation and say we have an average salary of 1,500 each, 
you’re looking at anywhere between 6 and $700 per month for a 
house in a northern Saskatchewan community with no tax base 
and no housing markets. You, over a 25-year period of that 
mortgage, could easily pay $220,000, Mr. Speaker, or 
$210,000. Now this is a . . . this is just an average government 
house. 
 
Now on one hand we have the government saying, well we had 
to put in social housing because there is no housing markets in 
the North, but on the other hand if you work then you’re going 
to be penalized for working because this is not intended for 
working people. 
 
And I know many examples, Mr. Speaker, of people that have 
been working at the mine site, get decent salaries, get dinged at 
the end because they’re making decent money. So the system of 
disincentives when it comes to housing in northern 
Saskatchewan is very, very prejudiced against the working 
people. It is. It’s not encouraging people to work. 
 
So after awhile you look at the housing problems and it’s a 
no-win situation. Many times people say: well I can’t afford to 
work. I can’t afford to work because it’s just not worth it. If I 
started working and get off welfare, I got to start paying my 
own power bill, my own heating bill, my own phoning bill, my 
own medicine bill, my own food and all the utility bills, plus I 
got to pay on top of this 6 or 700 bucks a month for rent. It’s 
simply not possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in essence, really it’s an issue about respect, Mr. Speaker. 
Again northern Saskatchewan is not Prince Albert; it’s not 
Meadow Lake. Northern Saskatchewan is Uranium City, it’s 
Fond-du-Lac, it’s La Loche, it’s Pinehouse, it’s Patuanak, it’s 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
So housing has to be addressed, Mr. Speaker, and it wasn’t 
addressed in this budget. There was no new plans for any new 
housing construction. No initiatives to deal with the housing 
problems of the working people. No, you know, dazzling 
sideshow of what they’re going to do to help the current 
problems in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And to top it all off, when it comes to housing, there is no new 
plans for any new construction. And I’ve said in the House 
countless times, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that the North does 
lead when it comes to health concerns. It leads in TB 
(tuberculosis), it leads in cancers, it leads in all kinds of 
diseases because of the crowded conditions of northern 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Now members opposite may say, you know, a Liberal, is a 
Liberal, is a Liberal. But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, 
these are facts. These are true concerns. The result of 
overcrowding and housing in northern Saskatchewan, of people 
living in substandard housing, is greatly affecting the health of 
northern Saskatchewan people. And this is the land that has 
developed many job opportunities and many profits for  

governments. 
 
And the fact is, that when they talk about profits, northern 
Saskatchewan mining companies, and forestry companies, and 
tourism opportunities, they hire many, many people from 
Regina, from Saskatoon, from Prince Albert. I would hazard a 
guess, Mr. Speaker, as many as a thousand people may work in 
these northern mines from Regina or Saskatoon. It’s a thousand 
people making a living in Saskatoon, paying their mortgages 
and raising their families, based on northern resources. 
 
Now when you go to the backyard of northern Saskatchewan 
communities, what about us? We also want to be able to 
participate in the benefits derived from mining. We shouldn’t 
have to have people living in substandard housing. We 
shouldn’t have to have problems with health and disease 
because we’re living in crowded housing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we shouldn’t have working people penalized 
that are trying to derive a better life for their own children. And 
this is why the system of disincentives in northern 
Saskatchewan, when it comes to welfare and it comes to 
housing, has got to stop. And this budget did not address that, 
Mr. Speaker. It did not address it in any remote way possible. 
 
So I guess the third point is, I would encourage the government, 
in their future budgets, to look at a new strategy of turning those 
houses over to the local communities and deciding, what can 
you guys do with this housing stock? Arrears are piling up, 
renovations are not being made, new construction is not 
happening. And if the government can’t deliver, Mr. Speaker, 
then perhaps it’s time to give back the control of these houses to 
the local people in the local communities, so they can come up 
with their own solutions and have the government stop 
interfering with their initiative and their plans. And that’s the 
whole thing. 
 
A truly socialist government would empower communities by 
giving the control over assets that are in that community so they 
can come up with a long-term, sustainable plan for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can give you the horror stories of northern 
Saskatchewan when it comes to housing. I know many people, 
again, put insulation in windows during the wintertime because 
it’s too cold. Now I talk about substandard housing, Mr. 
Speaker. I talk about crowded conditions. I talk about elders, 
you know, having to live in homes that they can afford which 
sometimes aren’t very pretty, but they’re surviving. 
 
Now these are people, Mr. Speaker, that we should be 
respecting. These are people that have built a life for many 
people in northern Saskatchewan and southern Saskatchewan, 
and then when they get to a certain age, we treat them with very 
little respect and very little effort to try and at least have their 
last days in this world spent in a comfortable manner. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you want, and if any member wants, to 
challenge me on providing those lists and those names, I will 
certainly provide them. 
 
So again the point, when it comes to housing, it’s another  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

disincentive in northern Saskatchewan to create opportunity for 
the northern people, and nothing was mentioned in this budget. 
And this is the reason why there’s got to be a new and 
innovative approach when it comes to housing, and basically 
the answers lie with the communities. I don’t know how clear I 
could be in reference to that problem. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the road problems in 
northern Saskatchewan, another area that was not mentioned in 
the budget. And I read a letter and I got a number of letters from 
people from the Dillon area. We have in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, basically six roads that need to be repaired. We have 
the Garson Lake road; it’s a small community and he wants to 
be connected to the rest of Saskatchewan. It’s only got about 20 
kilometres of road to be built, Mr. Speaker, 20 kilometres there. 
 
Turnor Lake, we have 30 kilometres of road that needs to be 
fixed, and for many years they were promised that that road 
would be fixed and for many years, as I mentioned earlier, they 
were told, the people at Turnor Lake were told, your road is on 
the list. But as I mentioned before, they found out you can’t 
travel on a list, Mr. Speaker. A list is a list is a list. And that’s 
30 kilometres, so we have 50 kilometres of road. 
 
Then you look at Dillon. It connects three communities and 
1,200 people. They have 60 kilometres, Mr. Speaker, 60 
kilometres of road to be built there; that’s 110 kilometres. 
Patuanak, a community of 1,200 people, they have five or six 
wash-outs each year, Mr. Speaker, so that community is 
isolated and the people can’t travel on these roads. So that’s 80 
and 110 is 190. And the Pinehouse road needs about 80 
kilometres of road to be built, and that’s 270 kilometres. And 
then we have a small stretch into Canoe Lake, which of course 
is another 30 kilometres. 
 
So you add all that up, Mr. Speaker, and it’s really only about 
250 kilometres, that people want, of road to be fixed up. Not 
2,500 kilometres, Mr. Speaker, 250 kilometres. And that would 
serve seven communities that have for many years been 
promised, been promised and promised, that these roads would 
be fixed. And, Mr. Speaker, after 10, 20, 30, 40 years of 
northern development, these roads have not been fixed. 
 
Now I got letters from a number of students in one of the 
communities affected by the road problems and that’s the 
community of Michel Village. I read one letter out, Mr. 
Speaker, from a young lady, here in the House a couple of 
weeks ago and we talked about these problems. 
 
And one of the kids actually I talked to and he said, if I was the 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), I would fix these 
roads. And I said well, Mr. Speaker, I am the MLA and I wish I 
could fix these roads but really it’s a larger question than that. 
He said well  again this being a small child, he still didn’t 
understand  he insisted that the road be fixed because his 
parents wanted the road fixed; his cousins wanted the road 
fixed; his chief and his mayor wants this road fixed. 
 
So in essence, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to promise that 
roads be fixed and roads be built, then follow through with your  

promise. Again you look at the budget; nothing in there about 
roads, Mr. Speaker. Very little about roads. Northern 
Saskatchewan, very little about northern Saskatchewan roads. 
 
The sixth issue, Mr. Speaker, that was not addressed in the 
budget, which I feel you must discuss and talk about, is the land 
issue. I go back to the strong connection that the native 
community have with the land in northern Saskatchewan, and 
we talk about the incredible need to make people independent 
in northern Saskatchewan. They live in a system of 
disincentives, the dependency is high, and it’s not what they 
want. But what they need, Mr. Speaker, is they need access to 
land  they need access to land. 
 
(1930) 
 
I’ve got a family in Beauval that has been for many years trying 
to get ownership of a piece of land that they’ve farmed and 
they’ve raised cattle on. And for many years they wouldn’t give 
them ownership of the land. They said, we need 12 or $13,000 
to give you ownership of that land. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a family starting out in the infancy of this 
farm, 12 to $13,000 is hard to come by in northern 
Saskatchewan communities. But instead of us as the 
government saying we’ll charge you 12 or $13,000, what’s 
wrong with us saying as government, we’ll give you that land if 
you promise that you’re going to make every effort to become 
independent? So either you do something or you don’t. And 
that’s really the issue here, Mr. Speaker. So far we haven’t done 
anything. 
 
Now the rest of the communities, be it the Metis communities 
or the Indian bands, they recognize the value of land. If you 
haven’t got access to land, Mr. Speaker, as a people, then 
you’re not going to make any significant difference when it 
comes to the economic or social development of your own 
people. 
 
So land is such a critical issue, and it was not addressed in this 
budget. It was not spoken about in this budget. And really I 
think, Mr. Speaker, you have . . . I go back to the CREDOs. 
You can’t have any success if you haven’t got access to the land 
and the resources that that land holds. In northern 
Saskatchewan, people are the same. 
 
I like to compare it, Mr. Speaker, to the fact that if you’re a 
farmer and you have your yard and you have your fence and 
you have your cattle in your fence, and you’re told you guys 
can survive on this little plot of land, but we don’t want you 
guys out in those fields, you’re not going to harvest that grain, 
you’re not going to have your cattle feed on that hay, that, Mr. 
Speaker, is liking telling the farmers they basically have no 
future and that’s the same thing happening in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The people are told that you can operate within your 
municipality, but don’t go out on that land because that land is 
basically owned by the huge companies  it’s Crown land and 
you guys have no say on that land. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
basically what’s being said out there. So in essence, if you do  
  



708  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

want a really good comparison, I would use the farming 
comparison to that of a northern Saskatchewan community. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, land, without question, is one of the critical, 
critical deficiencies in development and economy in the North 
and this budget did not make any effort in addressing that 
particular problem. 
 
I now go back to revenue sharing again, Mr. Speaker. We 
talked with the . . . The point, our commitment to northern 
communities, and again  this is my third time I’m going to be 
saying it but I’ll say it again  work with northern people to 
develop new revenue-sharing arrangements for northern 
communities. Well, Mr. Speaker, the only revenue sharing that 
the community has seen is in the form of a welfare cheque. And 
that, Mr. Speaker, is a revenue-sharing scheme that nobody 
wants for themselves or for their future. 
 
Again, coming back from a municipal background, when I sat 
as the mayor in my home community, Mr. Speaker, we had all 
these problems. The role of a mayor in council in northern 
Saskatchewan is much, much more different than that of a 
southern municipality, Mr. Speaker. We worry about everything 
from health care, to housing, to economic development, to 
social development, to taxes, to garbage collection, and even 
dogs, Mr. Speaker. You know the mayor in many of these 
communities actually is a small king. He has all these 
responsibilities. 
 
And in my particular community we approached a class of 
ladies that were doing some human development work, and 
they’re there for eight months, and they asked me to come in 
and explain how the municipal structure worked in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. But before I got to the question, I asked 10 of 
them, what do you think the town gets each year from the 
government to operate this municipality with? And I got some 
people writing down 10 million; I got other people writing 2 
million  that was the lowest. The fact of the matter, Mr. 
Speaker, we got $360,000, as a community to operate that 
community, from the government. And the whole class was 
absolutely amazed. They were totally amazed at that meagre 
amount of money which we’re given to operate our community 
with was in fact so low. 
 
So really the impression out there, Mr. Speaker, is that these 
northern municipalities have tonnes of money coming to them. 
These northern municipalities have a lot of power and control 
and authority. These northern municipalities have all this great 
energy to make a difference to their community residents. 
 
The budget again doesn’t support the municipal governments in 
the North. In fact next year, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at a 
huge cut, a 20 per cent cut. Now how much more can we afford 
to cut back on these small municipalities that are trying their 
very best to make a difference to the people they serve? These 
are people that feel the impact of these cuts right at the 
community level. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan we haven’t got the opportunity to go 
back to our taxpayers because our tax base is non-existent. We 
can’t go to the, you know, to the average Joe Blow on the street  

saying well, we’re going to raise your taxes as a business 
person because we need more money. Well the guy can’t afford 
it; it’s a limited market. And I know every other community 
that’s small is going to be facing the pressure of this budget. 
 
So in reference to the . . . instead of working with the municipal 
governments to come up with an aggressive new renewal plan 
for municipal governments across this great province and in 
northern Saskatchewan, we in essence are again penalizing 
them. 
 
I also want to share some smaller communities who are having 
actually a tougher time, Mr. Speaker, than anybody else. The 
community of Patuanak, the community of Jans Bay, 
communities at Cole Bay, Turnor Lake, Michel Village  and 
these are just a few in my constituency  they’re having a 
number of problems with their water and sewer system. 
 
The government has a capital works program in place, Mr. 
Speaker, to try and put in water and sewer to the communities 
that are eligible in northern Saskatchewan, and certainly I 
commend the government for doing so. However, in the small 
community in the small municipality of Patuanak, you know, 
they have increased costs as a result of running this water and 
sewer system. I think they’ve got to charge each of their 
persons getting water and sewer something like 90 or $100 a 
month to make this thing pay off for itself. And again they want 
that from people that are largely on social assistance or from a 
depressed economy. 
 
So what happens to the meagre 60 or 50,000 that this 
municipality gets? Ninety per cent of it is eaten in maintaining 
the roads and making the water and sewer service exist and 
picking up garbage. And it’s touchy each month  month to 
month, Mr. Speaker, that’s how many of these northern 
municipalities operate. It’s not an easy job. 
 
So the big thing here is what does a community like Patuanak 
do? What did they expect from this budget? They expected a 
new initiative, a new plan to help them with their particular 
problem. 
 
And that’s a point, Mr. Speaker, is we’re forgetting the people 
that we’re supposed to serve. The whole system and the whole 
political spectrum has turned around in Saskatchewan. It’s gone 
flip-flop. It’s gone from people serving government as opposed 
to government serving people. Government and politics should 
be about service. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes Patuanak, Jans Bay, Cole Bay 
and all these other communities, these small communities in the 
North and the small communities in the South, are having an 
awfully difficult time providing service for the people because 
of the cuts that this government made and the fact that the 
budget did not address these particular problems. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, you look at the whole problem with the 
service to small communities in the North when it comes to 
municipal government  it’s not there. Again, either you do or 
you don’t. And, Mr. Speaker, it is not there. 
 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

The other point, Mr. Speaker, is on what wasn’t in the budget 
when it comes to northern Saskatchewan, is the fact that . . . 
Let’s look at the health care system in northern Saskatchewan. 
We have the community of La Loche, which has about 3,500 
people, Mr. Speaker, and they have trailers that have basically 
been lumped together and welded and a common roof set over 
them and this is your hospital. And this is your hospital. This 
serves your people. 
 
So I go visit in the hospital and I see seven or eight tiles taken 
off the common roof for fixing water and sewer breaks. I see an 
overworked staff. I see an underfunded health care system in 
that place. So what is that going to . . . The point that I make, 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to health  there was no initiative, 
no new initiative, no new approach in the budget when it comes 
to health care in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s the whole point, Mr. Speaker, is that again, if you 
say you’re going to be a compassionate government, you say 
you’re going to protect health care, you say you’re going to 
protect the social programs, then do it. Do it. And the first thing 
I’ll suggest we do is go for a visit in these northern 
communities. Again, it’s not a problem area; it’s part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So health care in northern Saskatchewan, when you look at 
again the whole west side of northern Saskatchewan and the 
Athabasca area, Mr. Speaker, for the whole Athabasca 
constituency, I have not got one mental health worker, Mr. 
Speaker, set up in these communities to help with mental health 
 not one. We had one, Mr. Speaker, but somebody with 
infinite wisdom decided to cut that position back. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is an area that’s economically 
depressed, and what do we do for health? We don’t give no 
mental health support; we give them old hospitals and trailers 
lashed together to serve as the health care centre. We don’t give 
them no control over the decisions regarding their health care. 
We don’t give them opportunity and equal access to some of the 
resources of northern Saskatchewan. We basically don’t figure 
they’re part of Saskatchewan. We figure they’re a problem area. 
And then we wonder why the cost of living in northern 
Saskatchewan, in both human costs as well as financial means, 
is always going up. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, you look at the justice system in northern 
Saskatchewan. In my particular community, as I mentioned to 
the Justice minister a number of times, nothing in the budget 
came up to talk about justice initiatives in northern 
Saskatchewan. We don’t want the whole Justice budget, Mr. 
Speaker; we want a portion of that budget so we can do things 
innovatively, things that will give us a better say in how justice 
is being delivered in these communities. 
 
The average court day, Mr. Speaker, in different communities 
will have the judge and the legal aid lawyers flying in from La 
Ronge. And they’ll hold court. They’ll deal with 20 or 30 
different cases that day. They’ll have lunch, of course, then 
they’ll fly back. And really in essence, that’s our justice system, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

And it’s just putting people through the cycle. There’s no 
innovative changes, no new policies. There’s no community 
consultation. There’s no aggressive moves to involve parents, 
or elders, or local people in decision making. There’s no effort 
to come there at least three or days before court to talk to people 
that are being charged in northern Saskatchewan. And yet that 
is justice, Mr. Speaker. And again the budget did not address 
the justice issues in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, the one great ray of hope, Mr. Speaker, is an education. 
I can’t say anything negative towards the education system in 
northern Saskatchewan, except that many times it’s 
under-funded. Because the schools in northern Saskatchewan is 
the one bright ray of hope, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look at the community schools in La Loche, the Dene High 
School and the Ducharme Elementary School. This is a haven 
for children to go to. The school system in this particular 
community is just doing a tremendous job, but you’re 
overworking that staff, Mr. Speaker, because of the economic 
situation in the North, the school being the only stop-gap 
measure that many of these kids look to for, not only 
development of skills and intelligence, but also as a sign of 
hope. So right throughout northern Saskatchewan, teachers and 
the school boards and the school system have been basically 
been saving this government’s hide when it comes to not 
addressing the social and economic problems of northern 
Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, these kids are growing up and 
we haven’t got much time. The schools can only do so much, 
but sooner or later the problem will surface. 
 
So in reference to the health and the justice and the educational 
system in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, what the people 
want is a greater control over that system. They want to have a 
say as to how that education dollar is being cut up and chewed 
up and spit out. They want to have a say on how that justice is 
being delivered in northern Saskatchewan. And above all else, 
they want to have an adequate system when it comes to health 
care. And this budget did not address that, Mr. Speaker, so 
therefore I can’t see any new effort being put in place when it 
comes to justice, health, or education. 
 
Now the other point is we talk about the northern development 
fund. We talk about the lack of economic and social 
development. I’d like to share a story with you, Mr. Speaker, 
and the . . . again in the community of La Loche. For many 
years a local group of women and children and men got 
together and they met on a regular basis. They asked 
government, time and time again, give us a rehabilitation centre 
for alcohol and drugs. And they met and they constantly met, 
and they constantly met with different officials. We need to 
have a rehabilitation centre so we can cure our own people. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now I don’t want to be a hypocrite here, Mr. Speaker. I still 
have the odd drink. But what I’m trying to emphasize here is, 
these people for years fought for a new rehab centre, a full-time 
rehab centre, so they can cure their own people. And the 
government, after hesitation and hesitation, come back and said, 
I’m sorry; there is no money. We have no money for your rehab  
  



710  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

centre. And less than a year later, Mr. Speaker, they built a 
brand-new police station. In less than a year and a half later, 
they built a brand-new liquor board store. 
 
Now you tally up the costs of these two particular buildings, 
and I think it came close to 3 million bucks, Mr. Speaker. They 
have no money for rehab services. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, you talk about all this stuff and either 
you’re going to help a people or you’re not going to help a 
people. Decide  it’s A or B. It’s not . . . There’s no C between 
A and B, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now the latest effort, if you look at the management Act, 
the forestry management Act as being presented just recently, 
there is more and more control being given to the department of 
. . . or the Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management in terms of what you can harvest from the forest. 
Water is becoming a resource that could be very valuable in due 
time. And you look at . . . for many years the people that have 
been collecting herbs and collecting berries and going there and 
collecting wildlife, firewood, and the whole bloody bit. 
 
Now this new Act may be putting more constraints on the 
people in these communities. So is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
you talk about the frustration that people have in northern 
Saskatchewan, and the frustration that I have with this budget, 
that it doesn’t do anything for anybody? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I think this big problem we 
have is . . . again I go back to the management Act and I shared 
a couple of stats with you. And this is where you can go, and I 
talked earlier, when I started my point, Mr. Speaker, is pick a 
card  any card. You pick roads; there’s problems. You pick 
housing, and there’s problems. You pick economic 
development, and there’s problems. You talk about land issues; 
there’s problems. Revenue sharing; there’s problems. 
 
I’ve got the easiest job in the world as an MLA because I have 
so many problems I could bring up to this House. You know, 
and this is the point, is I could be up here every day talking for 
an hour, an hour and a half. Because the big problem, Mr. 
Speaker, is these issues have not been addressed. The 
point-blank truth is these issues have been ignored. And when 
we talk about turning our backs on the northern Saskatchewan 
people, this is exactly what I’m talking about. 
 
Now we go back to some earlier points that were raised, Mr. 
Speaker, about the forestry Act. And you’ll notice how 
effectively I’m killing time here when I’m searching for a 
paper. 
 
As we look at the northern . . . some of the social issues of the 
North, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan has 25 . . . or 21 
per cent of all families headed by single parents. The provincial 
average, Mr. Speaker, is 12 per cent. Where is the support for 
the single parents in this budget, Mr. Speaker, recognizing the 
tremendous costs of running a household and feeding a family 
in northern Saskatchewan? Where’s the support for the single  

parent? There is no support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan has the third highest number of teen mothers. 
Northern Saskatchewan has three times that average, Mr. 
Speaker. So really in essence, the population is young, and yet 
we’re continually ignoring this particular group and not doing 
anything innovative and exciting or dynamic when it comes to 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
In terms of northern Saskatchewan, the provincial system has 
32 schools and 29 communities, and the federal system has 17 
band-controlled schools. And only 14 of the 49 northern 
schools offer grade 12 programing. And the average high 
school completion rate is 24 per cent. Are these stats that are 
becoming of the efforts of the teacher, or are these stats really 
an indication of the economic and social problems of northern 
Saskatchewan? The teachers are doing their share, but they’re 
fighting a losing battle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess in essence you look at what I think are the solutions, 
Mr. Speaker, is first of all you involve all the northern 
Saskatchewan communities in northern development. In my 
particular constituency, there’s the industry of forestry starting 
to develop at a rapid pace. And with all due credit to the Indian 
bands in my constituency, they have basically gained part 
ownership of the forest industries that operate in our particular 
area. And I applaud their efforts, and I think they’re doing a 
tremendous job. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the Metis communities and the 
non-aboriginal communities of that particular area have also 
been impacted and affected by the forestry industry. Many 
fishermen and many trappers and many people that enjoyed the 
forestry no longer have that option. They can’t go and sit in 
their cabin and walk for miles and miles in forests when all the 
forests are gone. 
 
So what happens now is, because you exclude one group in any 
region, Mr. Speaker, you create animosity between all groups. 
And we, as a Metis community, don’t want to follow that 
particular path. We respect and recognize what the treaty bands 
have achieved for themselves. We certainly envy what effort of 
control they have over their lives and what the economic 
achievements that they have accomplished. But we would like 
to be treated the same, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to northern 
Saskatchewan. Don’t forget the Metis communities in northern 
Saskatchewan when it comes to allowing them to participate in 
the economy or allowing them to become owners of some of the 
resource industries operating in our backyards. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we hear a lot about land claims. You hear 
a lot about Metis rights. You hear a lot about the Metis Act. 
And yet we see nothing in this particular budget that even 
remotely suggests that we’re going to consult with these groups 
that come up with a new and innovative way. There’s nothing 
in there that even suggests that there will be an effort to change 
the things I speak about today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, looking at all these things  we talk about the 
budget that isn’t basically there for northern Saskatchewan 
people; it isn’t there for the rest of the Saskatchewan people,  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

and certainly you know I’m concerned with that. 
 
Okay, Mr. Speaker, just again I just want to apologize to the 
House. I did make an error when I said we had 25,000 people; 
we actually have 34,000 people in northern Saskatchewan. So 
that’s going to knock down the economic development dollars 
that I spoke about on a per capita basis. 
 
We cover one-half of the province, abundance of resources, and 
as well, now I hear that they are now test drilling for natural gas 
in north-western Saskatchewan. Natural gas, Mr. Speaker. And 
we again are travelling on inferior roads; we’re living in 
substandard housing. We’re largely excluded from northern 
development. We don’t have any ownership whatsoever in 
terms of the systems that operate. 
 
The spending priorities of this government continues to ignore 
the municipal efforts of self-help. No issues are being addressed 
when it comes to land. No issues are being addressed when it 
comes to gaining greater control over social services, justice, 
and the list goes on. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I urge this government to rethink 
their strategy when it comes to northern Saskatchewan. You 
guys have forgotten what it is to live in northern Saskatchewan, 
but there are people up there and they really have strong 
aspirations. We have to put extra effort in realizing their dreams 
as well. They’re part of this province  there’s no question 
about that  so treat them as part of this province, not a 
problem. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker  I am going to pause for a drink of 
water here and . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I just wanted 
to add as well, the reason why we had to have a different 
approach is when this government announced that they will 
protect social programs, I applauded that effort deep in my 
heart. I said it’s very important that as a society we protect our 
weakest member. But again, you know, the anger welled up 
inside me, because are we really coming up with a solution by 
ignoring people and hearing what they have to say when it talks 
about a new strategy? And if I was the Economic Development 
minister for a day and I had 4 or 5 million in social services 
being spent in the community and I was going to put in a 
million dollars or so from my department, I’ll go to the 
community and say look, listen, I got $6 million here. What can 
we do to develop an economy here for you guys? How could 
you help out your fishing industry? How could we help you 
train construction workers? How could we help you with your 
tourism? How could we help with your road building course? 
 
And that’s the whole trick here, Mr. Speaker, is using our 
money wisely  doing things that will help people come up 
with innovative ways to help themselves. As government, we 
don’t tell them what to do. We’re there to simply facilitate and 
support. 
 
And so basically I ask the government, and I urge the 
government, and I even beg the government, to kindly reaffirm 
their support with northern Saskatchewan. These social cuts that 
recently they’ve blamed on the federal government, really they 
shouldn’t be blaming the federal government but they  

should looking at them because they’re caught with their pants 
down. Because all of a sudden they got less for social 
programing, but they wouldn’t have to have social program 
dollars if they had economic development dollars put in their 
10, 15 years ago. 
 
So again I go back to the issue of sustainable development of 
economies that have local control and local businessmen 
developing and controlling those particular income. 
 
So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I will not belabour the points here 
any further. I want to say that the northern people do not say 
spend more money, Mr. Speaker. They say spend that money 
wisely, very wisely. Avoid duplication, Mr. Speaker. Protect the 
school system because that’s saving northern Saskatchewan. 
We ask the government to be fair in your approach and heed the 
people’s advice. Serve the people. That’s what politics is all 
about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can you be fair and consistent in spending? Yes you can. Can 
you reduce taxes? Perhaps not now but plan for it two, or three, 
or four years from now and you can. Can you balance the 
budget, Mr. Speaker? Municipal governments across 
Saskatchewan have been doing it for years and years and years. 
Some have done it without increasing their taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can you reduce the debt? Yes you can, Mr. Speaker, and these 
are what northern Saskatchewan people are saying. You can do 
this if you have more people living in Saskatchewan, more 
people working, and listen more to the people of the North 
when they come up with these ideas. 
 
The North leads, Mr. Speaker, and therefore I cannot support 
the budget presented in this legislature. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker; you caught me off 
guard there. I was told the other day that great speeches do not 
have to be long; in fact that the Gettysburg Address was only a 
page and a half. This isn’t a great speech, Mr. Speaker, but it 
does have something in common with the Gettysburg Address. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been told that Canada is the best country in 
the world, and we’ve been told that Saskatchewan is the best 
province in that country. So it should follow therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is probably the best budget in the world as it’s 
presented by this government. There are those that don’t agree 
with that in this House obviously. They have offered us many 
options and they’ve offered us alternatives. But I don’t think 
they’ve stopped to add up the cost of those alternatives and 
those options and what they would have deleted to make that 
budget work. 
 
(2000) 
 
During the Throne Speech debate which was presented to us 
and spoke of opportunities for changes, Mr. Speaker, I talked 
about changes being a vehicle to get us from the past to the 
future. Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget is the engine that will 
drive that vehicle and it will drive it into the 21st century and  
  



712  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

get us there very effectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate part of this budget is that we have 
to run it on gas and not jet fuel. The former administration, Mr. 
Speaker, used up all the jet fuel flying high, and I think we can 
take that literally, that they were flying high. But even on a gas 
engine, Mr. Speaker, this budget does preserve the priorities of 
the people of Saskatchewan. The people wanted health, 
education, and social programs preserved. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have done that for all the people of Saskatchewan no matter 
where they live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have done that through restructuring, 
streamlining, eliminating duplication of services that can be 
provided by other agencies such as the banks and the credit 
corporations. This gives us the ability to deliver services more 
effectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are those here that criticize this budget, even 
some right here in this House, Mr. Speaker. But a wise old 
constituent once told me there are three kinds of people in the 
world  those that can, do; those that can’t, teach; and those 
that can’t do either, criticize. And, Mr. Speaker, we know where 
that dividing line is here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Ward:  Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
don’t have to criticize, thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
support this budget that preserves the quality of life and gives 
us the freedom to choose and control our future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to take part in the debate on this year’s 
budget speech. I had sincerely hoped that I would 
wholeheartedly be able to offer my support for the 1996-97 
provincial budget. Unfortunately, this is just not possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have spent the past few months listening to 
this NDP government tell us that they are consulting the public. 
We all know that decisions that affect all people of 
Saskatchewan have been predetermined long before people 
have been consulted. People see through this government. They 
know exactly what is going on. They are tired of it, and they are 
furious. You can be sure that they will not vote NDP again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish that I did not have to go back to my 
constituents and hear of their total disappointment. I wish that I 
could tell them that this government had some respect for the 
people of rural Saskatchewan, and I wish that I could tell them 
that things are going to be okay. However, I can’t. I wish that 
the Finance minister and the rest of her party would have 
listened to the common sense advice given by all the people of 
Saskatchewan  to the seniors in their wisdom, to the concerns 
of the people of the North, to the concerns of farm 
communities. But I just do not believe that anything that this 
government has been told by the people of Saskatchewan has 
sunk in. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this government has spent the last few months 
warning the people of Saskatchewan of the dreaded cuts from 
the federal government. The provincial government warned that 
things will be bad, and then they come out with a budget that is 
nothing but devastating. This NDP government criticized the 
Tories when they were in power for the increase in the 
provincial sales tax. But since they came to power in 1991, the 
NDP government too has increased our provincial sales tax. 
This government places the blame on everyone else and then 
goes out of its way to avoid the issues at hand. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, small-business owners in 
particular, told this government that the current tax policy is 
stifling. They have told this government that it is very hard to 
make a business profitable in this province due to the extremely 
high taxes. Has anything been done? Of course not. But the 
Finance minister insists that they have listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know who she was talking to, but it 
definitely was not the people of rural Saskatchewan, nor was it 
the small-business owners that provide so many jobs for the 
people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this government continues to cut essential 
services, which it claims are the fault of my federal cousins, the 
government coffers are opened up for many less essential 
expenditures. While welfare recipients continue to live below 
the poverty line, the NDP cabinet has increased, along with an 
increase in deputy ministers and staff. 
 
Prior to the budget, people in Humboldt and the surrounding 
areas had hopes of an announcement in the budget that 
Highway 368 may be rebuilt. It made good sense to them that 
this government would see the value in this highway in 
promoting economic development. 
 
These people had good, common sense suggestions. It would 
help the towns around Humboldt; it would help the safety of 
school buses on the road, of ambulances on the road, and 
general safety overall. And it would help economically for all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we hear that the highway maintenance depot in Humboldt 
will be closing in July. People are discouraged with this kind of 
irrational judgement. 
 
While this government continues to waste money and 
contribute to political patronage appointments, people like Jack 
Messer are getting pay increases plus shameful perks. These 
pay increases and perks, amounting to close to $200,000, turn 
most people’s stomachs, especially when these pay increases 
provide no contribution to the economic development of the 
province. 
 
Where is the justice, Mr. Speaker? Where is the equality for all 
people of Saskatchewan? Many companies are suffering 
through wage and hiring freezes. The provincial government 
hires more staff, and appointees getting wage hike after wage 
hike. 
 
I wonder if this government realizes the full impact of its 
actions on the people of rural and urban Saskatchewan today  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

and in the future. I wonder if this government sees the damage 
that is done to rural Saskatchewan every time a local Crop 
Insurance office or highway depot is closed. And I wonder if 
this government sees the effect that closing schools has on not 
only the children involved but on entire communities. 
 
This NDP government sees Regina as the centre of the 
province. Not only is it not geographically the centre, Mr. 
Speaker, but it is not socially, economically, or 
demographically the centre of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are people from Ile-a-la-Crosse to Estevan who feel the 
effects of this budget. But I again wonder if this government 
has ever thought once about these people; about the people who 
elected them to represent their concerns. 
 
This budget contains absolutely nothing that will help the 
situation in rural Saskatchewan. The number of food banks and 
social assistance dependants is rising in rural Saskatchewan as 
well as in urban Saskatchewan. But nothing is being done to 
change the trend. 
 
The Finance minister and her entire party knows full well that 
more needs to be done to help the people of this province who 
are in desperate need of becoming more self-sufficient. Yet 
there is no indication of factors that contribute to an 
environment to create economic growth. 
 
Possibly this government believes it to be more beneficial to 
them to perpetuate a bureaucratic system that serves the 
bureaucracy but does not serve to enhance the well-being of the 
people of our province. 
 
To sum it up, this 1996-97 provincial budget provides very little 
for Saskatchewan’s poor. It provides fewer funds for the 
training that people need to get off welfare. This has been done 
through the cuts to New Careers training. But this government 
has somehow found more money to pay for the administration 
of Social Services in Saskatchewan. 
 
I firmly believe that the people of Saskatchewan did not tell this 
government to cut training funds and increase administrative 
costs. But the Finance minister still insists that she has listened 
to the people of Saskatchewan. Yes, the federal government has 
been blamed time and time again for the financial woes of this 
province. And the former Progressive Conservative 
administration has been blamed for the situation we are in 
today. 
 
But the time has come for the current NDP administration to 
take responsibility for their actions. They have received 
windfall revenues from natural resources, gaming, taxation. 
They should have great financial resources, plenty to provide 
the essential services needed in this province. But obviously 
money is being used in wasteful manners that will not help the 
province. 
 
We teach our children to accept responsibility for their actions, 
Mr. Speaker. We teach our employees and staff members to 
take responsibility for their work and actions in the workplace. 
And it is now time that we teach our government to take  

responsibility for its actions and the effects that those actions 
have on all members of our society. 
 
The Finance minister, in talking about this budget, mentions a 
spirit of confidence as this province prepares to enter the 21st 
century. I ask the minister to find that confidence in rural 
Saskatchewan, in cases like Humboldt, where the highway 
depot is being closed and the Social Service office is being 
downsized. I ask her to find the spirit of confidence in northern 
Saskatchewan, where unemployment still sits at 70 to 80 per 
cent in some areas for much of the year. I ask her to find a spirit 
of confidence among the 25,000 children in this province who 
depend on social assistance to survive. 
 
Where is the hope for these people, Mr. Speaker? Where is it? 
And where is the basis for a confident generation that will be 
entering the workforce in the 21st century? What does this 
budget do for our children who should be running this province 
in the 21st century? 
 
The Finance minister said in her speech, and I quote: 
 

People told us they want the security that comes from jobs 
and opportunities. 

 
Of course that is what they want. That is what we all want. Yet 
we see Crop Insurance offices being closed, highway depots 
being closed; stifling forestry legislation is imposed that 
threatens the thriving forestry industry in the province. There 
are no opportunities arising from office closures in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget, as stated by the Finance Minister, 
prepares Saskatchewan for the new century by delivering on our 
province . . . promises. Well I think the government will 
understand if I have a hard time believing that any promises 
made by this NDP administration will be delivered. The 
Premier himself has been quoted as saying that all election 
promises are on hold. 
 
This government has promised to eliminate child poverty in its 
first term. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are more children 
depending on social assistance today than there were in 1991 
when the NDP government came to power. This is not 
something that can be blamed on the former Tory 
administration or on the federal government. I challenge this 
NDP government to take some responsibility for their actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government says it will solve the dilemma of 
so many people needing social assistance. They put out a paper 
on reform. Mr. Speaker, we have had to listen to the Premier 
and the members opposite speaking about the dawning of a new 
day. Day in and day out, we watched the members opposite 
applaud themselves on their record of good government and 
innovative planning. Yet all we see are broken promises and a 
lack of focus on the direction their government plans to take the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear the Premier and his colleagues brag about 
doing things the Saskatchewan way, and nowhere is this more 
evident in the Minister of Social Services’s apparent pride in  
  



714  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

what they call social service reform. We hear of workfare and 
learnfare as though it were something new and different. And 
oh, remember that we, meaning they, the government, do it the 
Saskatchewan way, not the Alberta way or the Tory way, but 
the NDP way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much to the consternation of NDP followers, and I 
chance to say the member for Saskatoon Eastview, the former 
minister of Social Services, Saskatchewan’s plan for which the 
members opposite now take credit was begun under the 
expertise and direction of the current deputy minister when 
Grant Schmidt and the Tories reigned. It was undertaken by the 
same deputy minister while he was assistant deputy in Alberta’s 
Tory government and refined by the same deputy minister upon 
his return to Saskatchewan upon the election of the NDP 
government in 1991. 
 
And this is what we now have, the same as Alberta; the same as 
Alberta. The Minister of Social Services denounced only two 
weeks ago that very program. So much for 
made-in-Saskatchewan NDP solutions and reforms such as 
workfare and learnfare. The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan follows Alberta’s way all too often. Why not 
emulate Alberta’s tax break, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(2015) 
 
I would like to point out that this government’s goal to 
completely ruin rural Saskatchewan is going to have a 
detrimental effect on Saskatchewan as a whole. Our strong 
agriculture economy does not flourish from downtown Regina 
office buildings. Our potash and uranium mines do not depend 
solely upon Saskatoon for employees. 
 
Our forestry industry focus on the North for its prosperity. By 
implementing policies and legislation to stifle these industries, 
this government is in effect stifling the entire province and not 
just the rural and northern areas. We will all have to answer in 
the future to the current disruption and dissemination of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I firmly believe that this government has no foresight with 
respect to the impacts that this budget has, and its subsequent 
policies will have, on the future of Saskatchewan. If the 
government did have this kind of foresight, I firmly believe that 
it would be a lot more careful when it considers the cuts that 
have been made, and continue to be made, in our rural areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an MLA who represents a rural constituency, I 
may be more sympathetic to the concerns of those people  to 
the concerns that obviously fall on deaf ears in this party. Mr. 
Speaker, I see the effects of this government’s policies and 
fiscal problems every day in my constituency. Why do things 
have to happen, like closing of highway depots? Why? Spell out 
the savings to the people in Humboldt; help them to understand 
why. Give some rational reasoning to those families who are 
being torn apart because of these actions. 
 
How is rural Saskatchewan supposed to be financially viable 
when all the job creating and providing opportunities are being 
transferred out of rural Saskatchewan? The most recent  

example of this is the Whitespruce Treatment Centre in 
Yorkton. This alcohol and substance abuse treatment facility 
provides services for adults and youths from across 
Saskatchewan as well as from Manitoba and Alberta. It is one 
of the finest facilities of its kind. Whitespruce employs 45 staff 
members in Yorkton. This spins off to 45 more families living 
in and around Yorkton  children attending schools in the 
surrounding areas and money being spent in the Yorkton area. 
 
Well the NDP government has decided to close the Whitespruce 
facility in Yorkton and transfer the services it provides to 
Calder Centre in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, this does not only 
mean a loss of 45 jobs to the Yorkton area, it also means the 
loss of 45 families. The children will no longer attend those 
schools; the spouses of the Whitespruce employees will not any 
longer be employed in Yorkton; and money will no longer be 
injected into Yorkton’s economy. 
 
This dissemination of rural Saskatchewan has effects that 
trickle through all aspects of our province’s society and 
economy. Things do not occur in a vacuum in any province or 
country. Changes to legislation, cuts to social programs, 
financial problems, all affect every aspect of life in 
Saskatchewan. I am not saying that these changes or some 
changes should not be made. That would be ludicrous. But this 
government needs to look at the outcomes, good and bad, of the 
projects that it wishes to implement. Cuts to one area of social 
services will inevitably affect all other areas of social services 
and the people who depend on them. 
 
In 1987 when this NDP government was the official opposition, 
a four-member task force was formed to conduct a public 
review on a need for changes to social services in 
Saskatchewan. This study was conducted by talking to people 
of all areas and all income levels of our province, and to find 
out what was needed most and to gain some insight into how 
social services affect our rural and urban communities. 
 
A document was put together in 1987 that contained some very 
good recommendations and some very good insights into the 
problems facing social service recipients. These problems 
continue to exist even today. It is obvious to me, Mr. Speaker, 
that the NDP Party heard the people of Saskatchewan in 1987; 
they just did not listen carefully to what was being said. Had 
they taken the time to listen to the concerns of the people it 
would not have taken them four years in government to come 
out with a discussion paper that is in fact not going to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan need an environment 
based on empowerment of people at the local level. Rural 
Saskatchewan needs to be empowered to create jobs at the local 
level and not to be torn apart by office closures and highway 
depot relocation. To add to the problems facing rural 
Saskatchewan today, we have excessive taxation, high utility 
rates, and the loss of services at local levels. The budget does 
nothing to address these concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the financial aspect of government does not 
operate independently of the rest of society. This budget affects 
all areas of life. Most importantly, it affects the social programs 
and problems that are already so prevalent in society today. 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

Mr. Speaker, as a province Saskatchewan faces many social 
problems that need to be addressed. One of these problems that 
is growing at an alarming rate is teen pregnancy. This is a 
symptom of a much larger problem, the problem of the lack of 
adequate educational and social programs for the province’s 
young people. Even though Saskatchewan has one of the 
highest teen pregnancy rates in Canada and northern 
Saskatchewan has a teen pregnancy rate three times higher than 
the rest of the province, it surprised me greatly when there was 
not one mention of the problems that teen parents face in this 
government’s discussion paper, Redesigning Social Assistance. 
This is especially disturbing since single moms and young 
families make up the majority of food bank users. 
 
Teen pregnancies cannot be viewed in isolation. It is a symptom 
of a larger economic problem in Saskatchewan. The negative 
consequences of youth sexual activity cost the province about 
$1.9 million a year, most of this going to social assistance 
payments as no one will argue that teen parents are at a 
disadvantage in finding work due to the often lower level of 
education, less work experience, and the constant and 
ever-increasing demands of parenthood. The quality of life that 
our young people experience depends on the social conditions 
in which they live, and the social conditions in which they live 
depend upon the economic conditions of society. 
 
Due to the fact that this budget will do nothing to enhance and 
bolster the workforce in this province, the social conditions of 
our young people will continue to deteriorate, as it has over the 
entire mandate of this NDP government. 
 
Teen pregnancy is not the only problem on the rise in rural 
Saskatchewan. Family breakdown, child and spousal abuse, as 
well as drug and alcohol abuse, are all on the rise in rural 
communities; that is, in communities that do not have the 
services to work with the people who need it the most. There is 
not only a lack of social workers, there is also a drastic shortage 
of crisis shelters for abused women and their families. 
 
There is a Social Services office in Humboldt. For the past few 
weeks everyone has been on edge waiting for the axe of the 
budget to fall. This week it has been confirmed that one child 
service worker has had her job cut from full-time hours to less 
than part-time. She will be working only two days a week. In a 
rural area that is already short of social services and support, 
cutting another position is detrimental to our community. Not 
only will this woman and her family suffer financially due to 
the cut in hours and wages, but the entire community will suffer 
due to the loss of vital service. 
 
This woman may choose to stay in Humboldt. But she also may 
choose to move into a more urban centre in an effort to find 
full-time work. So one more family leaves rural Saskatchewan, 
one more service is lost, and the chance of recruiting a qualified 
social worker to rural Saskatchewan for less than part-time 
work while carrying a full-time case-load is slight. 
 
I would like to stress today that Humboldt is not the only rural 
area affected by these cuts. Towns and villages all across 
Saskatchewan are suffering in the wake of drastic cuts to all 
sorts of programs. 

The problem with the lack of funding for social services affects 
urban Saskatchewan as much as it does rural Saskatchewan. For 
several weeks now, news stories have been concentrating on the 
problem of child prostitution in our province. Over the past 
several months, the Saskatoon city police and the Egadz street 
kids centre have been working hard to get kids off the streets. In 
March of last year, it was estimated that there were at least 50 
child prostitutes working in Saskatoon’s inner-city streets. 
Juvenile prostitution in Saskatoon makes up about one-quarter 
of that city’s sex trade. This is an outrageous number and is 
totally unacceptable. 
 
Last week Regina city police estimated about 100 kids are 
working as prostitutes. We cannot let this continue, Mr. 
Speaker. There is no reason that a province as viable and as 
economically sound as this one should let its children work on 
the streets. How could we let this problem get so out of hand? 
 
Don’t let anyone tell you that child prostitution is an isolated 
problem. It stems from poverty in our larger centres due to the 
lack of social programing and education. It also stems from 
social and economic problems in rural Saskatchewan. Kids 
move to the city looking for a better way of life, and they end 
up on the streets. We must all work together to find solutions to 
these types of social problems that are plaguing our young 
people. Pretending that the problem does not exist is an 
irresponsible reaction to an uncomfortable situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government desperately needs to get its 
priorities in order. Not only are welfare case-loads increasing, 
but so too is the dependency on food banks. The number of teen 
pregnancies is on the rise in Saskatchewan, as is the number of 
street kids. I ask the government, where are your priorities? The 
children of our province should be of utmost importance to this 
government, yet little is being done to ensure that they grow up 
in a stable and loving environment. Of course it is not the role 
entirely of government to give parenting and self-esteem 
classes, but should it not be the role of government to provide 
appropriate program funding in areas that are so desperately 
needed? 
 
Apart from the fact that the number of transition houses in 
Saskatchewan is inadequate in comparison to the number of 
women and children who need them each year, but the number 
of child support workers is dwindling as well. Through this 
budget, half of the funding to the Saskatoon Family Support 
Centre has been reallocated. This means that four supervisory 
positions in Saskatoon have been eliminated, along with two 
front-line workers. 
 
These front-line workers work with the domestic abuse 
outreach program that worked with abused women and 
children. One of the positions was occupied by an aboriginal 
woman who works with aboriginal abuse cases. The other 
woman works with immigrant women who have been abused. 
Now I ask this government, if they in fact are supporting 
aboriginal cause, if they in fact are supporting everyone in this 
province, why in fact would they take these kind of measures? 
 
Another position that has been abolished is a child care 
position. This government claims that the money from this  
  



716  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

abuse program is being reallocated to an inner-city project that 
is yet to be defined. So the child care position has been 
abolished, leaving children from abusive homes without a 
means of support. I wonder again if the government has fully 
assessed the impact that this will have on our society. 
 
This shift in money will have a detrimental effect on abused 
women who will no longer have any place to go. According to 
Stats Canada, one in four women have been abused, that is 
physically or sexually abused. This does not include emotional 
or psychological abuse. This tells me that Saskatchewan women 
are in a desperate situation. We need to be educating people on 
a continual basis about the causes and effects of abuse on men, 
women, and their children. 
 
This government should be allocating money to transition 
homes and educational programs instead of appointing friends 
as highly paid presidents of Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, 
the priorities of this government are out of whack. One 
transition house in Saskatoon turns away almost twice as many 
families a year as it accepts. This should tell us all that there is a 
demand for the service; there is a need, a very important need, 
to be able to help battered women and their children in times of 
desperation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will close with one final remark. This budget is 
not a budget that has given any hope to the poor, to the people 
of rural Saskatchewan, to the women who depend on transition 
houses in times of need. This government has done its best to 
ignore the social problems facing us all each day, and it is time 
that the government opens its eyes to the world around it. Stop 
ignoring the real issues and get down to the nitty-gritty in terms 
of programing. Our future in the new century will be better for 
it. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to congratulate the member from Athabasca for his 
comments on the budget, and to state unequivocally that it’s the 
first time since 1991, in this House, that I’ve heard so many 
important comments made about northern Saskatchewan. And it 
was most educational, and I hope that people throughout the 
province were hearing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m here to make comments about budget ’96 and 
please let me begin by commending the government for so 
carefully explaining its intentions  its intentions to cut back 
on spending during the coming fiscal year. And it is only fair of 
course that those who depend on government funding, to have a 
clear understanding of what they can expect in the coming year. 
But I do want to remind people that intentions are intentions in 
this case, because the cuts in spending are for the coming year, 
Mr. Speaker, and they are estimates of what they intend to do, 
not what they have done. 
 
I should like too to commend this government for intending to 
maintain its funding of education and for other social programs 
for the coming year. Indeed it intends to increase its spending  

on education, on training and employment, by almost $11 
million, while its spending on health care and social services 
each falls by less than $8 million. I’m sure we all believe there 
are more cuts than that to come. 
 
The government should also be commended for showing a 
surplus of $600,000 in the General Revenue Fund for the fiscal 
year just past, 1995-96. Unfortunately it had promised much 
more  a $24 million surplus in that fund last year at this very 
time. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we must not be misled by budget numbers. 
And I’m going to spend some time using the government’s own 
documents in explaining why that is. They are forecasts and 
they are estimates  that’s what budget numbers are  based 
on wish lists of politicians and wish lists of government 
administrators. They are not the cold, hard facts of reality. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, budget ’96 shows that during the 
fiscal year just ended, 1995-96, this government added  and 
I’d like there to be a pause here for people to grab onto their 
desks  this government added $956 million to the provincial 
debt. Now where did I get that number, Mr. Speaker? Well I got 
it from the Saskatchewan Public Accounts, 1994-95, page 77, in 
budget ’96. 
 
We are almost $200 million deeper in debt now than we were 
just two short years ago. And it means that on Sunday last  
now just think of this  Sunday last, Mr. Speaker, on March 
31, every family of four in our province owed $3,824 more than 
it did on March 31 of 1995. 
 
Even worse, Mr. Speaker, even worse, this government has 
added over a billion dollars to the debt of our province since 
March 31, 1992. And where does this come from, Mr. Speaker? 
Well it comes from the Public Accounts for various years, and 
from the summary financial statements as well as from the 
statements, from the government’s own statements, on the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 
Now that is more than $1,000 more debt for every child, every 
woman and man this province has since the NDP formed 
government in 1991. Now that’s a lot of debt for the people of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. It is  what? Well it’s four months’ 
groceries for a family of four. It’s a summer holiday that 
perhaps people have not taken in some time. It’s the down 
payment on a house for a new family. It’s a year of children’s 
clothes in the family. The difference between going to work in 
an old car rather than replacing it with something safer and 
cheaper to maintain. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, by Sunday this week, this government had 
increased the total debt of our province to over $14 billion, and 
that too is from page 77 of their own document. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s over $14,000 per person  more than $56,000 for a 
family of four. And my goodness, really when you think of that, 
that’s the equivalent of two years of salary for a lot of families 
in our province. 
 
But that’s not all. This government is unable to bring its habits 
of tax and spending, tax and spending, under control. Spending  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

grew by $120 million during the fiscal year that just ended. 
Revenue went up by only $21 million. And where did that come 
from, Mr. Speaker? Well I happened to get that from the 
General Revenue Fund and the public . . . Saskatchewan Public 
Accounts 1995-96 and in budget ’96 from the government’s 
own documents. 
 
The $24 million promised surplus for the General Revenue 
Fund this year at this very time shrank to just $600,000 by the 
time the government spending for that fiscal year came to the 
end on March 31. In fact a balance is hardly a balance at all, and 
that’s very worrisome, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government spends all it gets and then it spends more. And 
its promise of reformed fiscal management is not real at all. It is 
not responsible management, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But how can the General Revenue Fund have a balance even 
though the government’s spending continues to grow and there 
are no tax increases announced in the budget statement? Well 
it’s because now it has among the highest income taxes and 
sales taxes. It has made gambling and utilities the cash cows 
that continue to feed its spending habits. And where does this 
come from, Mr. Speaker? Well surprise, surprise, it comes from 
the Public Accounts and shows up where, but in the summary 
financial statements and the cash flow statements. 
 
In other words, it has turned its attention to increasing 
regressive levies. In other words, utility rates and what is paid 
into gambling gains, and they act like regressive taxes  taxing 
those least able to pay just so government can feed their habit of 
excessive spending for themselves and their friends. 
 
And our power rates went up again. When? On January 1 of 
1996. Last year during the 1994-95 fiscal year $356 million of 
net income from the government enterprises  and this is 
mostly Crowns and Liquor and Gaming Authority  went into 
the General Revenue Fund so a deficit in government spending 
can be transformed into a surplus. Every single family of four in 
this province paid $1,424 more just so that this government 
could show it was possible to have a surplus on its spending. 
And that’s hardly responsible fiscal management. Indeed most 
people would deem that irresponsible and they would call it 
fiscal mismanagement. 
 
We see it every single month in our utility bills. And budget ’96 
confirms the people of this province’s greatest fear. There is 
absolutely no relief in sight. Taxes, and tax increases by any 
other name, are still taxes. And government overspending by 
any other name is still spending too much. Is it any wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are angry with this 
government preaching to them about how each one of them 
must take a cut-back. They’re spending so that government can 
continue to mismanage the money they have to pay in taxes and 
levies. 
 
And then there are the jobs. Where are the jobs, is the important 
question, Mr. Speaker. Our labour force dropped, and the 
amount of employment in this province fell, on average every 
single year during the first half of this decade, the years of this 
NDP administration. It has taken this government five years  

before it could show the same level of employment back up to 
where it was before the NDP became the government in 1991. 
It has taken this government five years to create 1,600 jobs, and 
their budget ’96 tells all of us in this province that they’re going 
to create 2,000 every year now to the end of the decade. Now if 
that isn’t one of the world’s wildest dreams, I don’t know what 
is. 
 
Now just in case you’re wondering where I got those statistics 
from as far as employment is concerned, and I know that 
they’re waiting with bated breath, Mr. Speaker, it’s from 
Statistics Canada monthly labour force survey. The high rates 
of tax, income, sales, and utility rates, Draconian labour 
legislation, and excessive workmen’s compensation rates are 
driving our friends, our neighbours, and our families out of our 
province to find jobs elsewhere  jobs that used to be here that 
aren’t here any more. 
 
And accountants and financial management consultants and 
managers see it every single day with clients who are telling 
them that they are leaving. Our high-tech, educated children 
who have learned in our schools, have to go away, lots of 
different places. In fact just this week I heard about some 
leaving for Arizona for a job. 
 
Saskatchewan now has the dream of this government and the 
dream of its Finance minister: low rates of growth, of income, 
so Saskatchewan can qualify for equalization payments, the 
payments which go to Canadian provinces that have few 
prospects for growth of their own. How very sad  the 
provinces that are dependent upon other provinces in Canada 
for the money that pays for government services. 
 
The data on this, on the economy, is showing rather clearly now 
that income is not growing anywhere near the rate of growth of 
our output of our exports. So the prosperity that we see in our 
export sector is not getting translated into income or 
employment in our very province. And this too comes from 
StatsCanada data, and the assumptions in budget ’96, Mr. 
Speaker, also reflect what I’ve just said, although the 
interpretation of the data in the budget has been done 
differently. Because whoever did the budget document, looked 
at only some of the data  not all of it  choosing what could 
be interpreted as giving the message that he or she wanted to 
give in that budget statement. 
 
So where is the plan to pay off our debt, Mr. Speaker? Where is 
the strategy to get our taxes and utility rates and workers’ 
compensation rates down? Where is the strategy to get viable, 
sustainable jobs in the province of Saskatchewan? Where is the 
program that gets the tax dollars back into the front line of 
health care and into the front line of the education of our 
children and our young people? 
 
Budget ’96 tells us that there will be government bureaucracy, 
and more bureaucracy, and more, and more. It tells us that there 
will be more without jobs. It tells us that we will owe more, and 
more, and more, to cover the costs that this government has 
failed to bring under control. 
 
The people of this province deserve better. They deserve  
  



718  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

responsible fiscal management that is real, not the smoke and 
mirrors of a government that just keeps postponing the hard 
decisions it promised to make. Not the smoke and mirrors of a 
government that seems hooked on taxes and spending; on a 
government that puts the burden of its own spending 
extravagances on those who can least afford to pay for them. 
 
And this government’s budget ’96 says that it is a preparation 
for the 21st century. Well welcome to the 21st century, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a government that gives us a 1990s province 
that is back in the days when our best export was our people. 
And it gives us fiscal management that pushes out our young 
and old, our rich and poor; pushes out those who have to go 
somewhere else to make a living and raise a family because 
they most certainly cannot afford to do it here. 
 
For those who can’t move it signals more of the same  a 
province where there is no substitute for high taxes and levies 
needed to pay for excessive government spending, while our 
social programs get smothered in the dead weight of 
government bureaucracy. 
 
Budget ’96, Mr. Speaker, makes us think, but what can only be 
a fleeting thought, of what our province might be like some day, 
beyond the days of a government that knows only how to take 
from everyone to give to itself. For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, 
I am unable to support budget ’96. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure to enter into the debate on the ‘96-97 provincial 
budget. Once again we see that this year’s budget document is 
compiled of nothing more than hollow words and empty 
promises. But then again that doesn’t surprise me, since the last 
four provincial budgets have been equally unsubstantial. 
 
We’ve come to expect little from this government, but the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve so much more. They deserve 
answers to their questions. They deserve solutions to their 
problems and they deserve a government that listens to them. 
Because the members opposite, along with the members on this 
side of the House, we make the most important decisions that 
will seriously affect and influence the lives of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
So instead of passing down the same old promises year after 
year and instead of breaking those same old promises years 
after year, the government should have stepped back from 
overused rhetoric and looked for something with real substance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at the details of this budget, we are 
faced with superficial words and insecure thoughts. And I’d like 
to spend some time looking at three specific areas. I’d like to 
look at the overall general comments provincially, and as my 
colleagues have pointed out, I’d like to spend some time in the 
areas of education and post-secondary education. 
When I refer to education, I will be referring to the kindergarten 
to grade 12 system, and of course post-secondary, as the  

minister indicated last night, we know that post-secondary 
includes not only the universities, not only the SIASTs 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
but also the regional colleges that mean so much to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at rural Saskatchewan. 
What has this budget meant to rural Saskatchewan? When we 
take a look at the grants to municipalities, we see that the grants 
will be declining by $20 million. When we see funding for the 
Department of Agriculture, we see that there is a reduction of 
$60 million. 
 
We have seen the closure of rural service centres. We have seen 
the closure of Crop Insurance offices in many centres, Canora 
being one of them. We’ve seen the 26, I believe it’s 26, 
maintenance depots closed that were depots of the Department 
of Highways. We’ve seen 170 jobs removed from the 
Department of Highways. 
 
We already know what the condition of our highways are, Mr. 
Speaker. We know that in many instances secondary highways 
today, after this storm, probably will not be cleared for a day or 
two or maybe even three. And if we are reducing the number of 
depots, if we are reducing the number of front-line workers out 
there, will that service improve or will it deteriorate? I think, 
Mr. Speaker, that answer is obvious  that service will 
deteriorate. 
 
We have 125 jobs slashed from Environment and Resource 
Management. Mr. Speaker, when we look at conservation 
offices and we see the closure of some conservation offices like 
the one in Pelly, this has a tremendous effect on rural 
Saskatchewan. And I want to just spend a few moments talking 
about what closures like that will mean for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We take a look at rural service centre closing, and a person who 
is working there, family of three, now is forced to move to a 
larger centre. We see the elimination of a conservation officer, 
the position, and that conservation officer now has to move. We 
see the spin-off. And in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, when 
one family moves and three children leave and another family 
moves and two children leave, there is another spin-off. And 
that spin-off is the fact that now probably there will be a teacher 
reduction because there has been a decline in enrolment. And 
when there is a decline in the enrolment, there is less money 
available to the school division. 
 
And as a result, you will see further cuts. When you see further 
cuts at the school level, that translates into a business. A 
business will close. So, Mr. Speaker, cuts like that overall mean 
a tremendous amount to rural Saskatchewan. The jobs that we 
lose means we will lose students as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall when we take a look at how the budget 
was developed, we know that this process began many, many 
months ago. We saw people from the government indicating 
that promises that had been made the year previous and the 
budget previous during the election campaign were no longer 
on. 
 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

And in fact there was a doom and gloom scenario that indeed 
the promised funding to education, to universities, to all of the 
players, was going to be reduced. And in fact there might even 
be a negative number that was thrown out. What does that do? 
What it prepares the public . . . is that they are expecting the 
worst-case scenario. And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately now 
when public reacts to a budget that wasn’t as doom and gloom 
or wasn’t as bad as they first predicted, there is complacency. 
There is a situation where people turn an eye and say, well it 
wasn’t quite as bad as I thought. 
 
What we have to look at, Mr. Speaker, is what does this budget 
really mean also for the local taxpayer. I see this budget as a 
downloading. We’ve heard the new words, the back-filling of 
the federal monies. We’ve talked about downloading, 
offloading, whatever words you wish to use. But what we see 
now is that the budget has continued that process, Mr. Speaker. 
Over the last four years, we have seen cuts to municipal 
transfers. We have seen cuts to both urban and rural 
municipalities. We have seen cuts to school boards, and there 
has been a tremendous amount of downloading. 
 
And yes, Mr. Speaker, the local taxpayer has back-filled 
because in many instances where there have been cuts  and 
the local municipality, the local school board has said no, we 
don’t want to give up program; we don’t want to lose the life, 
the amenities that we have  they raise the taxes. And they 
ensure that the money is there to spend. 
 
When we take a look at the budget that has just come down, Mr. 
Speaker, we see a further offloading. We see the approach that 
when you have people expect the absolute worst, then the bad 
news just doesn’t seem quite as bad. The front-line workers that 
have been cut and will be jeopardizing the safety and services 
of rural residents  these kinds of cuts, Mr. Speaker, are 
drastic examples of what will happen to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
At the same time as we see the cuts, and we hear the members 
talk about the availability of money; how can you cut without 
having money. We see that indeed over the last four years 
revenue to this government in tax collections, tax revenue, has 
accumulated in the amount of $700 million additional monies 
from tax revenues. That’s three-quarters of a billion dollars 
more in tax revenue. This year alone, by the Minister of 
Finance’s numbers, we see that there will be 100 million 
projected for this year over last year in additional tax revenues. 
At the same time, we see the fiscal problems being passed on to 
the local taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to understand what is really happening in the 
education scene, I think we have to spend some time looking at 
the picture in terms of what is involved in education today and 
what makes up the education system that we have in this 
province today. 
 
The kindergarten to grade 12 system, Mr. Speaker, is 
represented by 120 boards of education. These 120 boards are a 
combination of rural boards, urban boards, north, separate 
school divisions. These boards, over the last number of years, 
have faced from this government, Mr. Speaker, a decline of $21 
million of offloading. As a result, the grant that is now allocated  

to school divisions for the last fiscal year was $353 million. 
1991, Mr. Speaker, that number was $374 million according to 
the documents. So there has been, there has been downloading; 
there has been shifting of the responsibility of education from 
the provincial government to indeed the local taxpayer. 
 
I remember not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, that the numbers 
that were thrown about were the numbers, a 60/40 split. That 
education should be a responsibility of both the provincial 
government and the local taxpayer and that split should be 
based on 60 per cent and 40 per cent; 60 per cent coming from 
the provincial government and 40 per cent coming from the 
local taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reality is though, that as the costs of providing 
kindergarten to grade 12 education in the province nears almost 
$900 million, the numbers have completely reversed. It is 
indeed a 40/60 split; 40 per cent now comes from the provincial 
government and 60 per cent from the local taxpayer. So is it 
little wonder that the local taxpayer is very concerned about 
further offloading. 
 
We heard last year, and boards of education, teachers and the 
like, were very encouraged by the fact, that the minister had 
indicated that there was going to be a 2 per cent increase in 
grants to not only kindergarten to grade 12 boards of education, 
but also universities, SIAST, and the like. 
 
If that 2 per cent indeed would have been promised to the 
boards and that promise kept, Mr. Speaker, that additional 7 
million would not have even brought the boards of education 
funding back to anything close to less than 60 per cent. So we 
still have a massive, massive discrepancy in terms of what is 
funded locally and what is funded by the department. 
 
When I take a look at the promise of the 2 per cent and I see 
what the actual outcome is for this year, where the minister has 
indicated that funding for this year will be maintained at the 
$355 million range which, when we take a look at last year’s 
funding of $353 million and add to it the educational 
development fund, we see the exact same amount of money. 
There is absolutely no new money for boards of education 
because a program that has disappeared from the funding is the 
educational development fund. 
 
This was a fund that was, has been, in place for boards of 
education to use for many, many years, and last year’s funding 
to boards of education for the EDF (education development 
fund), as it is referred to, was about $2 million. And the line 
item for funding for EDF this year, Mr. Speaker, is zero. So 
therefore that same $2 million is now the $2 million that is now 
being used by the minister in terms of saying that we indeed 
have an additional $2 million increase. 
 
We also have to take a look at all of the costs for education for 
this year. And we know that there is, at the moment as we 
speak, a negotiation process under way. That negotiation 
process between the government and the trustees’ association of 
this province and the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation will 
no doubt conclude an agreement sometimes in this year. 
 
  



720  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

I quote from the address by the president of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation who, not too long ago, has indicated that 
there is an agreement on parts of the negotiation and that indeed 
a 2 per cent wage increase will be taking place in this year 
through a negotiated process. That, Mr. Speaker, I understand 
translates into the fact that a 1 per cent wage increase will take 
place on September 1 and a 1 per cent increase on December 
31, meaning of course that that second 1 per cent has very little 
bearing on the cost for this year. 
 
True to her word, the Minister of Education has indicated that 
the funding for that additional 1 per cent of salary to boards of 
education that will take place on September 1, 1996 will be 
picked up by the department. So she said the $2 million has 
been added to the budget for kindergarten to grade 12 funding. 
Well when we take a close look at that, we realize that that $2 
million will be offset by the additional $2 million in the salaries 
of teachers for 1996. So when we take a look at that and we 
take a look at the fact that the educational development fund has 
disappeared, the boards of education are indeed in a negative 
position  less and less. 
 
(2100) 
 
What we also see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that, as the 
negotiations take place, there may be additional costs. We don’t 
know what they will be for the people of Saskatchewan. What 
we also know of course, as anyone who has a business, as 
anyone who runs a farm, that there are additional costs from the 
cost of living, the increase in supplies, the increase in 
transportation that boards of education will face. 
 
So the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that as this budget has described 
the education scene, if the number breakdown last year was 
40/60, we can be assured that by the end of 1996 the numbers 
will be the like of 38 per cent and probably 62 per cent at the 
local level.  
 
Boards of education will be looking at this budget and 
wondering what they will do, Mr. Speaker. Because when they 
looked at the number of a promise of 2 per cent last year, many 
boards of education said . . . and looked at their delivery of 
program, they looked at the number of schools that they’re 
operating, they looked at the number of staff, and they said that 
that system can stay in place with the expected funding increase 
 
So they made very little changes, expecting the promise to be 
kept, Mr. Speaker. But that promise has not been kept. And as a 
result of the fact that we are now into the month of April, 
boards of education who are operating on this current year 
know that they will be going to the end of June with very little 
opportunity to adjust their budget. There’s no opportunity to 
reduce staff, which of course salaries make up a large portion of 
the operating expense of school boards. 
 
So they will operate until June 30. Sixty per cent of the budget 
for 1996, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will have been spent. What does 
the board of education do knowing full well now that they are 
receiving less money overall for the fiscal year that we are in 
today? Either they go to the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, and they 
raise the tax rate a substantial amount, or they make very, very  

serious cuts  triple the cuts, probably  that would be 
necessary to ensure that they can balance for this fiscal year. 
Because they must balance, they must balance their budgets. 
 
Who is the loser, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Number one, the loser 
of course is the trustees in this province who will have to make 
these very critical decisions. They will be forced to raise the 
taxes. The second loser of course is the teachers in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, because now they will be the ones that 
will be blamed by the local public, everyone else, for having 
received a salary increase and now that the mill rate will have 
been increased. 
 
But most importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the loser in this is 
the children of the province of Saskatchewan, for there will be, 
in some instances in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 
will a reduction in program, there will be an elimination of 
some services that are offered to children right now, and the 
quality and accessibility of education in this province will have 
been reduced. And that, Mr. Speaker, is tragic. 
 
This government has stated many times that the priority is 
education. And it must be, Mr. Speaker, because education, the 
education of our children, is the future of not only this province 
but of our country. This budget does very little to address the 
concerns for this year especially, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we take a look, when also take a look at the boards of 
education and how they operate at their own local level, there 
has been no move by the government to address the concerns 
that they have. 
 
There are about 5,000 non-professional employees employed by 
those 121 boards  the bus drivers, the caretakers, the teacher 
assistants. If there is a salary negotiated with the teachers, of 
course there will be a salary negotiated with those employees as 
well. Those additional costs, Mr. Speaker, will be reflected. 
Maybe they won’t be reflected in 1996, but they will be 
reflected in 1997. 
 
And let’s take a look at 1997. If I take a look at the Finance 
minister’s document for 1997, she’s indicated that there will be 
an expenditure of $900,000 additional grant money for 
education for the kindergarten to grade 12 system  $900,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at what I just mentioned, as 
far as the increases in salary for teachers for ’96, the increases 
in any other costs in 1996 for the local employees, and now we 
translate that full cost into 1997, it is estimated that that 2 per 
cent wage increase  the 1 per cent on September 1, the 1 per 
cent on December 31  any local matching of salary increases 
for the local employees, that number will translate between 12 
and $14 million to boards of education for 1997  12 to 14 
million. 
 
Now when the Minister of Finance has indicated that funding 
for education, the K to 12 system, for 1997, will increase by 
less than 1 million, she is stating very clearly and unequivocally 
that that funding must now be picked up at the local level if the 
program is to be maintained. 
 
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

Or, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sorry, if that is 
not to be the decision by the locally elected boards of trustees 
 they don’t want to raise that mill rate, can’t raise that mill 
rate because we’re taxed to the max  they have to make some 
very, very critical decisions: close schools, lay off staff, cut 
programs. 
 
Those are the decisions, Mr. Speaker. And I have heard from a 
number of trustees in the last three or four days who have said 
to me they feel that the 1997 budget is devastating to boards of 
education, to teachers in this province. 
 
When I take a look at the comments of the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation after last week’s budget, it’s very, very 
easy to take a look at the comment made by the president of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Mr. Dwain Drew, and he 
says: 
 

The years of cuts have taken their toll. Hundreds of 
teaching positions have been eliminated; class sizes are 
often over 35 students; vital school programs have been 
cut; and resource materials are scarce. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when we eliminate the educational development 
fund, which was in its last year last year, when the government 
eliminates that program, which was a program that was used to 
put resources into the libraries of our schools, which was a 
program that was used to buy computer equipment, modern 
software that was necessary to provide an adequate education 
for all schools across  we see that elimination. We see the 
quotation from the president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation that says, where are we going; where are we going 
when we know that these kinds of cuts are coming. 
 
The STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) general 
secretary Fred Herron says, and I quote: 
 

The longer the government puts off restoring adequate 
levels of funding for children’s education, the harder it will 
be to reverse the growing damage to our school system. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think this government has missed the point 
regarding funding for education in this province. Education is a 
priority. It has long been one of the larger expenses for this 
province, and students deserve better. So I would recommend to 
the government that we take a much closer look at funding for 
1997. 
 
For 1996, yes, boards of education, the teachers, the local 
employees  they are going to get by somehow or other. And I 
know that we have heard across this province, there are a 
number of schools that will be closed. There are a number of 
teachers that will be laid off and there will be positions lost. But 
if this plan is put in place for 1997, it will be devastating for 
education in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn at this time to future year, 
1998-99, which is also mentioned in the budget address. 
Minister states that in 1998-99, there must be a $7 million 
savings that will be achieved from all the boards of education in 
this province $7 million to come out of education savings. 

How will there be $7 million? What are the scenarios that are 
possible? Well the first scenario I’m sure, as the minister has 
been talking about in her regional meetings over the last 
number of months, is amalgamation. The projected savings 
done by different commissions over the last number of years 
has indicated that there were significant savings to be achieved 
from amalgamations. 
 
And that number varies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that the 
Langlois-Scharf report initially indicated that if boards, public 
boards of education, amalgamated, I think there was a savings 
possible of 15 to 20 million. There was a further study done by 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association that it indicated 
that that number was less. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m hearing from boards of education that 
many  many  of the savings that would have been achieved 
a number of years ago of course, if there were amalgamations, 
are not possible because there are a number of shared services 
going on in the province. I know that there are directors of 
education who are directors of education for more than one 
school division; who are assistant directors of more than one 
school division. These are savings that have already been 
gleaned by the board of education. 
 
The suggestion now is $7 million. Maybe that’s achievable. 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s achievable by amalgamation. And as 
I’ve indicated before in this House, Mr. Speaker, I encourage 
the Minister of Education to be upfront. To be upfront with the 
taxpayers of this province. To be upfront with the boards of 
education of this province. To be upfront with the teachers of 
this province. 
 
If that is the plan, if there is a plan to save $7 million in 
1998-99 by way of amalgamation, how are we going to do it? Is 
it going to be done by the government with a top-down 
approach whereby a map will be drawn and there will be X 
number of school divisions left in . . . at the end of 1996 or 
1997? 
 
Or will there be criteria that will be defined? Will there be 
guidelines that will be suggested and then that the boards of 
education, the towns, the villages, the people affected, the 
parents, the students, the teachers, will they then have the 
opportunity to sit down and develop a local plan? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, that $7 million, if that is a plan, if that is 
the demand that this government has for 1998-99, there has to 
be consultation. There has to be a plan put in place that will 
work cohesively and try to arrive at that solution. 
 
Option number two. How else can the board save $7 million? 
Well if you look at an average salary of a teacher, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that would make approximately 200 less teaching 
positions. So that would be very easy to achieve, $7 million, 
you just cut 200 teaching positions. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think anyone in this province would like to look at that scenario 
because 200 less teaching positions in this province, that will be 
devastating to the programs that are being offered in all of our 
schools in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



722  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

The other scenario, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that there be 
massive closures of small schools. Closures of probably 
between 35 and 50  35 to 50 small rural schools  would 
have to take place to achieve that saving in rural Saskatchewan 
because that is the only place where there is a declining 
enrolment. That’s reality. But we’ve been looking in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for some light at the end of the 
tunnel whereby we can find out that distance education could be 
a way of providing the programs in some small schools 
because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many small schools in 
rural Saskatchewan that can’t close. 
 
(2115) 
 
They can’t close because the students that arrive at those 
schools already are spending an hour and a half, an hour and 
three-quarters on a school bus to get there in the mornings and 
the same amount of time to get home after school. If that school 
is closed and the next nearest school is 45 miles, we’re now 
talking about a two and a half-hour bus ride one way. I’m sure 
members opposite will agree that that cannot occur. So we 
know that the options to close that many rural schools, that 
option is really not there in many instances. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, that if the plan of course is to look at 
$7 million as a savings, to achieve that kind of savings, I think 
it has to be done very wisely, and it has to be done with great 
consultation, and the Minister has to be upfront with that plan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The plan must be known. 
 
I’d now like to make some comments on the post-secondary 
education side. As the minister indicated last night, 
post-secondary education is broad, it’s not just the universities, 
it’s not just SIAST, it’s not just the regional colleges, it’s the 
looking at everything beyond post-secondary. I think that one 
statement is very, very clear here, and that is for Saskatchewan 
to prosper in this next century, in this next millennium, we need 
to ensure our residents have access to post-secondary education 
that is affordable  is affordable. 
 
My compliment was given to the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education when he announced that there would be a revamping 
of the loans to students; that indeed there was a program with 
the Royal Bank that loans would enable . . . that there would be 
a better system of operating loans for students and that there 
would be a $6 million savings. But I see from the Estimates, 
Mr. Speaker, from the budget, that that $6 million has been 
taken out of post-secondary education. 
 
And that is not fair to the students of this province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because as costs increase, and there is a need to 
increase the weekly allotment for students eligible for a student 
loan, as that cost increases  and we are saying now that the 
amount of money that is available to the entire student services 
area is less  we will have students, less students, being 
eligible for money. 
 
Less students being eligible means that there will be tighter 
restrictions; that indeed students who want to get an education, 
who have the intellect to get an education at a university, they 
will not be able to because they will not qualify for that money  

because there won’t be enough. 
 
We must take a look at the restructuring, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Universities in this province have looked at their program. 
We’ve heard from people involved in the universities  the 
students, faculty  who have said there has to be a better way 
of delivering our program. And maybe even if we do it better, 
we will do it more economically. And that is good because that 
is the key, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We must ensure, we must 
ensure that the education system that we have in place today is 
there, not only next year, but for my children and my 
great-grandchildren. 
 
And I think the plans that we look at today or over the next 
year, those will be the plans that will determine whether or not 
that university system is here. And I would encourage this 
government not to adopt the method of slash and burn, kill a 
program, kill a college, so that indeed the universities have a 
balanced financial position. That will not be in the best interests 
of Saskatchewan and that will not be in the best interests of our 
students. 
 
We must also take a look, not only at what is happening at the 
universities but also at SIAST. SIAST is a very strong program 
in Saskatchewan. When we hear my colleague from Arm River 
talking about the demand of the agricultural sector for trained, 
highly skilled individuals, these people are coming out of 
graduation programs in SIAST, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are 
the real welders. They are the people who will be employed in 
this province. They will be the people that will provide a tax 
base for the government. They will be the ones paying income 
tax. They will not be the ones who will be a burden to the 
government and a cost to the government. And we have to be 
careful with the SIAST programs to ensure that there is an 
availability of programs throughout all of the institutes. 
 
Whether or not there is a restructuring and whether or not we 
start to look at the delivery of program in an efficient manner, 
in a more efficient manner, that has to be looked at collectively 
with the universities as well. We must not do a piecemeal 
approach as is suggested. We must not do a review of the 
universities independent of the review of the SIAST programs, 
independent of the review of the regional college system. And if 
we try to do those things one year at a time, we will end up in a 
situation where we will have created a situation where we will 
not have looked at the big picture. We will have looked at little 
pieces in the picture and we will still have missed the big 
picture. So I encourage the minister to look at this one very, 
very seriously. 
 
We see that the funding cuts to post-secondary education will 
be extensive in the next years. That is reality. We cannot look at 
that and say, we’ll just slough that off and we’ll increase the 
tuition fees. That can’t happen. Tuition fees are the costs paid 
by students; they’re the costs of parents and we are at the 
national average, Mr. Speaker. So we can’t suddenly up our 
costs by another 5 or 6 or $7,000 for tuition. That will not work. 
So the approach that I hope that this government takes is one of 
compassion, one of looking at the entire picture and seeing what 
is best for the province  not for a political decision but for an 
educational decision. Because that, Mr.  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

Speaker, is why our young people will leave this province, and 
they will leave this province before they even get the education. 
 
So far we’ve been educating people and we haven’t had the jobs 
available for them, and they’ve been jumping to other provinces 
to get employment. But, Mr. Speaker, if we destroy our 
educational system we will be in a situation where we will lose 
our students even before we send them into the post-secondary 
programs. And that cannot happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has shown, I think, a situation 
where they are very, very capable at mismanagement and waste. 
In the last short while we’ve seen many, many people hired, 
hundreds of thousands of dollars spent on consultants. We’ve 
seen re-engineering structures put in place at a cost of millions 
of dollars. We’ve seen $2.5 million worth of expenditure for 
political appointments. We’ve seen studies done, I believe 
$600,000 spent on a review of whether or not we would have 
SaskPower rate increases. 
 
So there are expenditures that have been made, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that this government has control over. It is a matter of 
making choices. It is a matter of setting priorities. And the 
priorities that I talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the 
priorities of education. We must look at education as the key. 
 
If you identify, if you look at, the polling done by the members 
opposite, you will see that education and health are the 
concerns. Those are the concerns that have been indicated. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in closing I want to emphasize one more 
time how absolutely crucial education is to the future of 
Saskatchewan. This budget that the members opposite say they 
support, shows what little importance they place on educating 
the children, the youth, the adults of our province. 
 
Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget is full of government 
back-patting and empty rhetoric. And because it lacks any 
long-term, realistic solutions for the people of this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot support it, because the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve so much more. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to get up tonight and say 
a few words on the budget. I know time is winding on so I 
won’t spend probably as long as I would like to, but I’ll say a 
few words. 
 
I’d like to first of all congratulate you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
your election to the Deputy Chair and also to the Speaker on his 
election to this House’s Speaker. 
 
I also want to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, about the Watrous 
constituency. This is the first time that I’ve been able to stand 
up in the budget debate and talk on behalf of the constituents of 
Watrous. And I think most people know that that area is the 
centre of the province, if not the centre of the universe, and the 
economic activity flies on as usual from the great 
entrepreneurial spirit that lies in the communities. 

We of course have many huge implement dealerships in 
Watrous, in town itself, and car dealerships. And in and around 
the area we have a very active Manitou Beach mineral spa, and 
all towns from the Watson and Quill Lakes on the north-east to 
right near Saskatoon on the west side down to Semans and the 
south, and Nokomis, and everything in between. So I’m very 
proud to represent that area, and I want to thank those people 
for the support they gave me for the third term, my third term in 
government, and allowing me to represent them for the next 
four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit about agriculture to start with, 
and agriculture of course, it’s near and dear to my heart. I’ve 
been involved in it basically all my life and it sort of disturbs 
me, Mr. Speaker, to see some of the things that are happening 
today as far as the opposition is concerned in terms of the 
responsibility that they put forward  or lack of responsibility 
they put forward. 
 
I want to talk, Mr. Speaker, about the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program for just a minute, even though it is 
a long gone, dead program, just to set the record straight on a 
few things as to how the opposition carries on. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberals are talking about $12 million that the farmers had to 
pay back. I’ll tell you if I did a vote in coffee row in rural 
Saskatchewan I know I’d win the vote, because most farmers, 
the overwhelming majority, know that any overpayments from 
the government have to be paid back. 
 
In fact I give them credit, Mr. Speaker, because the 
overpayments . . . that they know that any bill that they want to 
pay back and are responsible in doing so . . . but let’s just put 
forward a scenario, Mr. Speaker, where that $12 million wasn’t 
paid back, as the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party say 
that we shouldn’t have to pay it back. My question to them, Mr. 
Speaker, is what would you do without? 
 
Because in this budget we have had a mandate to balance the 
budget and the people of Saskatchewan have given us that 
mandate and we’re continuing that mandate — the first 
province in Canada to balance the budget. Now we’ve got 
another four-year plan to keep the books balanced over that 
period. 
 
But let’s just take the $12 million . . . and even if we take a 
portion of that, let’s say it’s federal-provincial funding, let’s 
take $6 million as our share. I ask the Liberal members 
opposite, and I’m going to go to the book, to the Estimates 
book, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to ask the Liberal Party 
over there, the Liberal members, what they wanted to cut in 
order to make up the $6 million that the farmers wouldn’t have 
to pay back. 
 
Let’s go to administration: three and a half million dollars in 
administration. Can the Liberal members tell me if they want to 
cut administration? Well I don’t hear much talk. 
 
Accommodation and central services: $2.7 million. Well we’re 
up almost to $5 million. Would they want to cut the 
administration and the accommodation and central services? 
 
  



724  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

Or how about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the agriculture industry 
assistance programs? This is the grants to general agricultural 
interests. This is things like the rat control program at $125,000. 
Would the Liberal members want us to cut the rat control 
program? Or, included in that is the 4-H program for $271,000. 
The rat control program was 125,000, the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  We need rat control in here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We need rat control across the House. 
Exactly. The 4-H program, $271,000. Could the Liberal 
members tell me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you want to cut the 
4-H program? Is that one of the programs you would cut to 
make up the $6 million that you thought farmers shouldn’t have 
to pay back in the overpayment? What about the farmland 
leaseback compensation? Another $250,000. Should we cut 
that? 
 
(2130) 
 
Matching grants for international aid, how about that one?  
$300,000. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you add 
up all the agriculture industry assistance programs, it only 
comes to $4.3 million. And yet those members over there want 
to cut 6 million. And again I ask them, what part of this budget, 
of this agricultural budget, do you want to take that from? 
 
I’d like the members who have the time to stand in their place 
and speak, to answer that question, because it’s a fundamental 
question that has to be answered. If you don’t want to cut 
something, if you don’t want to have something paid back, then 
you have to take it from some place else. 
 
And I could go on. The land and regulatory management, just 
about $4 million. The livestock operations and land review, 
about $3 million. They could take their pick. Any one of those 
programs or a combination of those programs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, up to $6 million. I’d like to have them get their heads 
together over there and the next member should get up and say 
which of those programs they want to cut, because some of 
them are going to have to be cut if we want to balance the 
books and they know that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear the combined whine over there, talk about 
the crop insurance agents and offices. Well, Mr. Speaker, what 
they say is: oh my goodness, the agents are gone; we closed a 
few offices. What are we going to do? We’re going to have to 
drive for miles. 
 
Well the members should get into the 1990s and on into the 
year 2000, Mr. Deputy Speaker, simply because you don’t have 
to drive any more. We want to get to a system in Crop 
Insurance where you can fill out a form, if you don’t have a 
computer . . . because in the future, you’re going to be using 
Internets. You’re going to be using computers. And where you 
can use e-mail to get back and forth to the corporation. And I’ll 
tell you that will be coming in the years ahead. The members 
know that. 
 
We’re going to get to a program where farmers can sit down at 
their table . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member wasn’t  

here all day today; now he’s in, and he’s got lots to say since 
he’s come back, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to see your return to 
keep some order in the House for this member. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now, now the Speaker is not seeking 
helpful advice although I know that members are willing to 
offer it. And I’ll simply ask the hon. member, the Minister of 
Agriculture . . . he knows that he need not offer advice to the 
Speaker as to how to do his job. And I’ll let the Minister of 
Agriculture continue to do his. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sorry, I didn’t 
mean to help you to do your job, of course. 
 
But we want to get to a situation where you don’t have to drive 
in rural Saskatchewan, where you can sit down at your table 
and get the form to fill out for crop insurance, fill out that form, 
mail it back to Crop Insurance office, just as it was in the past, 
and get back to a simple program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are now developing this new program. We 
have had meetings around the province, 10 meetings around the 
province in early March. We had many hundreds of farmers 
come to those meetings to give advice on crop insurance and 
how the program should be put together. We are now taking 
that advice back to the Crop Insurance head office. We’re going 
to be putting together a presentation to this government and to 
the federal government to develop a new program so that 
farmers will have a stable, secure crop insurance program. And 
we have to have that, Mr. Speaker, simply because it’s the only 
program in town. 
 
Now these members across the floor can whine, like the 747 
coming in for a landing, all they want. But the fact of the matter 
is that we are going to have a good program and because 
farmers dictate, demand, that we have a good program, and we 
have to have some income security for farmers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that program was going to be put into place, 
and it’s not going to be like when the Tories were in 
government where you’re sitting on your tractor trying to figure 
out what the program is. Program will be in place in ample time 
to ensure that farmers know what’s coming down the pipe for 
the 1997 crop year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in Sask Agriculture and Food in general, we 
are focusing on economic development. We have tremendous 
potential in the hog industry in this province. 
 
We are seeing south-east Asia with a tremendous economic 
growth  6, 7, 8 per cent over this year and the number of 
years to come is the prediction. And in south-east Asia, Mr. 
Speaker, people over there . . . the disposable income is 
increasing. As their disposable income increases of course, the 
amount of money they have available for food increases. And it 
is a known fact in south-east Asia, many countries spend at 
least 40 per cent of their income on food. 
 
And that bodes well for the livestock industry of this province 
and that is why we have such great potential in the livestock 
industry, and particularly in the hog industry. Hogs are a very  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

important part of this province. We produce about a million 
hogs now and we would like to see at least 2 million in the near 
future, in the next few years, in the province. 
 
And in the area of technology transfer — I hear the members 
opposite complaining about all the offices that were closed, and 
we did close four extension offices — Mr. Speaker, there again, 
with technology transfer there is little need any more, if you 
have the equipment  and not everybody does so you have to 
have a transition period, and that’s what we’re in now  if they 
have the equipment to sit in your farm office, use your 
computer, connect with the extension agrologist, and then make 
your decisions on an informed basis. 
 
If you don’t use the computer, you can still have the telephone, 
and you can always still drive, because as far as extension 
offices, there are still, I believe, 31 offices around the province. 
 
But it’s important that we make sure that we have the 
technology. It’s important that we make sure we’re setting up 
our technology for the future, not burying our heads in our sand 
like the members opposite do, saying, I want it all back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few words  and as you’ve 
noticed, I’m cutting a number of these topics a little short  but 
I want to spend a few moments on the Canadian Wheat Board. 
Now at least on one thing I give the Tories credit for over there. 
They are taking a stand. They say the board should go. They 
say the board should go and we should lose 4 or $5 million a 
year that the board gives us as an advantage for premium 
pricing. At least I don’t like their stand, but I admire that they 
take a stand. 
 
With the Liberals, I haven’t heard really a policy yet. Of course 
it’s quite difficult to hear any kind of policy coming out of the 
Liberal Party, but I’ll get to that in a minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board is an integral part, and 
has been for 50 years, of the Canadian western, Canadian farm 
economy. I don’t want to go into all the detail, but the people 
who are calling for dual marketing are calling for it for one 
reason and one reason only  they want to see the end of the 
board. 
 
Because the philosophical argument, Mr. Speaker, does not 
change and it has not changed for years. The opponents of the 
board continue to argue against the board. The only thing that 
changes is the argument. As one argument wears out and 
becomes dysfunctional because it’s proven wrong, they’ll try 
another argument. And when that one wears out they’ll try 
another. And this is an ongoing saga, Mr. Speaker, that will not 
end. But the people in Canada today, in western Canada today, 
as we’ve seen at the western grain marketing panels, have said 
over and over and over again that the Canadian Wheat Board is 
an essential part, and a dual marketing system means the end of 
the board. 
 
I see, Mr. Speaker, many people saying, well you can have dual 
marketing and still keep the board. Those people either don’t 
understand the situation or care not to understand the situation 
because, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is . . . and I’ll go  

over it very quickly, and the member should listen, especially 
the Tory members of this House. If you proceed with dual 
marketing, the first thing you do is you lose origination of 
supply. In a monopoly situation, you have to be able to 
originate the grain, the supply, in order to get it through a 
system that can be congested very easily and would be 
congested very easily with a multiple-seller environment. Get 
that material, grain, through to the export position so that the 
buyers can be assured that the quality is there, and the time of 
its delivery is there. That’s one of the thing the board does. 
 
Another thing the board does, as in the what we call a KFT 
study  the Kraft-Tyrchniewicz-Furtan study just recently 
where they looked at every sale transaction from ‘80-81 to 
1993-94 — Mr. Speaker, in studying every sales transaction, 
they found that across this piece, the Canadian Wheat Board 
brought to the farmers of Saskatchewan an average additional 
51 cents a bushel or 4 to $500 million a year simply because 
they had a monopoly situation selling a product. They sold that 
product on a world market. And the quality of that product, our 
grain, dictated that those countries around the world would pay 
more than the street price for that grain. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you take that away, if you take that away, 
then you have to think what will happen? If you take the 
monopoly situation away, you have multiple sellers. In a 
multiple-seller environment, which is dual marketing, you only 
have one price, Mr. Speaker. You only have one price simply 
because everybody wants to sell a product, and they’re going to 
undercut each other until they get the price. That’s the 
open-market system. You can go to Chicago futures. You can 
go to the Minneapolis Grain Exchange or the Chicago exchange 
or the Winnipeg Exchange. There’s only price. 
 
But under the Canadian Wheat Board with a monopoly, there’s 
more than one price. There’s the street price, and then there’s 
the premium price that has been proven that we get under the 
system. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the Tories . . . I 
appreciate that they take a stand at least, and the Liberals don’t 
seem to, but I don’t know what they want to get rid of 4 or $500 
million a year for, especially after they started the ball rolling 
and the Liberals knocked down all the 10 pins by eliminating 
the $320 million a year of the Crow benefit in this province. 
 
Now you eliminate 320 to start with, and now they want to add 
another 400 or $500 million; that’s $800 million a year that they 
want the federal government to cut out of western Canada. My 
question to you and the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, is what 
is the logic of that? There is no logic. So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
want to go on about the Canadian Wheat Board, although it’s 
one of my favourite topics because it’s such an important 
instrument in this Canadian wheat economy, grain economy, 
that we have today. And I just ask every farmer to be sure they 
know what they mean when they say the want dual marketing. 
 
And the question that they have to ask themselves  and this is 
where everybody interprets the polls and plebiscites and 
surveys wrongly  the fundamental question is: will dual 
marketing mean the end of the Canadian Wheat Board? Mr. 
Speaker, the answer to that question, for the reasons that I’ve  
  



726  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

stated and for many more, is yes. 
 
And that is why when the people are asked the question, if it 
means the end of the board, do you still want dual marketing, 
that over 85 per cent of the people in western Canada say no, 
they do not want dual marketing. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, I agree with them. And I just hope 
that the Canadian western grain marketing panel who is 
reporting to the federal government reports favourably to that 
position, and that the federal minister will finally put an end to 
those opponents of the board, saying the board is staying. 
 
And of course we can improve it. We can improve it. There’s 
got to be two criteria when we improve it. Number one, it’s got 
to be beneficial to western Canada producers, and number two, 
it can’t be detrimental to the functioning of the Canadian Wheat 
Board. And those two criteria met, then we can make all the 
improvements we want in our marketing system. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just for a minute about farm 
input costs. This is a topic that the opposition never seem to 
raise. And it’s, I think, one of the most important topics, along 
with the retention of the Canadian Wheat Board, that is in 
western Canada today. 
 
An Hon. Member:  What are you doing about it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the member opposite says, what am 
I doing about it? I’ll tell you I’m doing a lot more than he is. 
And I’ll just tell him what I’m doing about it. A month ago I 
was in Toronto with the Ag ministers’ meeting across Canada. I 
took down to that meeting, with Mr. Goodale and the other 
Agriculture ministers, an idea, a suggestion, that we put farm 
input costs on the priority lists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government just came through a study. 
The Liberals over there keep yipping  but they just came 
through a study about farm input costs. Do you know what the 
Liberal study said? They didn’t come out to western Canada to 
start with, your buds down in Ottawa. They didn’t come out to 
western Canada to ask the people out here what they want. But 
the Liberal study said that farmers should  get this  should 
shop around. Well hallelujah, farmers, we got to shop around. 
That’s the Liberal solution to farm input cost increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did manage to get it on the agenda, and the top 
five items that we’ll be discussing in Victoria next July. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as you know, and as all members of this 
House know, one province alone cannot affect the system that 
much. But I’ll tell you what we can do. We can band together 
with the federal government. And we can do an in-depth study 
as to if there’s any price fixing, if there’s gouging, if there’s 
different prices for the same commodity in different parts of the 
country, if there’s different prices for the same commodity 
north of the U.S. (United States) border or south of the U.S. 
border. 
 
And we can make the chemical and fertilizer companies, Mr. 
Speaker, look over their shoulder, mind their p’s and q’s, and  

assist the farmers that way. Because it is such a shame, after a 
number of years of low commodity prices where farmers went 
for years fixing equipment trying to make ends meet, now when 
the prices are coming up, the input costs are eating up a 
significant portion of what could be profit, to get them back on 
their feet again. 
 
And what are the Liberals caucus done? What have the Tory 
caucus done? I haven’t heard a word, not one word. Maybe I 
can entice them from this speech, Mr. Speaker, to get up and at 
least ask a question in question period about input costs. But 
right now one of the most important aspects of rural 
Saskatchewan, input costs, is not even addressed by the 
members opposite. You hear what they talk about; they want to 
talk about everything else. 
 
In fact what is the policy? Here is the question. What is the 
Liberal Party’s policy on anything? I think tonight and over the 
few days of the throne speech, I’m starting to put together, I’m 
starting to put together what the policy is. 
 
(2145) 
 
And it just reminds me, Mr. Speaker, of that old, you know 
what happens when you play an old country and western album 
backwards? Well your dog comes back and your horse comes 
back and your wife comes back and your truck comes back. 
Well the Liberals, they want to play this big record backwards 
so that your service centre comes back, and your Crop 
Insurance office comes back, and your jobs come back, and 
your depot comes back, and everything comes back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, that would be nice. 
That would be nice but that’s not the real world, so quit 
spinning backwards. Quit spinning backwards, Liberal 
members across the way, and I’ll tell you, you might get some 
credibility. Because I’ll tell you, just if I sit here tonight, Mr. 
Speaker, if I sat here tonight for the time that I sat here and 
listened to the Liberal members opposite, and I had my little 
adding machine up and I calculated all the costs, you know: 
well we’re going to fix every road. The member from 
Athabasca, he had every road in his constituency fixed, and 
then some of the other members had all of their roads fixed. 
Well if we added all that up — and then we’re going to reopen 
all the schools that closed and we’re not going to close anymore 
— if we add all that up. 
 
And then we’re going to reopen all the hospitals and we’re 
going to add all that up. Mr. Speaker, you got to get your head 
out of the sand. It would be  we’ve cut the expenditures this 
year by $230 million — if we add up what all the members over 
there . . . they’re not only going to add that $230 million back 
on, they’ll add another 100 million at least, onto the budget of 
this province. 
 
An Hon. Member:  But they want to cut taxes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  And then they’re going to cut taxes. 
That’s exactly right. Well this is voodoo economics in the first  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

degree, I’ll tell you. It’s better than Presto Manning, you know. 
Like old Presto says, poof, now it’s gone and, you know, all 
your services are there and all your taxes are gone; it’s magic. 
This is just the voodoo economics of the Liberal Party across 
the way, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you, I think that the members 
opposite have to get a little real. 
 
Now I know it’s easy to sit in opposition and say yes, yes, yes, 
we should do this and do everything. But the reality is, there is 
no policy. I challenge the Liberal members, Mr. Speaker, to 
stand on their feet and dictate what the Liberal policy is. You 
can’t have a policy of, well we’re going to get your job back, 
we’re going to get your school back, and, you know, we’re 
going to get everything back. That’s not a policy; that’s a 
cop-out, exactly. 
 
Now what is the policy on education? Don’t give me the “give 
all the schools back” thing. What is the policy on education, on 
reorganizing to save money so that we can’t raise taxes? What 
is your policy on municipal government? What is your policy 
on health care? I mean don’t talk about just the give-back 
policy. Talk about how you’re going to balance the budget, 
keep the services, and reduce taxes, as this government over on 
this side of the House has done over the last years — first 
government to balance the books; first government to balance 
the books and now a four-year plan to continue that. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be too hard on the Liberals 
tonight because I know they’re having a few problems over 
there and so I . . . and I could, but I won’t be mean. But I’ll tell 
you, I had a little day-dream today and . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no, the nightmare comes from that side of the 
House. But I can just imagine, can you just imagine, the 
Liberals walking through the park, and we’ll call this one guy 
Ronnie O, and we’ll call the other guy Billy Boy. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the hon. member knows 
that he can’t do indirectly what he’s not allowed to do directly, 
and I’ll just ask him — he understands the rules of debate — 
and I’ll ask him to guide himself accordingly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Okay. Well you’ve got a Liberal no. 1 
and Tory no. 1. How about that? And Liberal no. 1 is walking 
through the park, Mr. Speaker, and all of a sudden out from 
behind the bush comes Tory no. 1, and he says, psst, psst, come 
on over here; come on over here. And he turns around and says, 
oh hi; how are you? Don’t say my name, you know. And Tory 
no. 1, the Leader of the Tory Party, says to the Leader of the 
Liberal Party, he says, no, no, come on over here; come on over 
here. He says, you should be with me; you should be with me. 
You know why? He says, because you’ve had a Tory 
membership in years, longer than you’ve had a Liberal 
membership in months. You’re really a Tory. Come on over. 
 
And then Tory no. 1 leader would say, well no, you know, I’m 
not one of you guys any more because, you know, you ran up 
the debt of this province. You’re bad guys. But he says, no, no, 
you’re one of us; you’re one of us, remember? You were with 
us then; you helped us. No, no, I didn’t help you. I’m a Liberal 
now; I’m a Liberal now. 
 

And then you could just imagine this little scene walking 
through the park, and another little Liberal jumps out. It’s the 
same story. Most of them have had Liberal memberships in 
months . . . or Tory memberships in years, longer than Liberal 
membership in months. But this is the new Liberal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can imagine these poor little lost souls lying 
in bed and like, just saying . . . lie there and say, what am I. 
What am I? And you can imagine this big voice comes out of 
the sky and says, you’re a Liberal; you’re confused. And that’s 
the way the Liberal Party runs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 
credibility again. Because I can see the Liberal members, they 
lie there awake at night thinking about things to ask in question 
period as well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They don’t think 
very hard, one of the members said. 
 
Well the problem is they don’t think very hard because lots of 
times  and I’ve got to be careful what I say  but lots of 
times it’s the Liberal version of the truth, let’s put it that way. 
And I’ve been listening to the members and it happens time and 
time again. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, the sad part of this whole situation 
is that it doesn’t matter what the opposition members say  it 
can be fact or fiction  it doesn’t matter what they say, they’ll 
get a story on it from the press. And then the press goes out to 
rural Saskatchewan and cities and towns in this province. 
 
And you know, there’s a saying that I just picked up not too 
long ago from a senior statesman in this province, and I want to 
repeat it now. And it says, a lie will be around the world twice 
before the truth gets its shoes on. And that’s the modus 
operandi of the members opposite. It doesn’t matter what you 
say, because a lie runs around the world twice before the truth 
gets its shoes on. And then the people in rural Saskatchewan 
say, what’s the truth and what isn’t the truth  degrading the 
level of debate in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s very wise. And I think the 
members should get their act together to maintain their 
credibility. And to maintain their credibility they talk about the 
demise of rural Saskatchewan, the demise of the poor, the 
demise of the children. That Liberal caucus, Mr. Speaker, last 
year voted against every increase in social value program that 
we put forward. Every one they voted against. Now they stand 
up there and say, oh the poor people of rural Saskatchewan, the 
children, the women. I mean you’ve heard it all today and the 
days in the past. Talk about lack of credibility. 
 
Now I don’t mind an opposition that stands up and criticizes me 
legitimately for something I’ve done wrong. But don’t stand up 
there and talk out of one side of your mouth after you’ve acted 
out of the other side of your mouth a few months ago. And 
that’s the problem that we have. 
 
Then we have, Mr. Speaker, then we have the Tory agenda. I’m 
going to speed up here pretty quick  the Tory agenda, which  
  



728  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

is the Reform agenda. We see the ag programs where they’re 
going to, like I said, get rid of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
They’re going to go . . . this is the Preston Manning. This is the 
leader of the Tory Party trying to be a miniature version of 
Preston Manning. I’ve got to get those Reform votes so I’m 
going to come in here and I’m going to do my thing voting 
against all social programs, Mr. Speaker. And he’s talking 
about boot camps and he’s talking about chain gangs . . . well 
not chain gangs, but boot camps like in Alabama where they 
have chain gangs. 
 
He thinks that the old U.S.-style programs are great. Make these 
folks work. In fact you know what, Mr. Speaker? In Texas 
today, it’s legal to carry a concealed gun, and not the only state. 
And this is what the Tories are promoting, that right-wing, free 
enterprise, open, every-man-for-himself country. What a sorry 
state that would be  can carry concealed weapons. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is these people have no respect. 
The Tories have no respect for this institution, and I have yet to 
form an opinion of the Liberals. No respect for this institution 
simply because . . . and they talk about cutting salaries, cutting 
pensions. They don’t think . . . And they want to be like the 
U.S. again where every senator  not every, over half the 
senators and congressmen in the United States — are 
millionaires, and that’s the only way they get to Congress. 
 
The problem is the Tory Party is listening to the Preston 
Mannings of the world, the Preston Mannings of the world who 
say, you don’t, you know, you don’t have to get paid. You don’t 
need a pension. You should do this for nothing. 
 
Well I’ll tell you that’s not how it works in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker; because if it worked that way, who would you have 
represented? Would you have the poor people represented? No, 
I don’t think so. Would you have natives represented? Not very 
many. Would you have many middle class represented? Not 
very many. You would have the elite in the House in 
Saskatchewan, just like you have in the United States. That’s 
why the lack of regard for this institution will bring this 
institution to its knees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to end by saying that . . . I want to say that 
we on this side of the House are preparing for the 21st century. 
We are on track with 10,000 jobs today, another 20,000 by the 
year 2000. 
 
We have a little dilemma in rural Saskatchewan. I want to talk 
to the people in rural Saskatchewan in this respect, to 
understand one thing. You demand a service . . . we demand in 
rural Saskatchewan  I live in rural Saskatchewan  we 
demand that service is maintained. We demand that there’s no 
increase in our taxes. We on this side of the House have tried to 
maintain that. And yet we demand that all our jobs be retained. 
 
And that’s the catch-22 situation, because if you take out every 
government job . . . a government can’t maintain this service, 
can’t keep the taxes down, and maintain every government job 
in rural Saskatchewan. Because if you look at any typical town 
of 2 or 3,000 people, if you took out all the teachers and all the 
doctors and the nurses and all the government employees,  

you’d take out a significant portion of their workforce. And as 
government, we would like to retain every job in that rural 
Saskatchewan, but the problem is, Mr. Speaker, you can’t do it 
all. 
 
But what you can do is you can create an environment. And you 
can create an environment where those jobs are replaced. And 
I’ll tell you, in rural Saskatchewan over the last number of years 
where there have been jobs cut, the rural Saskatchewan have 
replaced those jobs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’ll have 
lots of time, Mr. Member, to get up and talk later on. 
 
But in rural Saskatchewan we’ve replaced those jobs. For 
example, the processing, the food processing industry. A good 
example. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you. The food processing 
industry; a good example. Over 70 per cent of food processing 
is outside of Regina and Saskatoon. That’s in rural 
Saskatchewan. Those are small industries like Melfort . . . like 
Thomson Meats in Melfort, like Drake Meat in Drake. And you 
can go on all around the piece. Over 70 per cent. 
 
And that’s creating the climate. And a lot of those people are 
exporting to the world, Mr. Speaker, a lot of them to south-east 
Asia. But we have a value added plan in this province. We have 
ag innovation fund. 
 
Well the member laughs. Okay, I’ll just tell you how. We’ve 
got the agri-food innovation fund where people with new ideas 
and value added products can use government money, 
taxpayers’ money  not just a hand-out like it was in the past 
— but use taxpayers’ money to lever private money, to lever 
bank or credit union money, to ensure that that idea gets put 
forward. 
 
Then when the idea is created and you need some equity to buy 
the machinery to develop that value added product, we have the 
ag equity fund where again we take our few dollars — we don’t 
have a whole lot of money — we’re taking our few dollars, 
we’re focusing it on value added of primary products. We take 
that ag equity fund and we use it to lever private money, to 
lever bank and other institution money, in order that that equity 
is used to make that product hit the world markets. 
 
We have the Ag Development Fund, from research 
development right through the piece, focusing our money again 
on the value added. And that’s what has to be done in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And with that, we will create more jobs 
like the value added in the meat processing industry outside 
Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
And I just want to make a point about this budget. In 
Saskatchewan, 80 per cent of the government jobs are in cities 
and 20 per cent are in rural Saskatchewan. If you look across 
the piece, Mr. Speaker, instead of the job reduction in this 
budget, it’s exactly proportional  80 per cent of the job cuts 
are in the cities and 20 per cent in rural Saskatchewan. And that 
is the fair way to do things. Don’t go after one sector over  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

another. It was done very equitably and fairly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know I could go on and on, but I want to end this 
by saying briefly: health, education, social services  the 
incredible offload of the federal government. And it astonishes 
me to see the members opposite get up and talk about education 
and what this government’s doing in education and health care 
and social services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget we’ve back-filled those three, $106 
million, 100 per cent. And they have the audacity, after their 
cousins in Ottawa have cut not only Saskatchewan, but right 
across the piece, to stand up and say, what are you doing in 
education? I mean don’t they make the connection? 
 
And I’d like them to table every letter. I’d like them to table 
every letter they’ve written to the federal Minister of Health or 
the federal Finance minister, let’s put it that way. Table your 
letters saying, do not cut these programs. If you stand up in this 
House and criticize us for cutting, table letters you’ve sent to 
the federal government’s cutting. I don’t think there are any, 
Mr. Speaker. I don’t think there are any. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one reason we live in this province. 
Because over the years, despite a few warts in our system, 
we’ve had a CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party) government with a social 
conscience to deliver programs to cities and towns and rural 
Saskatchewan, to maintain jobs and the quality of life in this 
province which many others haven’t seen. 
 
(2200) 
 
We have seen this province come from a have-not province in 
the early years to a have province. We’ve got a little blip in the 
system but, Mr. Speaker, we are proud care-bearers of the 
NDP-CCF torch and we will carry that torch forward to make 
sure the budgets are balanced over the next four years and so 
that we can maintain the quality of life and do one thing that the 
other provinces and the other parties have not, and that is make 
sure that we have a job for our children when they need a job. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make my 
comments in relation to my support for the 1996 budget, 
Preparing for the New Century. Mr. Speaker, I’ll be making my 
comments in relation to a comparative overview between the 
Liberal government, the federal Liberal government, and our 
provincial NDP government. I’ll also be making comments, Mr. 
Speaker, on a situation regarding northern Saskatchewan as 
well as relationship with aboriginal peoples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start out by examining, you know, the 
overall question of the comparison between a Liberal 
government and an NDP government. As I travel throughout 
northern Saskatchewan and throughout the province, we see the 
line that is easily said, that in many cases the Liberals sound a 
lot like the NDP when they’re in opposition, but in the end 
result they govern like the Conservatives. 
 

When we look at the issue in that context, Mr. Speaker, there is 
quite a degree of truth in it. We look at it in regards to the 
biggest cut in the history of Canada since the Second World 
War in the area of social spending. When you look at that cut of 
a small province like Saskatchewan with a million people, it’s 
$114 million cut from the federal level in the areas of health, 
education, and social services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cut is going to have devastating effects, a lot 
of people had thought. But in many cases, we were lucky, in a 
sense, that we had an NDP government with compassion and 
with sensitivity. And we looked at it, Mr. Speaker, in a sense 
that as we consulted the people, we listened to what they had to 
say. Many of the people told us that we should not govern like 
the federal Liberals and their $114 million cut  73 per cent of 
their cut in the area of social spending. They were talking a 
good line before an election but indeed they would govern like 
the Tories. 
 
Many of the people I’ve talked to said without the Mulroney 
government . . . for many years Mulroney wanted to cut social 
spending, but he was unable to do so except to a certain degree. 
Many years Mulroney wanted to slash and cut the Crow rate 
and the impact on the agricultural community but he was never 
able to do it. 
 
Many of the Liberals from across Canada were criticizing 
Mulroney on the issues of social spending. And they were 
criticizing Mulroney on the Crow rate. They made all kinds of 
great speeches across Canada on the devastating effect of the 
Tory government in Ottawa, all across . . . people all across this 
country. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all those great speeches were never followed 
up with truth and action. What we saw, Mr. Speaker, is the 
exact opposite. What we saw was an attack on the basis of the 
fundamental institutions that we’re starting in this province. We 
took the example of medicare, 1962, when we had the famous 
Liberal, Thatcher, breaking the door down to fight against 
medicare. 
 
When we were dealing with this issue when we were in 
opposition in the ‘86-90 period, the Tories said it was 
mediscare. The Liberals said it was mediscare when we 
presented this issue during the federal election. 
 
But the truth comes now, this year, when indeed the Liberals 
. . . have you looked at the gun control Bill that they passed? 
Have you looked at all the big names of the rich that paid to the 
Liberal Party? The rich are not touched. Not all the rich. The 
selected rich of the province are not touched by the Liberals. 
But they will attack the farmers. They will attack the poor, the 
middle class. They will even attack the trappers in regards to 
gun control. 
 
So when you look at the Liberal strategy they may try and 
sound a lot like the NDP before an election, but indeed they 
govern and act like the Tories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at that as well, when we look at  
  



730  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

the aspect of educational cuts and the foundation, you know, for 
the future, part of that cuts on our youth will be devastating. 
You know the youth are trying hard to go to school and become 
contributing members to society. And we look at people who 
are disabled, when you look at the cuts, a lot that hasn’t come 
out is that the vocational rehabilitation program for disabled 
people were cut by the federal Liberals. 
 
So not only did we see absolutely nothing in regards to cuts for 
the rich, the selected rich, friends of the Liberals at the federal 
level, but they would pick on, not only the poor, the middle 
class, the farmers, a lot of the workers, aboriginal people, but 
also people who are disabled. Mr. Speaker, that’s the reality of 
the Liberal approach in regards to governing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an NDP government, I was proud of our budget 
this time around, as I was on all the previous years we’ve been 
governing. A government is judged in many cases not only with 
the partnership it builds with the general population, but also 
the partnership it builds and the compassion it has for people 
who are poor, people who are needy, and people in the 
middle-class realms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the NDP government in this budget 
has again built on that tremendous history. The CCF started it 
out and reflected it in the history of Canada, and we’re seeing it 
reflected in NDP governments throughout the Saskatchewan 
history. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that what we see is not 
only compassion but a sense of stability and a sense of change 
as we look forward in the future. 
 
We see this idea of stability through our fiscal responsibility as 
a government. We’ve seen the first balanced budget in the 
history of Canada in recent years. We’ve seen balanced budget 
legislation in this province. When we look at the new budget, 
we see, four years into the future, a balanced budget. Four years 
of planning, so people can look ahead and see what's coming, 
was a very important aspect of our Saskatchewan budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  We see, Mr. Speaker, that in the four-year 
period, after the fifteen and a half billion dollar disgrace by the 
Tories, that indeed we will reduce our debt by 2.4 billion. The 
interest payments on the debt are $850 million, Mr. Speaker, 
but we will have them cut in the next four years down to 750 
million  a cut of $100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that will be $100 million to the people of the 
province in regards to the needs, whether in the realm of what 
we have been able to support this year in regards to our 
expenditures by taking the cuts in health, education, and social 
services of over 100 million and replacing it with an NDP 
government of over $100 million and saving these programs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say a few words as well in regards 
to the North. I hear the member from Athabasca and I hear the 
member from the Saskatoon Greystone making comments about 
the North. But I will say I’ve been sitting in our legislature 
since ’86, and I might say that what we have done in regards to 
northern development in comparison let’s say to  

Alberta or Manitoba or anywhere across Canada, or for that 
internationally, was one of the best examples of development 
that you could ever see. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  We looked at the situation in regards to 
mining. And I would guarantee there is no place in Canada or 
the United States or any place else where you have 50 per cent 
employment of people from that area. No place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  There is no place where you will see the 
training programs in a few, short period of time; in the 
four-year period we’ve had 400 people trained. And, Mr. 
Speaker, when we look at the high unemployment rates of 
aboriginal people, 90 per cent of the people that were trained 
were aboriginal people, Indian-Metis people from northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think that says a lot in regards to the fact that the multi-party 
training program that we had in northern Saskatchewan won a 
national award for excellence, and that was an example of, 
again, an NDP strategy in education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also worked in partnership, not only with the 
people of the North, but with the businesses of the North in 
regards to Cameco and Cogema. And also we work, Mr. 
Speaker, with the smaller businesses of the North. 
 
I must say that since we’ve become government, we’ve 
increased the number of contracts to quite an extent. But what is 
really important, Mr. Speaker, is the amount of the contracts. 
We’ve gone from $12 million worth of contracts to northern 
businesses to $47 million worth of contracts this year. That is a 
400 per cent increase in four years. That is unmatched 
anywhere in the world. 
 
When you look at the contractors, Mr. Speaker, I heard the 
Athabasca member talking about whether the east side or the 
west side were getting all the contracts and the jobs in the 
North. I will say very clearly that even in the far north where a 
very few jobs existed during Tory times, you could count a 
handful in Athabasca region of which the member represents. 
We now have over a hundred people in the training and hiring 
components of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We also see in there, Mr. Speaker, that in regards to the training 
component, that the west side had a new building in regards to 
Northlands College, right in Buffalo Narrows which the 
member from Athabasca represents. So when he says that 
nothing was done, it is inaccurate. Important things have been 
done in regards to the self-determination effort of the people 
from the west side and the partnership with the Saskatchewan 
government. 
 
When we looked at the development therefore, we also saw the 
development on the west side. When I went to Contact Lake, 
just north of La Ronge, there was a tremendous success story on 
that. As I looked at the road constructions and Internorth, we  
  



April 2, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

saw companies like Internorth from the west side, and I say 
from Ile-a-la-Crosse, from his home town, a Metis person by 
the name of George Raymond owns that company, Internorth, 
along with Leonard Larson from Buffalo Narrows. Tremendous 
Metis entrepreneurs, they have the contract for Contact Lake. 
 
(2215) 
 
Their record of employment — they’re with a general 
contractor — their record of employment was very impressive. 
Over 80 and 90 per cent of the people at different stages of 
development were from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
When you looked at the overall record of that Contact Lake 
development, it was 66 per cent employment of people from 
northern Saskatchewan, in that mine. So when you look at the 
development you see people who have stood up, said we want 
to be part of development, and Saskatchewan government in 
partnership with the mining company said yes, it’s an important 
state of development and that’s what we will do and that is what 
has happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I would also talk about 
other companies, etc. I might make a comment on Kitsaki 
Development Corporation, NRT, Northern Resource Trucking, 
I might say that Chief Cook, who also sits in on the Cameco 
board, represented at the highest levels of decision making on 
the largest uranium mining company in the world, is also the 
person in charge of what NRT has achieved, and that company 
is now the largest uranium mining transportation trucking 
company in the whole world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is progress. That is economic development. 
That is real and true partnership with people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When we look at forestry, Mr. Speaker, I 
could go on on another litany in regards to what has happened 
in forestry with Meadow Lake Tribal Council; with Montreal 
Lake and the computer programing that they had along with 
their forestry program, you know, updating the technological 
knowledge of their people, getting involved in the forestry 
sector. 
 
I can talk about Cumberland House and their involvement in 
forestry in the past couple of years and what we are doing with 
MacMillan Bloedel and the mill over there, and the possibilities 
for development in that area; as well as what is taking place 
with what is happening with the possibilities on Weyerhaeuser. 
And as well we just signed, Mr. Speaker, an agreement with 
Green Lake, of where the member from Athabasca represents 
Green Lake, 30,000 cubic metres of forestry in his own area, 
Mr. Speaker  30,000 cubic metres of wood. 
 
Every year for 20 years, Mr. Speaker, that is progress. The 
leadership of that community stood straightforward with us, 
said this is where we want to head. We want to put food on the 
table for our own children. We need the wood. We need to stay  

strong with our own families. We don’t want the welfare 
cheques, they said; we want pay cheques like everybody else. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we listened, we then followed up with 
action and we signed an agreement with the tremendous 
leadership of the people from Green Lake in that regard. Mr. 
Speaker, again that is reflected in our budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, I could go on in regards to 
the whole issue of treaty land entitlement. And you look at 
treaty land entitlement and the problems they’re having with 
treaty land entitlement in Manitoba. No place else in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker, has treaty land entitlement been resolved except 
with an NDP government in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are looking at over 1.6 million acres of land to 
be settled. Mr. Speaker, when you look at that $450 million 
agreement, the province will be paying approximately 180 
million of it over the years to come. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a sign of commitment. 
 
There are problems in areas in regards to the process of the 
implementation, but what I see, Mr. Speaker, is success. I saw 
the situation that was touch-and-go in Fort Qu’Appelle, Mr. 
Speaker, but the people went in partnership with Indian people 
of that area and they resolved that issue. That is a sign not only 
of partnership with the province of Saskatchewan and Indian 
people, but the community and Indian people, Mr. Speaker. 
That was a sign of progress. That is a sign of meeting up with 
the new century. 
 
When we look at the aspect of the whole idea of Indian people, 
we also look at the issue of gaming. We look at the gaming 
issue in this province and we see the partnership that we had 
with Indian people and with our section on the associated 
entities, you know, with exhibition associations as well as 
charities and with Metis people. And, Mr. Speaker, people are 
looking at that; class it again as being a model, a model of 
fairness, a model of reason, a model of building a sense of 
stability where all peoples can work in partnership in the 
betterment, you know, of their community. 
 
And although it was a very touchy issue, Mr. Speaker, we did 
the best we could. And a lot of people are congratulating and 
saying yes, that was the way to go. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  So when you look at it, Mr. Speaker, and 
when I heard the comments made in regards to the North and in 
regards to aboriginal people, I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there is 
no better place in Canada than Saskatchewan. Yes, we have a 
long ways to go, but slowly but surely we are dealing with these 
issues and moving forward. 
 
I looked at the issues that were outstanding for many years in 
my own community, the Cumberland bridge. We are now 
talking about finishing the Cumberland bridge this year on this 
budget. We talked about the road in regards to Grandmother’s  
  



732  Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 1996 

Bay. That road is already done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at the road to Athabasca, it’ll be moving 
forward. When we look at the road this year on improvement 
and we look at the Highways budget this year on Highway 903 
and also 965, there’ll be improvements. These roads are in the 
member of Athabasca’s own constituency. These are 
improvements in Cole Bay, Jans Bay, Canoe Narrows, and 
Waterhen area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are important areas because the road needed 
to be improved in regards to the people partaking in the forestry 
development. So not only is there help in regards to people 
getting involved in forestry, but also improvements for the 
people, the community people utilizing the road, whether it is, 
you know, for better safety and etc. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing development NDP-style, and 
it’s taking the leadership, you know, all across Canada. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Community government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  So when you look at it, Mr. Speaker . . . 
One of our people said it’s community, you know, business as 
well as government. And I think that’s an important concept. 
And I would say that we see that again in regards to the North. 
 
The NDP government, and I made this speech again when I was 
talking earlier on with the throne speech, the basics of the 
history of the North in terms of control was indeed again NDP 
in partnership with the people. 
 
We saw the first elected board in Ile-a-la-Crosse in NDP times 
 the member from Athabasca’s own home town. We looked 
at the fact that Northern Lakes School Division, the control, the 
largest school division in the North, done in NDP times. We 
look at Northlands College and the development of the three 
community colleges right before that — that was done in NDP 
times. 
 
When you look at the fact that the development in regards to the 
history of control and municipalities, with that first elected 
government in northern Saskatchewan through a northern 
municipal government, northern municipal council, that was 
done with NDP government. The options 80 proposal which 
helped formulate the basis of The Northern Municipalities Act, 
again developed in the process of consultation with NDP 
government in the latter ‘70s and early ‘80s. 
 
So when you look at it, Mr. Speaker, not only have we seen 
control in the education area, and the municipalities area, we’re 
now moving in regards to health. We will have elected boards, 
Mr. Speaker, and I would say that it will be . . . when that 
happens, we will have . . . northern people will control 80 per 
cent of the budget of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is a sign of the times. We’re putting 
control into the hands of people at the community level. And 
that is exactly what the NDP government is all about. That is 
partnership with the people. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  So in summary, Mr. Speaker, as we are 
preparing for the new century, we are seeing not only a great 
sense of stability for the people throughout our fiscal 
management, but we are seeing strong support for the key 
elements that have built Saskatchewan. 
 
We see the key elements of support that we’ve seen in this 
budget, new dollars, a 114 . . . $110 million in regards to health, 
education, and social services. Mr. Speaker, we are countering 
the insensitivity of Liberal governments at the federal level. 
Yes, they may sound like the NDP before an election. Some of 
them may even dance at trappers’ conventions like the MP 
(Member of Parliament) Gordon Kirkby. He was dancing and 
sounding pretty good before last election. Next thing we knew, 
he was voting for gun control. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing that in many cases the Liberals, 
as a matter of fact, are sounding a lot like Grant Devine. Mr. 
Speaker, when I’m listening to them they’re exactly like Grant 
Devine  no taxes and no cuts. And then sometimes they shift 
their argument and say, let’s have more services and more 
spending. So I guess they’re a little bit different that way. 
They’re going back and forth a little bit. But I think in most 
cases they still sound a little bit like Grant Devine in the sense 
that they try and take their right-wing agenda on no tax. 
 
But I’ll tell you something. They just mentioned that they 
would do Devine Grant as well, but that’s their side of the 
argument. Our side of the argument is to build on the province 
in regards to education, health, and social services, and the job 
creation of 10,000 jobs in the province and more jobs into the 
future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see our partnership with the North, with 
aboriginal people, in mining, forestry, treaty land entitlement, 
gaming, Cumberland House bridge, Grandmother’s Bay road 
improvement, Gouldfields Bay, Jans Bay. We’re seeing the 
work in the Northlands College in Buffalo Narrows. We’re 
seeing northern control, in partnership with the NDP 
government, of the people of northern Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I think we’re moving and creating a good base to face 
the new century. 
 
I am proud, I think, Mr. Speaker, to stand up and say that this 
1996 budget will indeed prepare us not only for this year, but 
for many years into the future as we face the challenges, not 
only the realms of education and health and social services but 
in economic development and jobs. 
 
These are the bases that the people of northern Saskatchewan 
have elected me on. And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m 
proud to stand up with people in northern Saskatchewan and 
say that the 1996 budget has been a tremendous budget in 
partnership with the people of Saskatchewan and the North. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 703 
Ward ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 711 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 712 
Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................. 716 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 718 
Upshall......................................................................................................................................................................................... 723 
Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 729 

 


