













































March 6, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 99 

 March 6, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of hundreds of names regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. 

 

The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

communities all throughout southern Saskatchewan  some in 

Regina, in Shaunavon, Broadview, Pilot Butte. We have 

hundreds of them here from the south half of the province, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would like to table these today. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too, as 

well, have petitions today with respect to SaskPower. And I’ll 

just read quickly the prayer for you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until an 

all-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from . . . all from the area 

around Colonsay, Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present them 

on their behalf today. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

of hundreds of names regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Canora; they’re from Invermay; they’re from Buchanan, 

Saskatchewan; Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Punnichy, Estevan, 

Kamsack; all over throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Osika:  I also rise today, Mr. Speaker, to present 

petitions of many names regarding the Plains Health Centre. 

The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Canora, Broadview, Fort Qu’Appelle, Moose Jaw, 

Yorkton, Oxbow, Davidson; virtually all over southern 

Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I arise today to present 

petitions of hundreds of names regarding the Plains Health 

Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

such places as Regina, Langenburg, Lumsden, Avonlea, and 

Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 

petitions to present today in reference to SaskPower: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Punnichy, Hazlet, Bromhead, 

Oungre, Tribune areas of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition to 

this Assembly as well, and I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the Montmartre, 

Kendal, Francis area of this province. I so present. 

 

Ms. Julé:  I rise today, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions of  



100  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

hundreds of names regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Estevan, Balgonie, Moose Jaw, Creighton, Marquis, and 

throughout Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’d like to 

present a petition. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Signed by people from Limerick, from Saskatoon, from 

Assiniboia. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  I would like to present a petition, Mr. 

Speaker, regarding Highway 16. I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

reverse its decision to route Highway 16 through the 

village of Borden, and that your Hon. Assembly may be 

pleased to cause the government to route the said highway 

around the north side of the village of Borden on land 

already purchased by your government for that purpose. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by individuals from 

Saskatoon, North Battleford, Lloydminster. I wish to table such 

petition. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of hundreds of names regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. They prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Preeceville and Endeavour and Weyburn and Regina and 

Yorkton, Melville  whole host of communities. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have been 

receiving thousands of petitions from people and we’re 

delivering some more of them today: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately repeal the  

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement and replace it 

with a fair tendering policy which awards all government 

contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, union and 

non-union, with no union hiring quotas. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These come from Saskatoon, and we will be adding a lot more 

in the future. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

petitions of hundreds of thousands of names regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

all over the south part of the province, and particular Regina, 

Moose Jaw, Canora. Mr. Speaker, thank you. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I rise too to present petitions of 

millions . . . I mean dozens of names regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed this petition are once again from all 

across Saskatchewan: from Crane Valley, from Big Beaver, 

from Tribune, from Assiniboia, and all over. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise today to present 

petitions on numerous names regarding the Plains Health 

Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

McLean, from Indian Head, from Montmartre, Wolseley, 

Sintaluta, as well as Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

oppose changes to federal legislation regarding firearm 

ownership; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

allocate adequate funding dedicated toward the 

double-laning of Highway No. 1; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to  



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  101 

order a moratorium on hospital and nursing home closures; 

and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 

that I shall on Friday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Agriculture, regarding the 

approximately 12,000 farmers who received gross revenue 

insurance program, GRIP, bills from the government: (1) 

how many of the approximately 12,000 farmers who 

received GRIP bills from the government have paid those 

bills to date; (2) what is the rate of interest the government 

is charging for those producers who are late in paying 

those bills; (3) what is the amount of the largest GRIP bill 

set out by the government to an individual farmer? 

 

I so present. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are visitors 

from the board of governors of the Southeast Regional College, 

and I would like to introduce them to you, and through you to 

my colleagues in the legislature. Lorraine Hanson is the acting 

chairperson of the board; Carroll Cantlon, a member of the 

board; Bill Haussecker, also a member of the board; and Roger 

Rasmussen, a member of the board. Also present is Arthur 

Whetstone who is the president of the Southeast Regional 

College. I’ll be meeting with them at 2:30, Mr. Speaker, but I 

wanted to take this opportunity to introduce them to members 

of the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join with the minister in welcoming the representatives 

from the Southeast Regional College. Certainly it’s been a 

pleasure to meet with these individuals on numerous occasions, 

and I know the college really does a fine effort in working to 

help with the education of young people in our area. And I 

commend them for their hard work and welcome them to the 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and to all of my colleagues in the Assembly a 

person that is very, very special to me. For the past 26 years I’ve 

had the great pleasure to have this lady call herself my wife. 

Together we’ve had three beautiful daughters, and I really want 

to introduce Carole Gantefoer to this Assembly to give me 

support today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce today to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly some friends and associates that I see seated in the 

west gallery. There’s June Mitchell, a long-time community 

activist and person who has strong principles and values that 

had a lot to do with the whole development of Saskatchewan. 

Seated next to her, Brian Rands and Shelagh Malloy, involved 

in the Friends of Cuba, an issue that we’ve been hearing a lot 

about these days; Jim Elliott, who’s very involved in recycling 

projects in the constituency that I’m from; and I think, if my 

eyes don’t fail me, Mr. Spence, who has had a long-time 

involvement in first nations’ issues and community support 

throughout the province. So I’d like the members to join me in 

welcoming them to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you and to the members of the Assembly the young man 

seated up in the gallery opposite, from Canora, Saskatchewan, 

my constituency assistant, Jeffrey Hryhoriw. Jeff. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to join 

other members of the legislature in welcoming the Southeast 

Regional College Board here, and Art Whetstone, the CEO 

(chief executive officer) for that regional college. They do do a 

tremendous job in our area and I appreciate the fine work that 

they’ve done. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you. I would like to introduce to 

you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members in the legislature today, 

Mr. Gary Carlson. Mr. Carlson’s in the west gallery. Mr. 

Carlson originates from the town of Tisdale and is very 

involved in Saskatchewan Agricultural Hall of Fame. I’d like 

everybody to please welcome Gary. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and to the legislature, Ms. Florence Driedger, one of my 

constituents. She is the former director of the Family Service 

Bureau of Regina and she’s also a member of the board of 

Family Service Canada. Welcome to you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I would also like to welcome my 

constituents, Brian Rands and Shelagh Malloy and Mr. Gary 

Carlson. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

just like to add my welcoming remarks to the member from 

Regina Lakeview, to Ms. Florence Driedger. I’ve had the great 

privilege of being able to work with her from time to time. 

She’s the consummate professional and has added greatly to the 



102  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

fabric of our society by serving people so very, very well. 

 

So welcome to you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to join the Minister of Justice, and the member from 

Greystone as well, to welcome Florence Driedger here. Florence 

of course is a 25-year friend, a social work colleague, a very 

active member of the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers, and has contributed to not only Regina, 

Saskatchewan, and Canadians’ public policy, public social 

policy, but also has been very involved internationally. And it’s 

been a real pleasure for me to work with Florence over the 

years. And I also feel that she is, along with Otto, are just two 

outstanding citizens in the area, and I’d like to join the 

members to welcome you here, Florence. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce a 

young man in your gallery today. His name is Jared Orynik. 

Jared is a student at St. Mary High School in Prince Albert, and 

he is so interested in politics and in the workings of the 

parliamentary processes that he’s applying for the position of 

page at the House of Commons. He was here for an interview 

this morning, and he’s spending some time with us and I think 

meeting with some pages. And we wish you the best, Jared, in 

your endeavours. Please welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Saskatoon Entrepreneurs 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Whoever said that 

young people are leaving Saskatchewan hasn’t heard about a 

Saskatoon business called Shuttlecraft, a group of young 

entrepreneurs in our community. This business recently had its 

official opening in Saskatoon, and designs and manufactures 

fibreglass boats. Just to put this successful enterprise into 

perspective, Shuttlecraft had its initial prototype developed in a 

family garage and since that time has progressed from a small 

operation to its present 34,000 square-foot facility in Saskatoon. 

 

Shuttlecraft and these young people now employ 85 people and 

anticipate that the workforce will reach a hundred by the end of 

this year. Sales in just three years have grown to $2 million. 

And this is just one of many examples of how businesses are 

taking advantage of the economic climate here in Saskatchewan 

to expand their operations. 

 

And so I’d like to congratulate Dan Beaulac, Wayne 

Washington, and Trevor Hewison of Shuttlecraft for the 

initiative that they have shown and for their demonstration that 

young entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan can have not only a 

significant role but a growing role in developing our economy. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

War Games at Canadian Forces Base in Dundurn 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

respect the privilege of being able to make a member’s 

statement, and while we typically focus on positive events, we 

have a responsibility to not overlook the negative. 

 

This weekend at CFB (Canadian Forces Base) Dundurn, 

soldiers played a war game which was the epitome of racism 

and stereotypical prejudice directed at Indian people. This is an 

issue which transcends politics because it goes to the very core 

of basic human dignity. 

 

Canadian Indians were among the soldiers who fought against 

the racist atrocities of Nazi Germany and it is beyond 

comprehension to learn that their brothers in the Canadian 

military would engage in a game that undermines that memory 

and disrespects the citizens of our nation. 

 

The mother who called my office about how the television 

report of this event distressed her two young sons of indigenous 

parentage is rightfully demanding a public apology from the 

military, and we should do no less. This is not only a fearful 

incident for Indian children to hear on the news; it affects 

everyone’s children and their perceptions of others. 

 

So I urge all members of this Assembly to acquaint themselves 

with the details of this situation and to publicly denounce the 

actions of these soldiers and their commanding officers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Scott Tournament of Hearts 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although this 

event is of the recent past, I wish to recognize the community of 

Tisdale for an outstanding job of hosting the Scott Tournament 

of Hearts. The ladies provincial curling was really something to 

see January 26 to 28. The Tisdale Recplex was a hub of activity. 

It was a great honour for my wife Carole and I to participate in 

the opening ceremonies, Friday evening banquet, and incredible 

curling. 

 

The Hon. Mrs. Wiebe was in attendance and I share her 

observations of how a small rural community can display such a 

wonderful event, well organized and full of warm hospitality. 

 

Bonnie Dagg and the host committee of the Tisdale Community 

Curling Club did a spectacular job. It was exciting to see 

Melfort’s own Kay Montgomery, third for Sherry Anderson of 

Prince Albert. Sherry Scheirich emerged as a winner 

representing Saskatchewan at the Scott Tournament at Thunder 

Bay. 

 

I ask this Assembly to join with me in congratulating the 

community of Tisdale and Sherry Scheirich who we’re very 

proud of when she was in Thunder Bay. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  103 

Certificate for Bravery 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to recognize 

an outstanding young citizen and a member of my constituency, 

Anne Paula Jeanne Lavergne . Miss Lavergne is a 12-year-old 

grade 7 student at St. Louis School. She was awarded a 

certificate for bravery and the award of merit medal on June 30, 

1994 for her selfless actions during a fire at her family’s home 

in St. Louis on April 22, 1994. And just recently she was 

awarded a certificate of commendation from Government 

House which states: 

 

A commendation is awarded to Anne Paula Jean Lavergne 

for an act of great merit in providing assistance to others in 

a selfless manner at St. Louis, Saskatchewan, on April 24, 

1994. On behalf of His Excellency, the Governor General 

of Canada, it gives me great pleasure to present to Anne 

Lavergne this prestigious award. 

 

And I would like to offer my sincere congratulations to Anne 

Lavergne on her bravery. Congratulations, Anne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wolverine Resources 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to report a Saskatchewan 

project in the town of Humboldt that will increase the economic 

activity, create jobs, and protect the environment  three very 

important goals  following the motto: reduce, reuse, recycle, 

and reclaim. Wolverine Resources, a privately owned and 

operated corporation, has built a facility that will process used 

oil into synthetic crude that can be used by any refinery. The 

products that will be produced are the same as from any other 

crude. Construction of the facility has been completed. Oil is 

now being collected. Processing is scheduled to begin in 

mid-May. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, surveys suggest that there is 

probably 27 million litres of used oil that could be collected. 

When the plant is fully operational, Mr. Speaker, it will be able 

to process 75,000 litres a day, with the possibility of expansion 

in the future. Initially 12 people will be employed at the plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is good news for the Saskatchewan economy 

and the environment. I congratulate Wolverine industries for its 

contribution to both. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Repercussions of William Dove Slaying 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in August 

of 1992 the entire province was shocked to hear of a 

horrendous crime that was committed in the Whitewood area. 

On August 15, William Dove left his summer home at the 

Maple Grove resort to help three young men who said they were 

having car problems, and we are all aware of the results of this 

assistance that was offered and the fact that Mr. Dove lost his 

life in such a horrendous fashion. 

 

I know many people in the Whitewood area continue to be 

concerned about how justice has been handled, and I think it’s 

not just Whitewood but it’s certainly across the province. And I 

would like to add, Mr. Speaker, that while we have questions 

about the parole board and while we have questions on the way 

justice is meted out, one can only hope that the Dove family 

will finally find comfort in knowing that hopefully justice has 

been served. 

 

But I think the fact that the perpetrator, or one of the 

perpetrators of this crime, who is now being given the okay for 

a parole, has said that he prays all the time, that he’s sorry, and 

that he asks for forgiveness, we truly hope and pray that this 

individual will seek that forgiveness and will show to the 

Whitewood community and to our society as a whole that there 

is a place for forgiveness to be meted out. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Country Music Week 

 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, it has long been recognized that the 

two most important things in a country music fan’s life are his 

or her half-ton truck, and of course country music. For proof of 

this claim, one need look no further than the Lumsden valley, 

which is home to one of the world’s country music festivals 

every July. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Not this July. 

 

Mr. Wall:  Well, oh, this July it’ll be bigger and better 

because now it is being sponsored by the Kinsmen Club. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this week country music fans 

and industry people will be getting into their half-tons, cars and 

buses and heading for Regina because this is Country Music 

Week in Saskatchewan, and Regina is this year’s host city. 

 

From Wednesday, March 6, through Sunday, March 10, the 

people of Regina will be hosting Country Kicks in ’96, 

showcasing Saskatchewan’s best country music artists, 

entertainers, songwriters, managers, promoters, and 

broadcasters in a celebration of what has become Canada’s 

largest provincial country music event. 

 

This week includes performances at Regina’s country music 

night clubs by Saskatchewan performers, as well as educational 

seminars. 

 

The annual SCMA (Saskatchewan Country Music Association) 

president’s dinner will take place on Saturday night at the 

Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts, followed by a cabaret in 

Hanbidge Hall, featuring the Johner Brothers of Midale; 

Marilyn Fay Parney of Rosetown; the Poverty Plainsmen of 

Regina; Rob McLane and Against the Grain from Yorkton; and 

Lorrie Church and the Last Train Out from Meadow Lake. 

Sunday’s events include . . . 

 



104  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’m sorry, the member’s time 

has expired. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Protocol Agreement Signed 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

recognize the historical signing of the protocol agreement 

between the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan and north west 

municipalities. This agreement was signed February 23 and 

supports and recognizes the inherent rights of Metis people to 

self-determination, a land base, self-government, and hunting, 

trapping, and fishing rights. The municipal governments of the 

north-west are primarily Metis people . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I have not yet called for oral 

questions. I recognized the member. I was thinking that he was 

wanting to make a private member’s statement. I will take one 

more as it still is in order, and I recognize the hon. member for 

Saskatoon Eastwood. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I had the recent . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Was it a member’s statement? I’m sorry. The 

Speaker, the Chair, apologizes to the House and I will recognize 

the hon. member for Athabasca. I apologize for my error. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

recognize the historical signing of a protocol agreement 

between the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan and the North West 

Saskatchewan Municipalities. This agreement, signed on 

February 23, supports and recognizes the inherent rights of 

Metis people to self-determination, a land base, 

self-government, and hunting, trapping, and fishing rights. 

 

The municipal governments of the north-west are primarily 

Metis people and therefore have a tremendous amount to gain if 

these Metis issues are addressed. 

 

However, this protocol agreement, while intended to highlight a 

potential allegiance between the two organizations, will also 

recognize municipal governments, their role, the jurisdictions, 

and endorsement of any future settlements of the Metis issues 

under this agreement. 

 

It is the first in the call for social and economic justice for the 

people of the North, and specifically for the Metis communities 

of this particular area. Thirteen Metis locals in ten communities 

signed this protocol agreement along with Jim Durocher, 

president of the Metis Nation, and Mayor Louis Morin of Jans 

Bay, who is the chairman of north west municipal association. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my questions today are for the 

Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. Speaker, 

representatives from rural municipal governments will meet 

next week at their annual convention and one controversial 

issue is expected to dominate discussion  amalgamation. 

 

The Premier set off this debate by speaking during a recent 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

convention and in his province-wide address about the need for 

municipal governments to merge and work more closely 

together. Furthermore, the Premier used Alberta as a model of 

what this province should strive for. Would the Minister of 

Municipal Government explain why her government would 

point to Alberta as an example when studies have shown the 

cost of municipal government per citizen in Alberta is greater 

than that of the average Saskatchewan resident under this 

province’s present system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer 

the question because the question refers to the television 

address that I made and various speeches that I made at SUMA 

and around the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to say to the members opposite and repeat again to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan that the government of 

the province of Saskatchewan is embarked on a task that the 

people want us to engage in and that is to prepare our province 

for the 21st century in several key areas — one of which is the 

question of governance, making sure that the infrastructure of 

local governments and local services is the best that it can 

possibly be in the year 2000 and beyond in the face of the Crow 

rate changes, in the face of the technological changes, the 

global economy, and the like. 

 

We are approaching this from a partnership point of view. 

We’re asking our urban governments and our rural governments 

to sit down with the government of the province of 

Saskatchewan and have input from the opposition members and 

from the community at large in devising the most effective, 

most sensitive infrastructure scheme for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier speaks about the 

urgent need for local government to become more efficient, 

when in fact he couldn’t be further from the truth. Rural 

municipalities have suffered a 36 per cent drop in 

revenue-sharing in the past eight years under the current 

government and the previous Conservative government. 

However, during the same period of time rural municipalities 

have raised their mill rates only 10.8 per cent. They should be 

applauded not jeered. 

 

Does the minister have any studies which show amalgamating 

of our rural municipalities would achieve any monetary 

savings? 

 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  105 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for that question. What we are doing, in concert with 

the municipal organizations and their member municipalities, is 

talking about a vision for the future of Saskatchewan and how 

to increase the capacity of municipalities, how to increase their 

capacity to respond to the challenges that are going to be facing 

them in the loss of the Crow, changes in transportation, 

reassessment, the settlement of treaty land entitlements. 

 

There are challenges facing municipalities in this province at 

this time and in the future that are equal to, if not greater than, 

those that were faced by our pioneers. We want to work 

together with that sector to make it as strong as it can be. Work 

with us. Join us. We respect their ability. We respect the ability 

of those people elected at the local level, leaders in their own 

communities, to show innovation and initiative and to be able 

to respond to those challenges. We want to be there with them. 

Where are you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, municipal governments in this 

province have been the model of efficiency. If only this 

government would take a lesson and stop its holier-than-thou 

attitude of telling municipal governments what’s best for them. 

It is the people of these municipalities that do know what is best 

for them. Yet the Minister of Municipal Government insists in a 

February 23 Leader-Post article, and I quote: 

 

. . . changes are needed and is counting on municipal 

politicians to arrive at the same conclusion. 

 

What changes is the Minister of Municipal Affairs counting on 

them to make? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad to have the 

opportunity to answer that question. Municipalities all over this 

province are sharing services, are sharing administrations, are 

entering into inter-municipal agreements to provide services to 

the residents of their communities, urban and rural. We want to 

encourage that. We want to be with them, to make it easier for 

them to do that. We plan to introduce legislation that will help 

them do that. 

 

It’s not a top-down approach. We’re responding to the 

measures that they want to take. They do know what’s best for 

them. That’s why we’re listening to them. That’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, we are engaging in consultations with them, to design 

a system in rural Saskatchewan that will lead us into the next 

century and beyond. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, municipal leaders are getting 

a mixed signal from this government. On one hand the minister 

states there is no top-down plan, but on the other she is quoted 

on February 23 Leader-Post article as stating, and I quote  

again: “ . . . for now, the government won’t force them to 

amalgamate.” For now. 

 

Will the minister stand in this House today and assure the 

people of Saskatchewan that municipal governments will not be 

forced to amalgamate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I certainly can confirm 

that there is no plan to force rural local governments to 

amalgamate. What they will have to do, Mr. Speaker, is join 

together in the face of some challenges that have been given to 

them by your counterparts at the federal level, when they 

privatize railways, leading to railway abandonment, leading to 

elevator closures which affects the tax base of rural 

municipalities and small towns and villages in this province. 

That’s the kind of challenge we have to ready them for. You 

should be helping them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that railway 

abandonment has nothing to do with the efficiencies, has 

nothing to do with the efficiencies of rural municipal 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, municipal governments cannot be blamed for 

being somewhat suspicious of this government’s motives. 

Health care serves as a perfect example. Let’s not forget it was 

this government that promised to consult at the grass roots 

level, and then proceeded to close 52 rural hospitals, providing 

local residents with no say in these decisions. 

 

Will the minister make it clear what her government’s complete 

intentions are on the issue of amalgamation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, these are the same 

people who were against medicare now talking about health. 

The member opposite says, and he should know better, that 

elevator closures have nothing to do with the capacity of rural 

Saskatchewan to meet its challenges. He should know that in a 

lot of smaller towns and villages the grain elevator is the major 

source of revenue through taxation. If that elevator closes, the 

town loses that source. 

 

And you’re trying to tell me . . . Mr. Speaker, is the member 

opposite trying to tell me that the changes to the grain 

transportation system that will affect the road network in this 

province and affect the rural and urban municipalities’ ability to 

deliver transportation services, that the actions of the federal 

government are no challenge to those communities? He’s 

wrong, and he knows it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Potential Lay-offs at Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

 



106  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

Mr. Heppner:  My question is for the Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education. Mr. Minister, we see that you’re 

running your department with the same negligence you ran the 

Department of Justice. Yesterday I asked you to confirm that 

major lay-offs were coming to SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology). You said, and I quote: 

 

I doubt if it’s true, because if it is true, I think I’d have 

been notified about it. 

 

Today, Mr. Minister, we have received SIAST budget planning 

for the next three years. It indicated that SIAST is planning to 

eliminate between 180 and 330 positions, resulting in the 

elimination of over 2,800 student positions. This information 

was distributed to SIAST employees on Monday. 

 

Mr. Minister, why did you mislead this House? And when are 

the lay-offs and student . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order, order. I want to call the 

member to order. I recognize he’s a new member, and I remind 

him that it is out of order to infer or to accuse a member of 

misleading the House. And I’ll ask him to withdraw that remark 

and complete his question. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I withdraw that remark. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member 

knows things I don’t know, I’d appreciate receiving a copy of 

the material that he has, because the fact of the matter is that the 

SIAST board of governors and the SIAST administration have 

not made any decisions with respect to any adjustments that 

they’re going to have to make. 

 

Now the member will know, assuming that the member even 

reads the daily papers, that SIAST is faced with particular 

problems as a result of the changes in the federal government’s 

funding from the Unemployment Insurance Commission. The 

total pill that SIAST is going to have to swallow over the next 

three years is something like $31 million. That’s a very, very 

significant item as far as SIAST is concerned. And they have 

been actively planning how they’re going to cope with those 

cut-backs as they occur. 

 

Now we don’t know what the pace of those withdrawals will 

be. We know they’ll take place over three years. We’re 

negotiating with the federal government about it now. But there 

has certainly been no decisions made as to what kind of lay-offs 

or cut-backs will take place at SIAST. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, in his speech the other day, the 

Premier talked about promoting training that meets the demands 

of today’s job market. Well I guess that’s what’s happening; 

there are no jobs, so there may be no training programs needed 

either. 

 

Mr. Minister, how do the massive reductions square with your 

commitment to provide good quality education for the young 

people in this province? 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is 

asking a question of the wrong minister. He should be asking 

the question of Ottawa when they cut back funding for training 

programs that amount to $31 million in a small province like 

Saskatchewan. Now we’re trying to cope with those reductions, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a difficult matter. For example, our whole 

apprenticeship program has been put under a very dark cloud as 

a result of withdrawals from the federal government. Now 

we’re trying to cope with that. We’re trying to cope with that as 

best we can and we’ll do the very best we can. But for the 

member to suggest that it’s something this government did to 

withdraw funding from these programs at SIAST, the member 

is just dreaming. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, the information on the budget 

that we have is a decision made by that government; it was their 

choice and I suggest they take the responsibility for it. Either 

you’re negligent in your duties or you . . . either way one really 

has to question your competence. 

 

Mr. Minister, your Premier promised cuts in your government 

that would start at the top. Yet today we see between 180 and 

330 jobs gone and going to be gone shortly, about to be 

eliminated  instructors — 2,800 student positions gone. Yet 

you keep your job, even though at this rate there’s going to be 

next to nothing for you to be the minister of. 

 

Mr. Minister, why don’t you show some leadership by making a 

real cut at the top? Why don’t you resign your make-work job 

and resign your ministership of Education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter what 

kind of an answer you give to that particular member, I guess 

he’s going to go ahead and read the questions anyway. 

 

I repeat for the third time and maybe  the member’s looking 

right at me now  he may hear it this time: the cuts are not 

ours. The withdrawals are being done by the federal 

government. They total $31 million. Is the member suggesting 

that the SIAST administration should not be planning as to how 

they’re going to swallow these bitter pills that are coming down 

from Ottawa? Is the member suggesting that they should just 

whistle in the dark and pretend these cuts aren’t coming? 

 

We’ll do the best we can, but the member knows that this 

government is not in a position to back-fill behind these federal 

cut-backs, either from the CHST (Canada Health and Social 

Transfer) envelope or from the Unemployment Insurance 

Commission. We simply don’t have the resources to do it. But 

we will do the best we can because training, post-secondary 

education, indeed all of education, enjoys a very high priority 

from this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Size of Cabinet 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier 

because it’s obvious the minister for Post-Secondary Education  



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  107 

doesn’t want to take any responsibility for his decisions or his 

department. 

 

Mr. Premier, you said cuts would start at the top. You said that 

you’d be showing leadership by cutting the size of your cabinet. 

Yet where do the cuts start? Two hundred and fourteen people 

cut at Crop Insurance and now as many 330 people may be cut 

at SIAST, not to mention the number of student reductions in 

class reductions. Yet the do-nothing Minister of Post-Secondary 

Education, who doesn’t even seem to know what’s going on in 

his department, he gets to keep his job. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you show some real leadership here today? 

Will you fulfil your promise to cut the size of cabinet by cutting 

the Minister of Post-Secondary Education, obviously a portfolio 

that is no longer needed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the question by the 

Leader of the Conservative Party is amusing, to say the least. 

Here we have a situation where the federal Liberal government, 

probably reinforcing it in about an hour’s time or less as they 

present the federal budget, has decided to eliminate $80 million 

on the post-secondary portfolio, has decided by constitution to 

devolve manpower and training to the provinces. And the Tory 

leader gets up and says that the provincial government should 

not be prepared to respond to that. 

 

Now if that isn’t a head-in-the-sand approach, if that isn’t an 

attitude that goes back to the Dark Ages, if that isn’t an attitude 

which is outdated, if that isn’t an attitude which is typical Tory, 

I don’t think I’ve ever heard of one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is about managing change. We 

don’t like what Ottawa is doing. You shouldn’t be criticizing 

us; you should be joining us in attacking the Liberal Party for 

doing what they’re doing to the students of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and the educational system. 

 

This is not a question of where you and I are at odds. We 

should be joining our hands against the Liberals. And for that 

matter, the provincial Liberals should be joining this legislature 

in condemning their federal counterparts for what they’re 

doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, during the past few days in this 

legislature I have debated with the Minister of Agriculture the 

matter of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) wind-up 

bills and his failure to keep a promise not to collect these bills. 

 

Mr. Minister, each one of these bills represents a Saskatchewan 

farm family, and each of these families are affected in a 

different way. And they’re affected by the actions of you and 

your government. 

 

I would now like to refer to a letter from one farm wife. And,  

Mr. Speaker, I would like to table this letter and bill, and I 

quote from it: 

 

My husband was accidentally killed on January 1. Since 

that date, I have received GRIP bills, bills for the wind-up 

of the GRIP program. I don’t have the money to pay this 

bill, let alone the overpayment cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the Minister of Agriculture not understand 

the anxiety he has created among farm families because of his 

broken promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my condolences go out to this family. A very sad situation, 

although I’m not familiar with it. I would like to say to the 

member opposite I’m a little bit disturbed about him dragging a 

family’s crisis in this legislature when this issue has been 

debated very many times, and he knows very well the rules and 

how the rules are going to be carried out. 

 

And he also knows that I’ve said over and over again, if farm 

families cannot pay their bills  as this is the case in this 

situation  all they have to do is call the corporation, go to the 

corporation and sit down and talk to them, discuss what options 

are available to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

farmers of Saskatchewan did not budget for your GRIP wind-up 

bills because the former minister of Agriculture, the Premier, 

and in fact this government, broke a promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to refer to a letter from a young 

farmer, and I’d like to table this bill and letter as well. And I 

quote: 

 

For a young family of three, $3,000 takes a lot of clothes 

off my child’s back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why he refuses to honour 

this promise to our farm families, both young and old. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday I asked for clarification of the Liberal policy on 

overpayments because we produced a letter that was sent to 

farmers from the federal Liberal government for overpayments 

in the WGSF (western grain stabilization fund) wind-up from 

1990-91. 

 

Now I think if the member for Arm River would be consistent, 

he would ask that all those farmers who received all those 

federal overpayments . . . be having them send to him the bills. 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, that would be as irresponsible as 

he is being by trying to create false hope for the farmers of 

these bills that will not be paid. 

 



108  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

For the last time, Mr. Member, the bills have to be paid. If you 

can’t pay them, you can make arrangements to pay them. The 

important part here is that you and your Liberal opposition over 

there are being totally irresponsible in the light of a serious 

issue in agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to remind 

the members opposite that this is provincial legislature, not 

federal. The actions of the Agriculture minister and that of this 

government represent everything that is wrong with government 

today. Their actions have only contributed to a growing feeling 

of cynicism. 

 

I would now like to refer to a letter from a farmer whose 

finances are already stretched to the limit. And the farmer states 

and I quote: 

 

It will be a long time before we fall into another program 

of this type that is nothing more than a government scam. 

 

I’d like to table this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why the farm families of 

this province should have any confidence in this government 

when it does not know the meaning of the word honour or the 

definition of promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I find this quite 

interesting. Yesterday during the debate one of the Liberal 

members over there was trying to describe what a Liberal is. 

Well it really is easy, Mr. Speaker, because a Liberal is a 

Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Unfortunately this Liberal member either 

can’t understand the program or refuses to understand the 

program. 

 

The farm families of this province know the GRIP wind-up has 

been completed; 40,000 families got cheques . . . I’m sorry, $40 

million of cheques were sent out and there were some bills that 

were sent out. Over half of those bills  in fact more than half 

of those bills now; I haven’t checked in the last couple of days 

 have come in, and they will be coming in. 

 

Because you know why, Mr. Speaker? Because farmers in this 

province are responsible. They know when they get an 

overpayment it has to be paid back. And no matter if it is in 

unemployment insurance, as is the case  and maybe the 

member would like to say, does this go for UI (unemployment 

insurance) overpayments as well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Agriculture, and for that matter this government,  

refuses to acknowledge the pain and suffering they are creating 

in rural Saskatchewan. One Saskatchewan farmer writes, and I 

quote: 

 

The changes which the New Democratic Party made to the 

GRIP program have helped me and my family farm go 

through a farm bankruptcy, the loss of two-thirds of my 

land, the loss of my credit rating, and untold and 

uncountable stress to my family. 

 

And I would like to table this, Mr. Speaker. And this envelope 

shows the frustrations, if I may, of this farm family. And I’d 

like to quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is another example of a farmer who signed up 

for the GRIP program in good faith. Will the minister 

demonstrate the same good faith and deal with each one of 

these cases on an individual basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to identify, I think, what is a problem here. And I want to 

recall and have members recall an interview that the Liberal 

member opposite did with, I believe it was the CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) a few weeks ago. 

 

When referring to the process of how farmers were informed, 

we said there were letters sent out in September and January of 

. . . September ’94 and January ’95. The member opposite said 

something to the effect — I paraphrase — that he had 

remembered seeing a letter but he didn’t think the letter said 

anything about how the payment had to be repaid. I think that’s 

the problem here. Maybe it’s denial; or maybe it’s an inability 

to comprehend this. 

 

It’s a simple concept. It’s a simple concept and I just want to 

reread something, Mr. Speaker, that I read yesterday. This is a 

quote from the Fort Qu’Appelle Times: 

 

Party strategists have given the Liberal MLAs bad advice. 

Haven’t they caught on that people want their politicians to 

(be politically) . . . to do politics differently? Isn’t that . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Last question. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

only people that don’t seem to understand is the members 

opposite, including the Agriculture and Food minister. This 

whole issue comes down to integrity, honour, and trust  

virtues which have abandoned this government. 

 

A letter from another Saskatchewan farmer contains the 

following and I’d like to quote: 

 

I don’t know if you have a personal thing against rural 

people or are you pushed by the higher-ups? I believe what 

you did was wrong, unfair, and a breach of contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to table this letter and bill for the minister 

to deal with personally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Agriculture has nothing against  



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  109 

the people of rural Saskatchewan, why is he and his government 

taking every opportunity to attack the very fabric of rural 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

member for that question. Mr. Speaker, the credibility is a 

problem with this member obviously. I tried to tell him that to 

be effective he’s got to be credible. To be effective you have to 

be credible. In this respect, Mr. Speaker, the member is not 

being credible. 

 

In one hand, he’s saying that the provincial government should 

not  even though it’s a federal-provincial agreement  

should not ask for overpayments back, which is irresponsible 

and incredible. On the other hand, he says, well maybe  in 

light of not saying anything about it  he says maybe the 

federal government’s overpaid, but it’s okay for them to be paid 

back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the credibility problem lies with the Liberals, and I 

ask the member again: Mr. Member, what is your official policy 

on  I just spilled my water  on pay-back. What is your 

official policy on repaying overpayments? Please give us your 

official policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’ll ask the members to come to 

order. 

 

Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  I would ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I see in the west gallery, and 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you to other members 

of the House, Mr. Jerry Huget and Mr. Karl Austman. Jerry 

Huget is a fire-fighter in the city of Regina and is president of 

the Saskatchewan Professional Firefighters Association. And 

Mr. Austman is from Yorkton, and I believe he is the secretary 

of that organization. 

 

I had the pleasure to meet with these gentlemen this morning, 

and I believe they’re meeting with the Minister of Labour this 

afternoon. And they do a lot of good work for fire-fighters 

throughout the province, people that protect us on a daily basis. 

I’d like to recognize them and thank them for their 

contributions. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murrell, seconded by Mr. 

Thomson, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 

Boyd. 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

re-enter this debate on the Speech from the Throne today. And 

as I was saying yesterday, in some respects I think at least as 

important or perhaps more important than the Speech from the 

Throne itself is the document MAKING CHOICES  for today 

& tomorrow that was shared with the Saskatchewan public over 

the course of the last two or three months. 

 

It is in this booklet here, the MAKING CHOICES document, 

that we really have revealed what the government is up to, not 

just for these next four years but to take us into the 21st century. 

 

(1430) 

 

Bill Gates, the owner of Microsoft, has written a book called 

The Road Ahead, in which he talks about the electronic 

super-highway, the Internet, the whole computer revolution — 

technology and where that’s taking us. And one of the constant 

themes of that book, The Road Ahead, is that the road ahead 

holds for all of society, incredible change and upheaval. And 

Mr. Gates tells the story that when he was a sophomore at 

Harvard university he was crossing the commons one day with 

a friend and they had a copy of Popular Electronics with them. 

On the cover of the magazine was a feature article about the 

world’s first personal computer. This really dates Mr. Gates and 

many of us here in the room. 

 

They read the article with great interest, but they not only read it 

with great interest they began to follow their instincts down the 

road to the future and never looked back, and so he is where he 

is today as the owner and chief executive officer of Microsoft 

Corporation and really leading the revolution in the high 

technology and the super-highway. 

 

In many respects that’s the way I look at Saskatchewan these 

days; that we are leading a revolution in the transformation of 

government and in setting an agenda for change for the 

Saskatchewan population that rivals the kinds of changes that 

were made by social democratic governments in 

Saskatchewan’s past with the introduction of medicare. And I 

think that it will only be in retrospect that we will be able to 

understand the full implications of what is happening right now 

as we look back on the past and say what a tremendous turning 

of the corner has been achieved by the present government. 

 

Mr. Gates goes on to mention the fact that there never is a 

reliable map for unexplored territory. The pioneers who came to 

this country did not have a map to lead them where they were 

going. A year or two ago I read Palliser’s journals. It was an 

eye-opener. He talks about leaving Thunder Bay, the Lakehead, 

crossing what was then relatively known territory to Winnipeg  



110  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

and Fort Garry, Lower Fort Garry. But after he left Fort Garry 

there was the wide open prairie sky and very little else. 

 

Yes, there were some native peoples in the area travelling 

around. They knew the paths through the territory, but from 

Fort Garry, Lower Fort Garry to the Rocky Mountains and 

beyond the Rocky Mountains, there really was no reliable map, 

and in fact really no reliable path to the west coast. And yet 

Palliser and his men set across the Prairies and opened this 

great country and brought map makers along with them so that 

those who followed could have a course and a path outlined for 

them so that they could reach their destination. And that 

essentially is what this government is doing, not just for 

Saskatchewan, but in many respects for the whole of Canada. 

 

I want to pause for a moment, before I talk about the future, to 

look back on the last five years and see where we’ve come from 

because I think we have a bit of a map that’s been drawn 

already these last five years. And we can look back and see 

where we’ve come from during the first term of this 

government, the legacy of debt and mismanagement that has 

been turned around. I would liken that in many respects to a salt 

shaker that for ten long years had been turned upside down, and 

the salt was running out of the salt shaker. That’s okay if you 

have something to use a salt shaker in that fashion, if you have 

something to salt. But to simply keep it upside down and let the 

salt run out isn’t very appropriate. 

 

And the provincial salt shaker, so to speak, had to be turned 

right side up. The province’s finances had to be turned right 

side up. And it took four long years for this government to do 

that. It couldn’t be done overnight, to exchange deficits for 

balanced budgets. And now we have the enviable reputation of 

being the first province in Canada, the very first province in all 

of Canada, to introduce a balanced budget this past year. What 

an accomplishment. What a road map for the rest of the country 

to balance budgets after more than a decade of consecutive 

deficit financing. No small achievement. 

 

Well that wasn’t the only thing that happened, Mr. Speaker. 

This government has sometimes been painted as being 

preoccupied with fiscal matters, and well we should have been 

preoccupied with fiscal matters where we found ourselves four 

or five years ago. 

 

There was a lot of change in addition to the change in the 

financial circumstances in the province. Part of that change 

revolved around the reforming of our provincial health care 

system. And there was a lot of controversy and stress and 

anxiety and uncertainty and upheaval surrounding this change 

that was brought to bear on our health care system. 

 

But change had to come. Change did come. And we took a 

system that was based principally on a sickness model, and we 

turned that model upside down to put it right side up again. And 

we came up with a wellness model for health care. A model that 

was predicated for years, for decades, on the growth of 

institutions and the funding of institutions irrespective of the 

actual care that in many instances took place in these 

institutions. It was the bricks and the mortar that were funded 

by taxpayers. And there’s been a tremendous shift in that  

perspective and orientation over the last four or five years, and 

people are now being put first  as they should be  before 

bricks and mortar. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  More change in health care. We took a 

system that was fundamentally predicated on a centralized 

bureaucracy out of Regina in the Tommy Douglas Building, and 

we said we’re going to stand that on its head. And we’re going 

to decentralize health care, and we’re going to be putting the 

decision-making responsibility principally in the hands of local 

communities  a revolution in many respects. 

 

And now we see the fruits of that revolution, this last year, with 

the first election of health care boards in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We took some 300 or 400 different health 

boards and consolidated them into  what was it?  30 

different boards here in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 

change. It threatened many communities, but it was positive 

change, and it’s change that’s working now for the betterment 

of health care in Saskatchewan. 

 

Why do we have to change, the people of Saskatchewan ask? 

Because there are changing needs and changing circumstances. 

Why, many people in rural Saskatchewan ask? Why do we have 

to have change to agriculture? Why did you change the GRIP 

program, they asked of this government in its first term? And 

they didn’t just ask that. They opposed that change. And the 

opposition opposed the changes to GRIP  loudly and long. 

 

But what we’ve done in agriculture is a sea change  from 

farmers farming government programs to see farmers farming 

the land and farming on the basis of the market-place. And 

Saskatchewan is a better province because of that. And the farm 

community is stronger because of that because they are dealing 

with the realities of the 20th century and the 21st century in not 

relying on government for hand-outs. 

 

The same kind of change, Mr. Speaker, has also extended into 

the arena of labour relations and the business community with 

the Partnership for Progress and the Partnership for Renewal. 

The old model of confrontation between organized labour and 

unorganized business, so to speak, has been abandoned. And 

instead this government has opted for a change in relationships 

between the labour community and the business community and 

insisted that there is now a time and a place and a necessity for 

a partnership between these two communities of interest. And 

in fact this partnership is the only way we can build our 

province and renew it. 

 

And so with that proper balance between labour and business, 

with those two communities cooperating together, the 

Government of Saskatchewan came up with a specific action 

plan with targeted dates for the renewal of the provincial 

economy. And those objectives were met in its first term. And 

one of the important changes, I might add in this respect, an 

important change for the psyche of the province was that 

government alone could not solve the problems of the business 

community and create jobs. 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  111 

There’s an old temptation for people across the province to look 

to government to create jobs  to come up with job creation 

programs. And this government, in spite of strenuous 

opposition, has said no, we aren’t going to do things that old 

way. We are backing out of the give-aways  that’s the old 

way. And we’re moving forward into a new, sustainable, 

progressive relationship  cooperative relationship between 

business and labour — where they work together to create jobs 

and strengthen our economy. And this is exactly the way the 

pioneers built our province. Individuals in the business 

community and individuals in the labour community in the 

pioneer days didn’t fight with one another over their territory or 

their rights or prerogatives. They worked together, and that’s 

what we’re relying on today, that value of cooperation, 

innovation, enterprise, community of common interest, and 

indeed hard work, to rebuild our province. And it’s paying 

dividends. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that there are many people in 

Saskatchewan who wish that it weren’t so. Oh, that we didn’t 

have to change. Oh, that we could hang on to what we’ve 

known and loved and have had for years and years and years. 

Everything may not be working just fine, but let’s keep what we 

have. Let’s go for the status quo and not for change. And there 

are many that I encounter who hope somehow, knowing 

themselves beyond hope, that there might be a reprieve from 

some of the government’s decisions and from the changes that 

they face, a sort of lull in the storm after the changes of the last 

five years. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I say that change is not only a constant in life, 

life itself is a continuum of change. We all start as a fetus in our 

life journeys We’re born into this world. We grow as children. 

We experience our teen years. We grow into adulthood. We 

grow into a second adulthood  hopefully around 45 or 55  

and begin to see life in new ways, in deeper ways, maybe more 

spiritual ways. And the inevitable ageing takes place, and we 

still grow. And change comes to us in the form of death, and for 

many of us we believe that there still is change at that point in 

our life and there is new and resurrected life. But change is a 

constant in all of life. 

 

And certainly this was true of the pioneers who built this 

province. I think, for example, of Theodore Riegert who came 

to the community of Laird and spent the first year of his life 

here in Saskatchewan, spent the first winter here in 

Saskatchewan living in a hayloft in a barn as a young man. And 

to tell him that there should not be change, that everything is all 

right, would have been terribly, terribly cruel and unfair. 

 

(1445) 

 

And it was men and women like the Riegerts who built this 

province because they believed there was a better way of doing 

things. They left the old country and came to Canada and to a 

new life, holding on to a new vision and a new dream where 

there was equality and opportunity. There could be new models 

of community. And they could build their lives. And change 

would bring improvements to them and for their children. 

 

And we have been the inheritors of what they worked for. And  

as the inheritors of the pioneers and what they worked for and 

poured out their sweat and their blood and their tears for, we 

too need to keep changing and evolving and building this 

province. We owe it to those pioneers. 

 

In those days the crop was cut by hand. They were lucky in 

many instances if they had horses to help haul the crop. And 

change should not have come to agriculture? Mr. Speaker, I 

wasn’t there when horses were replaced by tractors, but I’m 

sure there were many who argued that this is not right. This is 

not appropriate. This is not even good for the farm economy  

that tractors should supplant horses and human labour. 

 

But the change came. And we’re living it with it now. We could 

go to the Western Development museums, and you can see the 

farming techniques of yesteryear and how change has come to 

agriculture. The great threshing machines and the first sod 

busters are there as museum pieces. Change came to 

Saskatchewan as well with electrification. Should people have 

left behind wind chargers and batteries? They ran the washing 

machines. They ran the radios. But change came with 

electrification. 

 

And the old prairie trails that Palliser blazed and the Carlton 

Trail, for example, gave way to dirt roads and then to 

pavements and now to the information highway. 

 

And so I say Saskatchewan has changed profoundly in the last 

90 years  profoundly. There’s been rail line abandonment, not 

all of which has been good. There’s been the consolidation of 

farms, not all of which has been good. There’s been 

displacement. Rural Saskatchewan is now largely distinctly grey 

in the hair. And while we may lament these facts, and even 

fight them, all of us find that we must adapt to change. And we 

must also always reapply the values that the pioneers brought to 

bear to build this province  the hard work, the compassion, 

the cooperation, and the sense of community that they shared, 

and the faith that they brought to their enterprise. 

 

And that is exactly where we find ourselves today, at a point of 

decision, asking ourselves how do we apply those same values 

to the changing circumstances around us — the values of hard 

work and compassion and cooperation and community and faith 

in the future. 

 

Yes the winds of change are blowing all around us, with huge 

demographic shifts between rural and urban Saskatchewan, 

with a huge differential between the aboriginal and the 

non-aboriginal population of the province. I sometimes think 

that we are ill-informed about some of these demographic shifts 

and that the government itself has an obligation, I would say, to 

better inform the Saskatchewan public as to what we are 

looking at just in terms of some of the demographics down the 

road. 

 

The demographics, for example, between youth in the province 

and those who are over the age of 60 or 65 — tremendous 

implications for our social programs. And we think that the 

offloading from the federal government in Ottawa is a problem 

now. We have far larger problems looming on our doorstep in 

terms of the changing demographics that I’m talking about.  



112  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

And most importantly in some respects, Mr. Speaker, the gap 

between wealth and poverty in our province and in our country 

as a whole. 

 

These are things that we might like to turn a blind eye to. That 

we might throw up our hands and say, well there’s really 

nothing we can do, we have to hunker down and hold on, and 

deal with the status quo. And that is exactly what people said 

when it came to reforming our health care system five years 

ago. Heaven forbid that we should do anything to our rural 

hospitals. We’ve got to keep them at all costs. What will 

happen if there isn’t a hospital in a particular community that 

has known one and loved one? What will happen to the people 

who need that care? What will happen to the people who are 

employed there? These were all legitimate questions. But at the 

end of day change had to be embraced. More change needs to 

happen in that regard, and more change will happen. 

 

I look at the university systems in our province as well. I know 

having the University of Saskatchewan in my own constituency 

that there are many people at the University of Saskatchewan 

who are very threatened by the thought of change to university 

funding. There is talk of an ivory tower often, in terms of the 

university community. Some of that ivory tower is being 

threatened by the funding crisis brought on by the federal 

government. And yet there are larger changes in store for the 

university than simply the funding crisis from Ottawa. 

 

The University of Calgary, for example, has recognized this a 

number of years ago, the changing demographics, and said to 

themselves that we need to look at the new kinds of students 

that are requiring education. No longer do we get young people 

fresh out of high school who need education and a three- or a 

four-year degree and then maybe a master’s degree and maybe, 

if they’re really keeners, a Ph.D. What the University of Calgary 

found in looking around them and the changing demographics 

and the changing labour market was that they had people 

already long graduated from high school and university who 

needed particular skills. 

 

Maybe it was a business person who needed to learn Mandarin 

Chinese in order to conduct their business. They didn’t need 

another university degree, but they needed Mandarin Chinese. 

Or maybe it was a lawyer who needed some business 

accounting courses, or management or marketing courses, that 

didn’t want a commerce degree but wanted some particular 

expertise. 

 

And so the University of Calgary has shifted their emphasis to 

providing courses for a range of individuals, trying to meet their 

needs in evening courses, inter-session, summer session. 

Year-around lifelong learning is really the emphasis there. 

 

All of this reminds me of Ancient Greece. I never lived in 

Ancient Greece, Mr. Speaker. I’ve visited Greece and seen the 

remnants of Ancient Greece. 

 

But there were lots of philosophers roaming around in those 

days, more than we seem to have nowadays. One of them was 

Parmenides. Parmenides held to what was known as the first 

principle, the first principle of immutable change. And he said:  

change doesn’t happen; reality is changeless and immutable. He 

denied the reality of change. That was Parmenides. 

 

And along came Heraclitus. And Heraclitus says, I don’t buy 

that. I don’t buy that for a minute, that change is not real. Mr. 

Speaker, he said you cannot step into the same river twice, for 

new waters are always flowing on you and past you. Change is 

a constant to life, Heraclitus says. 

 

And that’s where we find ourselves today in some respects in 

Saskatchewan. There are some people who would deny the 

reality of change, who would hold to immutable first principles, 

like Parmenides, who said you can’t change it because it ain’t 

going to change even if you want to change it. It’s going to stay 

the way it’s always stayed. And they will deny reality. 

 

What this government is about is what Heraclitus was about  

recognizing the reality of change, and doing more than that, 

grabbing hold of change and embracing it. And so I would urge 

the Minister of Post-Secondary Education to look, for example, 

at what the University of Calgary is doing and to begin urging 

the University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan to 

be looking at that kind of model. 

 

And change is an opportunity for growth and renewal in our 

life’s journey, an opportunity to forge our futures rather than to 

simply rely on the forces of circumstance or fate. That’s why I 

say this government is trying to speak the truth to the people of 

Saskatchewan about what we face, even if they might not like 

to hear that truth, even if they might not like to believe that 

truth. 

 

And some of that is open to discussion. And thank God for an 

opposition in this House to test some of the decisions that we 

are making. And thank God for a media and a public press that 

scrutinizes these decisions, because these are very important — 

monumental in some respects — issues of public concern that 

need to be widely debated. And I for one don’t feel that enough 

people in our province have an understanding of the 

implications of change and the choices that are being made, 

given the relatively low circulation of the MAKING CHOICES 

booklet. And information is power and knowledge in this day 

and age. 

 

What can be done? Where do we go? Much can be done, Mr. 

Speaker. We have many places to go and many tasks to engage 

in. We can’t rest on our laurels with the Partnership for 

Renewal. And this government has said we’re going to institute 

a new program for economic renewal in Saskatchewan, building 

on the old one. The Partnership for Renewal program of the 

last five years will now shift gears into a Partnership for 

Growth. Part of the emphasis, a very important part of the 

emphasis or change brought to our economic development 

strategy, is a new emphasis on export growth — the entry of 

Saskatchewan into the global market-place and the need to be 

much more competitive now that we have consolidated some of 

the economic base and the fiscal integrity of the province over 

the last five years. We need to make choices that propel us into 

the international market-place. 

 

(1500) 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  113 

Ten thousand new jobs were created over the last five years, but 

we can’t rest on our laurels there. We have a goal to create an 

additional 20,000 new jobs by the year 2000. Change has come 

about these five years: seven and a half percent growth in the 

gross domestic product between 1992 and 1995; a 2.2 percent 

growth in employment over that same period; and a modest, a 

very modest, growth in population over that period of time, 

some 7,600 new people in Saskatchewan. 

 

And security has come to Saskatchewan from some of the 

changes brought about by the Partnership for Renewal. Now 

the strategic view of our economic development strategy is to 

concentrate our efforts on building on the strengths that we 

have, on our people, on our communities, in order to be world 

competitive, and to bring some of our market-place into the 

global market-place in terms of six key sectors  agri-value, 

forestry, mining and minerals, energy, tourism and cultural 

industries, information technology, and telecommunications. 

 

This is a very expansionist vision, a very risky vision, I might 

add, in some respects. Again we’re going into territory that is 

uncharted; that we don’t have a map for; that there are vast new 

vistas for us to conquer and vast opportunities for us to seize. 

 

That’s the Partnership for Growth. And I might add that if 

anyone is interested in this economic development strategy, 

simply contact the government caucus office here in Regina. I’ll 

see that you get one. 

 

Another challenge that I alluded to earlier is the challenge for 

growth in education and the redirection of education — $80 

million less, Mr. Speaker, over the next two years for 

post-secondary education in our province. How will we meet 

that challenge? With a lot of wringing of hands, with a lot of 

shedding of tears, I suspect — with a lot of uncertainty among 

young people as to whether they’ll be able to afford university 

education. 

 

But with a determination and a partnership between the people 

of Saskatchewan and its government, and with positive 

suggestions from the opposition, we will rebuild our 

post-secondary educational system and make it resilient and 

proactive to the changes that are taking place in our world 

today. I have no doubt about that. 

 

Part of what gives me confidence in this regard, Mr. Speaker, is 

what I see happening with the redesign of social services here 

in Saskatchewan. The very fact that we are able to take hold of 

such a mammoth undertaking as social services and restructure 

and reform our whole outlook to that, social services, gives me 

hope that we’ll be able to do the same in education. 

 

And I urge the people of Saskatchewan to stay tuned for that 

redevelopment of education. It isn’t put together yet, but it will 

be coming. 

 

I want to talk for a few moments about social assistance, Mr. 

Speaker. In its original design, social assistance was not 

expected to deal with large numbers of people  not the large 

numbers of people that we have across Canada or even in North 

America or even in the global community. It was a different day  

and a different age when social assistance was introduced to the 

arena of government. A relatively small number of employable 

clients received social assistance, and these were employable 

clients. And jobs were relatively numerous over the course of 

the last 30 years. So people didn’t stay on assistance programs 

for the long periods of time. We didn’t have chronic 

dependency, systemic dependency, the way we have nowadays 

because people were able to find their way back into the labour 

force and to find work. 

 

But today society has undergone tremendous change from 30 

years ago. The economy itself and the labour market have been 

stood on their head, and there’s now much greater impact on 

social assistance programs for all governments. In the 1960s for 

example, unemployment ran about 4 per cent. In the ‘90s it’s 

been running about 10 per cent across the country. Thankfully 

we have some of the lowest unemployment in all of Canada 

here in Saskatchewan, but it’s still very high when it comes to 

dealing with the problem of social assistance and poverty. 

 

And these programs have not been restructured over the last 30 

years to meet the changing realities. Social assistance 

case-loads have risen dramatically due to higher unemployment. 

And while there’s a perception that abuse is a problem, any 

significant study that has been done of social assistance, not 

only here in Saskatchewan but across the country, has shown 

that the vast majority of people who receive assistance from the 

public treasury are in need of that assistance and are honest. 

 

But now bigger problems loom on the horizon and force a 

restructuring. As we all know, the federal government is 

eliminating the Canada Assistance Plan at the end of this year 

and will reduce the amount of federal transfers for provinces 

and for Saskatchewan by more than $100 million. The federal 

government is addressing its deficit problem, as it must. It is 

addressing its problem by shifting more of the costs for health 

and social programs and training onto the provinces. And the 

number of people receiving social assistance has risen over the 

last five years, due in large part to changes in unemployment 

insurance made by the federal government, including lower 

income benefits and shorter periods of time for the payment of 

benefits, which forced more and more unemployed people onto 

the social assistance rolls. 

 

In 1993, in addition, Mr. Speaker, the federal government 

withdrew from providing social assistance for first nations 

people living off reserves in our province. And this in itself 

added a cost of $40 million to the provincial social assistance 

budget; $40 million each and every year to the social assistance 

budget, absorbed by taxpayers of Saskatchewan through the 

provincial government. 

 

So this is a challenge, and a daunting one, for the provincial 

government. And we’re committed to providing the programs, 

and the services, and the supports to this province’s most 

vulnerable people. And I’m proud to say that the area of social 

services has been one of those areas that this government has 

not cut over the last five years, as the needs have increased 

amongst our people. And that’s a tribute to this government, 

because it is putting people first and protecting those who are  



114  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

weakest and most vulnerable. 

 

And it is critical that we continue to do this, but also that we 

continue to find new ways to protect people and to provide 

them with the support they need  not just to stay on social 

assistance, but the support they need to move off of social 

assistance and to find jobs in the new economy. And that’s why 

job creation is so important to our government, because the real 

solution to social assistance is employment. As important as 

social assistance reforms are, employment is even more 

important and goes hand in hand with social services reform. 

 

And so our objectives, Mr. Speaker, in terms of social services 

reform. First of all, to protect the most vulnerable; to reduce 

disincentives, secondly, to work. Thirdly, to reduce poverty and 

its effects. Fourthly, to encourage participation in the economic 

and social life of communities. And fifthly, to simplify 

administration and reduce costs and enhance public 

accountability. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Just a word about some of the specifics 

behind these goals, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already had a 

Saskatchewan action plan for children these last four or five 

years as part of our agenda of change. We’ve had new, 

preventative and support programs as part of our agenda for 

change. We’ve had integrated school-link services, community 

schools, for example, these last five years. A child nutrition and 

development program that’s new to the province. And now 

we’re proposing a Saskatchewan child benefit for low income 

families with children to reduce child poverty and make work 

for families receiving assistance. 

 

Almost 44 per cent of the people on social assistance, receiving 

social assistance, Mr. Speaker, are children. And therefore we 

have to break the cycle of poverty where it starts: with children. 

Thirty-five thousand children in our province on social 

assistance, fully 44 per cent of the people receiving social 

assistance  Mr. Speaker, that’s where we need to bring 

change to bear to break the cycle of poverty and to free these 

children for a positive future and a new model. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  And so the Saskatchewan child benefit that is 

being proposed would be in the form of a monthly supplement 

based on a family’s income and would take basic benefits for 

children out of welfare. It would also be available to low 

income families who do not currently receive social assistance, 

but families would be able to earn more income before benefits 

start to drop. 

 

And another facet of the reform is that the Saskatchewan child 

benefit would provide supplementary health coverage for 

children so that families are able to leave social assistance 

without fear of losing the supplemental health coverage which 

is often a very big decision for them. Positive change. 

Integration of change between Social Services and the 

Department of Health, no longer having Social Services as a 

standalone agenda, but integrating decision making with Health  

in a way that hasn’t been done thus far. 

 

A second facet of social service reform has to do with the 

working poor. Across the country increasing numbers of 

families work for wages that are just at the poverty line or 

maybe even below the poverty line. They aren’t on welfare, but 

they aren’t living very far from the poverty line. And for many 

of these families then, the loss of a job, a sick child  any kind 

of little family crisis or big family crisis  can put them over 

the edge into instability and social assistance. The proposal for 

working income supplements would provide a continuous 

incentive to parents then here in Saskatchewan to increase their 

earnings and/or to pursue child maintenance, and would help 

families to move off assistance and to reduce or remove the 

disincentives to work by encouraging low income working 

families to pursue employment opportunities even if the work is 

part time. 

 

The working income supplement would provide a monthly 

supplement to low income families based on the amount of 

income they earned and the child maintenance they received. In 

effect it would top up wages and maintenance and allow more 

families to become independent of social assistance. It would 

provide an incentive for low income families to earn as much as 

possible and to pursue maintenance support from non-custodial 

parents. 

 

A third area where reform is necessary and is coming for social 

assistance is in the area of youth and social assistance. Over the 

last few years the number of youth receiving social assistance 

has been climbing steadily. Many of these young people aren’t 

attending school or working. Seventy per cent of the youth who 

receive social assistance today don’t even have a grade 12 

education. Over 30 per cent have not finished grade 10. That 

means they have no future  no education, no job, no future. 

 

(1515) 

 

And the labour market and the economy are demanding at the 

same time that young people be well educated and highly 

skilled. And so to assist them in moving into the 21st century 

and into education and employment, we’re proposing a youth 

futures program to ensure that young people under the age of 22 

are involved in productive activities and will remain also 

connected to their families. No more going out on your own and 

living off of social assistance. A new approach would 

emphasize connection with your family and the importance of 

education or work or community service if you’re going to be 

receiving social assistance. 

 

And there are other proposals as well  a provincial training 

allowance for people sponsored in provincial training programs. 

Often, given the collision of federal and provincial programs, 

there needs to be a simplification to cut through much of the red 

tape, to help people maintain their independence while they are 

in training programs. And so a provincial training allowance 

will be introduced. 

 

These are all terribly important reforms that are being brought 

to the arena of social services. And again I say to the public of 

Saskatchewan: if you have any interest or concern for these  



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  115 

kinds of issues in social assistance, simply contact the 

government caucus office or myself and I’ll see that you get a 

copy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, change involves choices. And I’m proud to say 

that this government is making choices to prepare the province 

for the future and to deal with the changes that are happening 

all around us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do I agree with all the changes this government is 

making? Not all of them. Personally, sometimes I feel we don’t 

look far enough into the future or act boldly enough when it 

comes to change. 

 

I could go on for quite a while here this afternoon on this 

subject. I look for change beyond those changes mentioned in 

the Speech from the Throne. And I know many Saskatchewan 

people look for change that goes beyond what’s contained in 

the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I think, for example, of resource policy and forest policy. We 

need the new forest Act that’s mentioned in the Speech from 

the Throne, and I applaud the government for that. It’s long 

overdue. It was introduced last year. I argued it should have 

been passed last year. It’s going to be passed this year. But we 

need change desperately in our forest sector to protect our 

resource and to share the benefits of the resource with all the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This is an old socialist principle, Mr. Speaker  that the 

resources of the province belong to the people of the province 

and should benefit all of the people of the province. And we 

need to get back to that principle. We need to look for a new 

forest economy, to rethink the very notion of forest tenure and 

look at co-management and community involvement in decision 

making. 

 

And I’m very pleased that that’s a component of the new forest 

Act. We need to look also at site-specific forestry as opposed to 

blanket clear-cutting  the reductionist forest practices that 

have come to be accepted too casually and too easily in this 

province, which are linear and extractive and single-issue and a 

one-way approach to the forest, which is just to grab and run, 

without any thought for the consequences of doing so. 

 

We need to look at not only what we protect, but to watch what 

we do with those areas that aren’t protected when forest 

harvesting is going on. We need to look at the value economy in 

relation to forestry and not simply the volume economy that is 

based on fibre and timber extraction. 

 

We need to move from a focus and a preoccupation and an 

emphasis on capital to a focus on labour, and take a long-term 

view of jobs and the economy. And we also need to move from 

a corporate view of the forest to a collective view of the forest, 

a community-based strategy for the forest. 

 

Another area where I look for more than I find in the Speech 

from the Throne is for tax policy. The opposition criticizes the 

Speech from the Throne and complains that there’s no tax relief 

mentioned in it. That’s not my beef, Mr. Speaker. My beef with  

the Speech from the Throne isn’t that there’s no tax relief but it 

doesn’t talk about tax fairness. We need more tax fairness in 

this province, and for the opposition to simply call for tax 

reductions is irresponsible. It’s how you implement those tax 

reductions that make the difference, and where they’re done, 

and whether it’s done fairly. And that’s what this government 

needs to be committed to and what I will commit to work to 

within this government  is tax fairness. 

 

I think, for example, that we ought to be looking at some of the 

luxuries of contemporary society and life, and whether there 

isn’t some room to tax in this regard instead of simply calling 

across the piece for tax reductions. How simplistic! 

 

I look at the Crowns, and there’s a review of the Crowns being 

done by the government. And I would look for a more proactive 

view for the Crowns. To look, for example, at not only how the 

Crowns are presently doing, but how they might serve the 

interests of Saskatchewan people better in the future. How, for 

example, the Crowns might commercialize some government 

activities and return revenue from government activities itself. 

 

I think, for example, of the international division of the 

Department of Health which is taking information from the 

prescription drug database and investing some provincial 

funding to commercialize that and to commercialize the 

management systems within the Department of Health to places 

like Taiwan and Bermuda. And we need to do more of that. 

 

Government these days, increasingly, is nothing more than a 

repository of information and decision making, and we need to 

take a fresh look at how some of the information that 

government holds might be of commercial value given the 

emphasis on the information highway. 

 

I look also for change to come to our energy policy in 

Saskatchewan; for a new emphasis on conservation and 

alternative energy strategies. I look also, for example, for social 

housing initiatives. I know the federal government has pulled 

out of this area and that historically the federal government has 

taken the lead in social housing policy and provided a 

framework for the provinces to act. But in the absence of the 

federal government acting in that respect, I think it behoves us 

as a province to take a look at what we might be able to do on 

our own in terms of social housing. 

 

The member for Athabasca said yesterday that Stony Rapids is 

waiting for roads and sewers. I think we need to look at that 

issue and how social housing and the infrastructure is important 

in terms of our wellness initiative in health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I look across the political landscape of this 

country, and indeed across this world, I see Saskatchewan 

standing as a beacon of hope and opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Saskatchewan isn’t perfect but we are a 

beacon of hope and opportunity, a place where people can have 

confidence that they can retire from active work knowing that 

there is a medicare system in place where they won’t have to  



116  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

worry about how much money they have in their pocket at any 

given time. How many other provinces can you say that of these 

days, Mr. Speaker? Not very many  not very many provinces 

across Canada. 

 

I think for example of the importance of change that has come 

to Saskatchewan Government Insurance and the personal injury 

protection plan. If there ever was a hidden secret, it’s got to be 

this personal injury protection plan that was introduced last year 

in legislation, and incidentally fought tooth and nail by the 

opposition parties. 

 

The personal injury protection plan was implemented last year, 

as I said, and offers improved auto insurance rate protection for 

the people of Saskatchewan while avoiding . . . increased 

protection while avoiding increased fees. So how do you do 

that? You get rid of a lot of the litigation. You cut through the 

number of personal injury claims that are fought in the court 

system. 

 

And it was these personal injury claims that were increasing by 

an average of 12 per cent each year for the past decade that 

threatened the very viability of our SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) insurance program in this province. 

And people said, don’t change it. We want to protect the right 

of people to sue and destroy the system of low cost insurance 

that we’ve enjoyed in this province. 

 

If the personal injury protection plan had not been introduced, 

Mr. Speaker, it would have meant a rate increase for 

Saskatchewan drivers of at least 8 per cent for 1994, 1995, and 

1996; 8 per cent each of those years  an overall increase of 

about $100 per vehicle. 

 

I for one, Mr. Speaker, and the members on this side of the 

House, didn’t believe that people wanted to pay $100 more for 

the privilege of the right to sue. And SGI knew that a rate 

increase wasn’t the right answer either. And so we came up 

with a made in Saskatchewan solution  a personal injury 

protection plan. 

 

Under the old system, SGI was paying most of its settlement 

dollars for pain and suffering, followed then by loss of income, 

and lastly, rehabilitation. And now as a result of the change that 

has come to SGI with the personal injury protection plan, it has 

flipped those priorities right side up. No longer are settlement 

dollars for pain and suffering the number one pay-out by SGI 

for accident settlements. It’s rehabilitation that’s being funded 

as the number one priority, as well it should be. And that I say, 

Mr. Speaker, is putting people first. 

 

After one year of operation, here’s what we have with the 

personal injury protection plan, Mr. Speaker. No premium 

increases. As promised, the introduction of the personal injury 

protection plan has put the lid on rate increases these last three 

years. And Saskatchewan residents now enjoy some of the very 

lowest auto insurance rates in all of the country. 

 

Not only have we put a lid on premium increases, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve reduced costs. And how could you keep premiums stable 

if you hadn’t reduced costs, people might ask. Little wonder.  

Preliminary financial results show that $117 million was 

reduced in expenses or cost to SGI as a result of this change, 

resulting in a financial turnaround, a complete and total 

turnaround in the auto fund from a deficit of 94 million in 1994 

to a modest surplus in 1995, as a result of this legislation. And 

that is change coming to the province of Saskatchewan, being 

fought by the opposition parties, but being initiated by a 

government that cares about putting people first rather than 

money first. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Koenker:  What else has happened, Mr. Speaker? A 

redirection of benefits, as I’ve said. Seventy per cent of the 

costs in the old system were incurred for pain and suffering. 

Now the personal injury plan is doing something about pain and 

suffering with rehabilitation services. 

 

In 1995 there were only 48 appeals out of 6,654 injury claims, 

Mr. Speaker, and none of those appeals have gone beyond the 

first stage, to mediation or the Court of Queen’s Bench. We 

have a system that is working, and working for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And this in fact has been one of the most 

significant changes in all of the history of SGI. And the people 

of Saskatchewan need to know this good news. 

 

It is just one more example, Mr. Speaker, of how Saskatchewan 

is standing out as a beacon of hope and opportunity in the rest 

of Canada. And I’m thankful for this and I’m proud to be part 

of this government because it doesn’t beat up on the poor and 

make them pawns in the rush for tax reductions for the wealthy, 

like we find in Ontario. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Or Alberta. 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Or Alberta, a member says. 

 

I’m proud to be part of this government because it doesn’t 

privatize liquor stores from public hands into private hands with 

no increase in jobs and no decrease in prices and no 

improvement in services. I’m proud that we keep our liquor 

stores in the hands of public employees. 

 

I’m proud that here in Saskatchewan we can say that our 

children can go to kindergarten without paying. Oh, I know, 

Alberta has changed. But there’s no constancy there. One day 

your children can go to kindergarten and they don’t have to pay; 

the next day they have to pay; now they don’t have to pay again. 

Saskatchewan has never entertained that notion and this 

government never will entertain that notion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Oh for life in Alberta, the Tories say. Oh for life in Alberta. If 

we could only have what Alberta has, we would be so happy  

$860 in health insurance premiums for a family of four in the 

province of Alberta. How does that help individual households 

in Alberta? Instead of charging premiums for health care like 

Alberta does, this government is rebuilding the health care 

service to make sure that there is no two-tiered system in this 

province, not only for ourselves but for our children and our  



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  117 

grandchildren, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker:  And what is Ontario doing with its medical 

coverage for the so-called snowbirds? It’s after the reduction of 

health payments for out-of-country coverage, after reducing that 

in the former NDP (New Democratic Party) government, the 

Tory government of Ontario has now reinstated coverage for 

snowbirds at a cost of millions and millions and millions of 

dollars to the taxpayers of Ontario. 

 

In other words, we have a situation where some of the most 

wealthy and privileged of people who can afford to flee the 

Canadian winter of southern Ontario, can do so and basically 

have their health coverage paid for publicly. This, after a 

progressive government introduced measures to ensure that they 

paid their fair share based on their ability to pay for health 

premiums out of country. I’m proud to say that isn’t happening 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, just one more example. A Liberal 

government in New Brunswick refuses to allow collective 

bargaining because they’re beholden to one of the biggest 

companies in the country, Irving Oil, and allows a nasty strike 

to go on for two years, with all of the dissension and the strife 

and the family turmoil and community breakdown that 

accompanies that. 

 

I’m proud to say we don’t have that kind of labour strife in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. In some respects, Mr. Speaker, these last 

years, this last decade perhaps of the 20th century, is something 

akin to the Industrial Revolution not only in terms of the scope 

of change but the scale and speed of change as well. 

 

There never is a reliable map for unexplored territory, Bill 

Gates has told us in his book. There never is a reliable map for 

unexplored territory. But, Mr. Speaker, we can learn important 

lessons if we pay attention to the past. If we can look at our 

recent past and the changes that have been brought to bear in 

this province and the restructuring of our health care system and 

our agricultural policy and our labour and business policy, these 

last four years  our financial policy  we can learn some 

important lessons for ongoing restructuring and dealing with 

change. 

 

And not only that. We can look beyond what this government 

has done in its first term to what our pioneers did. And how 

Saskatchewan was built on the conviction that we truly are our 

brother or our sister’s keeper. And on the conviction that there 

is enough for everyone’s need but not for everyone’s greed. 

 

And if we keep an eye on some of these fundamental values 

that have built this province  on compassion, on fairness, and 

equity, on community and on cooperation, we will succeed. 

And that’s what this Speech from the Throne is all about, Mr. 

Speaker  building for the 21st century, building in partnership 

with Saskatchewan people, building in partnership, yes, with 

the opposition in this House to make a better province and to 

leave a better legacy for our children and our grandchildren. 

May God help us in this endeavour, and I thus will support the 

Speech from the Throne. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, I’m 

new, and I just wondered if that was a filibuster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a great honour and a distinct privilege to rise 

today and give my reply to the government’s Speech from the 

Throne. I would also like to join other members in my 

congratulations of you, Mr. Speaker, on your election. You 

have demonstrated not only your ability to be fair, but you have 

shared with this House a vision of a proactive role for the office 

of Speaker that I am sure will go a long way to elevate the 

image of all of us in this legislature. 

 

I wish also to extend my congratulations to the member from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood on his election for the position of 

Deputy Speaker. The confidence of this House speaks well for 

the regard that the members hold of each of you. 

 

Before I go any further I especially wish to thank and 

acknowledge the single most important person in my life. All of 

the members realize what a sacrifice that our families make to 

allow us as members to serve the people of Saskatchewan. By 

giving credit to my wife and best friend Carole for her love and 

support, I wish, Mr. Speaker, to thank all spouses and families 

of all members for their love and support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  I’m beginning to believe that they are really 

the true heroes of this province and they quietly do much to 

make this place better for all of us. 

 

I believe I should begin by giving the members of this House 

some introduction to myself  who I am, where I’m coming 

from, and where I think we should be going. 

 

My father was undoubtedly the most influential person in 

peaking my interest in public service in general and politics in 

particular. I very much regret that he passed away in 1968. In 

retrospect I must admit that the concept of public service did 

not take much importance to me as a teenager with other 

priorities at the time. However I’ll always remember that my 

father was keenly interested in the politics of the day. I 

remember the names of Pearson, Diefenbaker, Douglas, 

Thatcher, and Blakeney  not all proclaimed with the same 

amount of respect. 

 

He called himself a Liberal because he said that historically we 

always stood up for the ordinary people. He believed it was the 

party of the centre that best represented the responsible balance 

between the injustice of big business on one hand and the 

injustice that big unions were also responsible for. 

 

Since that time, Professor Red Williams has explained that the 

history of liberalism goes back to the time of the Magna Carta 

when the rights of ordinary people began to emerge. I often 

tease Red that he should know; he was probably there. More  



118  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

than the partisan part of politics, my father strongly supported 

the idea that we as citizens of our community, our province, and 

our country, needed to contribute to the common good. 

 

As I look back, this idea has guided my attitude about 

community life ever since. I’ve proudly served on service clubs, 

church councils, agricultural boards, school boards, community 

associations, political associations, and numerous other 

organizations. Through it all, I’ve tried to offer a common sense 

approach to issues based on principles of fairness and justice. In 

last year’s campaign, the most inspiring thing for me were the 

people of the constituency of Melfort-Tisdale. And as much as 

they are representative of all Saskatchewan people, their dreams 

and ambitions are limited only by their ability to deal with the 

challenges that they’re faced with. 

 

They excel in all areas of life. They’re vibrant and active in 

their faith, in business, the arts, in sports. You name it; we do it 

and do it well. For example, Naber and Walker Seeds export 

lentils all around the world. They took a new crop, saw its 

potential, and have built businesses of critical importance to the 

entire province. 

 

Thomson Meats started as a family business, grew; and now 

sells Saskatchewan meat to Japan and Korea. Melfort, Tisdale, 

and Kinistino are homes to championship hockey teams and 

tournaments. And provincially renowned artists such as John 

Epp, Wendy Weseen and Phyllis Dickie-Windsor make their 

home in our constituency. 

 

What is it that enables these people to excel? Not surprisingly, 

it’s their belief in values that really personify rural 

Saskatchewan. It’s their true and honest sense of community, 

their strong belief in family and cooperation, their fierce 

independence and initiative. Many of these values are rooted in 

our history. 

 

In the RM (rural municipality) of Willow Creek, there are 18 

rural cemeteries all with cairns erected on them. Mr. Charlie 

Vickar, an early pioneer to the area, writes, and I quote: The 

reason for so many rural cemeteries was because of all the 

different racial extractions in the RM. They were a multicultural 

society, all living harmoniously together. All became true and 

loyal Canadians. 

 

Mr. Vickar speaks of the Edenbridge colony. This colony was 

home not only to the only rural synagogue in Saskatchewan; all 

the others were in urban centres. If I again may quote from Mr. 

Vickar briefly: I think the story of this colony personifies why 

people came to this area with so much determination to build a 

better future. 

 

The Edenbridge colony has its history in Lithuania when a 

young man of 20 years of age, born in 1877, emigrated to Cape 

Colony, South Africa. This was the time of the Boer War. He 

was fortunate enough to procure a position in the 

merchandising business. His first dollar earned he sent to his 

impoverished father and then saved so he could bring his two 

sisters and two brothers out of Lithuania. The reason for the 

migration? The Jewish people lived in slums, weren’t allowed 

to own property, were not regarded as citizens, were scapegoats  

for every problem, were not protected by the law. They were 

spat upon, insulted, beaten by drunks, and their homes were 

destroyed. 

 

In 1905, 56 Hebrew families left South Africa to settle in the 

fertile district along the Carrot River. They were offered 160 

acres of virgin land for $10. This group became the nucleus of 

what was to become known as the Edenbridge colony. At one 

point this community grew to contain 90 families. One of the 

members of this beginning, the Hon. Norman Vickar, served in 

this legislature with Premier Allan Blakeney. 

 

(1545) 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is but one example of the deep and diverse 

history that illustrates in the Tisdale-Melfort constituency. It 

also illustrates what is best about the traditions that we have 

inherited from all of those who have gone before us in this 

province. 

 

I am proud of my constituency for many reasons, but let me 

first, Mr. Speaker, give the hon. members some idea what the 

newly drawn riding of Melfort-Tisdale looks like. The major 

communities of Melfort, Tisdale, Kinistino, Star City, Zenon 

Park, Ridgedale, Beatty, Yellow Creek, and Valparaiso make up 

61 per cent of the population of the constituency. The RMs of 

Tisdale, Star City, Flett’s Springs, Invergordon, Connaught, 

Willow Creek, Kinistino are all the areas of the rural part of the 

constituency and make up the other 39 per cent. 

 

I would also like, Mr. Speaker, to recognize some of the 

important events and recent happenings in our riding. I 

mentioned to the House the Scott Tournament of Hearts that 

was held in Tisdale. The Royal Bank Cup is going to be held in 

Melfort this Spring. Thomson Meats expansion in the spring of 

1996; Bourgault Industries employs many people from Melfort 

and the area. Northern Steel in Tisdale increased from 28 to 49 

employees. The Chicken Delight remodelled and expanded 

from 64 people to 140 people in Tisdale. The Tisdale Alfalfa 

dehydrator’s second storage building enables the plant to 

double its production. 

 

The Tisdale school is an 8 million joint-use facility that will 

include a new high school, Cumberland Regional College, 

public library, and a small presentation theatre. Tisdale Farm 

Parts has built an addition onto its building, of a thousand 

square feet. And in Kinistino a major new facility called Ag 

World, 33,000 square feet has been constructed. 

 

In 1998, as I mentioned to this Assembly yesterday, there’s a 

joint bid for the Melfort, Star City, Tisdale for the 1998 

Saskatchewan Winter Games. In Zenon Park, a French cultural 

centre has opened. The Cumberland Regional College in 

Melfort has opened a joint-use facility with the high school. 

 

Tisdale has been chosen as the largest high through-put grain 

elevator and marketing centre by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 

a 12 to $15 million project. Melfort & Unit Composite 

Collegiate High School will host a student leadership 

conference that will accommodate 750 student delegates and 

200 staff advisors in September of ’96. 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  119 

These and many other events are why the people of 

Melfort-Tisdale are truly remarkable. And I must apologize, Mr. 

Speaker, if I have inadvertently failed to mention anyone or any 

event that is worthy of recognition. I will try as much as I can to 

keep all members of this House informed of the successes of all 

the folks in the constituency. 

 

As far as the election itself, it was heart-warming to meet so 

many old and new friends over the three months that I had been 

actively campaigning to seek the support of the approximately 

12,000 voters in our riding. The Liberal message of fiscal 

responsibility, smaller government, lower taxes, better health 

care, and greater representation certainly hit home, as it is not 

every day that an incumbent minister is defeated when their 

government is not. 

 

Well I would like to think that the reason I gathered almost 50 

per cent of the vote was because of my efforts. It was evident 

everywhere that I went that the people of Melfort-Tisdale 

understood that this NDP government has made it very clear of 

its intention to abandon rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  There is hope though, and that hope kept 

me going door to door, farmyard to farmyard, town to town, 

and business to business. Folks were always hospitable, no 

matter what their political stripe, although sometimes their dogs 

all seemed to think I was from the wrong party. They shared 

their hospitality with lunch or just a cup of coffee. They were 

always willing to share their dreams for this province. It’s been 

a long haul getting here and I could not have done it alone, so to 

all those who helped along the way, I thank you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, having been elected in June and waiting 

eight months in order to take my seat in this House and 

represent my constituency, there is a number of things that I feel 

should be made clear. 

 

Since the election, I have taken the philosophical position that 

everyone voted for me and that is my commitment to represent 

each one equally. That even includes the Hon. Andy Renaud 

who is one of my new constituents. I made only one promise 

over the course of that election. I promised my constituents that 

I would, to the best of my ability, represent each and every 

individual in our constituency. And I renew my pledge today. I 

will keep my promise. 

 

Yesterday in response to the Tory’s grandstanding after the 

Speech from the Throne, a constituent called in disgust and 

reminded me that our job here is not to frivolously seek 

attention but to work for the people that we represent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  From a Liberal perspective, Mr. Speaker, 

there are certain principles and ideals that I believe strongly in 

and that I will continue to fight for at every turn. There are 

economic issues that must be resolved in order for us to be able 

to get out of this debilitating cycle of harmful austerity 

measures and restore hope, growth, and opportunity to our  

province. Taxpayer protection must be enacted so everyone 

knows that government will not solve its problems by picking 

our pockets at every opportunity. 

 

Real and meaningful balanced budget legislation is needed to 

control unnecessary and irrational government expenditures. 

This would also force the government to recognize its 

responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan. A realistic plan 

for debt reduction has to be adopted. We can no longer rely on 

windfall resource revenues, the sale of corporate shares, or any 

other risky venture to save face for the Finance department. 

 

Politically there are also changes that must be made so that the 

citizens of this province can prosper. Taking discretionary 

political tools out of the arena will make the system more 

transparent. Free votes in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, will 

provide for true representation. 

 

Regularized election and legislative session dates are essential 

to the evolution of democratic principles in this province. 

Honesty, integrity, and the people of Saskatchewan will be the 

big winners. 

 

A specified code of ethics is needed in these cynical times to let 

our citizens know that they can trust all members of this 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, many of the principles and ideals that I 

have just mentioned are what inspired me to become involved 

in politics. The former leader of the Liberal Party of 

Saskatchewan, to her credit, shared her conviction and steadfast 

support for these principles. It is with respect that I say to you, 

Mr. Speaker, that they will remain a part of the Liberal platform 

and will be promoted as Liberal principles in this session and 

into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  One group, Mr. Speaker, that has a long 

way to go in gaining some sort of credibility, not only in this 

House but as a party as well, is the Conservative Party. We’re 

expected to believe that the born again Conservatives are 

actually different. They have a leader who is unsure of his own 

occupation. 

 

They can never really be taken seriously, let alone be expected 

to come up with a real plan for getting Saskatchewan back on 

its feet. Their solutions involve parroting Liberal policies that 

date back to the days of Ralph Goodale who called for restraint 

when the Tories and the NDP were outbidding each other in the 

’86 election. Other than bringing forward motions and Bills that 

have been in Liberal platforms in 1991 and 1995, it is only by 

pushing the emotional hot button issues and playing on 

people’s fears that they have any voice at all. 

 

I find the inflammatory and often racially motivated rhetoric 

offensive. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan recognize a 

Pat Buchanan impersonation when they see it, and they don’t 

like it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  The real Conservatives in this House  



120  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

however are the NDP. Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas would be 

rolling in his grave if he knew that the Premier wants to 

privatize everything that he spent decades buying up in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Why the shift in ideology? But before we 

go too far, and if we take a closer look, they really haven’t 

changed at all. The only reason this government seems to be 

confused is because it is. The NDP doesn’t know where it’s 

going with respect to jobs, the economy, health care, 

agriculture, and the public service because they don’t have a 

plan. They have high priced pollsters instead. They aren’t really 

listening to the people of this province. They have their own 

agenda. 

 

When questioned about the changes mapped out by this 

government in the Speech from the Throne, the Premier 

responded by saying that the New Democratic Party certainly 

was changing. Mr. Speaker, the Premier then paused and almost 

as an afterthought added, oh yes the province will have to 

change as well. This partisan, poll-driven style of leadership 

does not breed success. It does not create jobs. It does not 

provide adequate health care, sound agricultural policy, decent 

infrastructure, or any kind of climate that is open to growth. 

 

The Premier makes much about the need to be forward thinking 

and to be willing to face the challenges of the next century. I 

agree that these are all realities that we must face up to. 

However we cannot move to the future if we do not understand 

the mistakes of the past. 

 

To listen to the Premier, you would think that the province of 

Saskatchewan was founded in 1981, with the first government 

being that of the Conservatives. He fails to remember  

although he shouldn’t; he’s been here long enough  that the 

NDP governments must also bear their part of our history. 

 

He fails to mention how, during a time of unprecedented 

economic growth in this country, the Blakeney government 

managed to squander our potential in order to expand the role 

of his government in our lives. He fails to mention how the 

NDP proudly campaigned on the backs of the family of Crown 

corporations in the 1981 election and were almost wiped out by 

the Conservatives, who as we subsequently realized, had no 

idea what they were doing. Yes, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier 

tells us, we must look forward. But we also must be honest in 

reflecting on our past so that we can learn from the fundamental 

lesson of history which is, those who do not learn from the 

mistakes of the past are doomed to repeat them. 

 

The realities of the present also need to be addressed. For the 

first four years of this government, every day we heard how the 

NDP government had no choice as they raised every 

conceivable tax, fee, and utility rate; how it was the terrible 

Conservatives who left us with no choice in this matter. Now in 

their second term, all we hear about is how the terrible federal 

Liberals in Ottawa are going to cut the transfer payments, and 

we will have no choice of doing to education what we have 

already done to health care. 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the Premier that he is in danger 

of sounding like Chicken Little, and soon no one will believe 

him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  He may also be alienating the few friends 

that he has left in Ottawa that can help him with his retirement 

plans that the media is speculating about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  So let’s get off the high horse, roll up our 

sleeves, and be honest about those issues that are of value, 

those which must be reviewed, and those which are mistakes 

and should be corrected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province want more. They 

deserve more. If I allow myself to dream a little, it is easy to 

imagine that every one of the 58 constituencies of this province 

have as much to offer as mine has. If we multiplied all of the 

talent, all of the goodwill, all of the energy and 

entrepreneurship that I see in my constituency 58 times, 

imagine what we could be. We simply must remove all of the 

impediments that will stop the individual human spirit from 

realizing its full potential. If this means that we must look at 

issues of big business, big unions, or big government, so be it. 

Common sense and the desire to succeed must prevail. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this institution deserves the 

respect and dignity of all of us in this province. As you said in 

your opening remarks, thank God that this forum allows us to 

fire words at each other rather than bullets. You warned that 

there would be moments of heated debate and strongly held 

positions, and this is exactly as it should be. The people who 

elected each of us picked strong members with strong 

convictions. I know that the debates will be vigorous, the 

question periods raucous, the questioning detailed. Through it 

all I believe that all of us are doing our best for our families, our 

constituency, this province, and this country. 

 

I will be pleased to support those items that the government 

brings forward which I believe are in the best interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan. In the course of making these 

decisions, I hope and pray that my father will be proud. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, as we prepare for the 21st 

century I’d like to respond to the Speech from the Throne and 

also make some comments in regards to statements made by the 

member from Athabasca, especially as it regards northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  121 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I would like to as well, Mr. Speaker, in 

the context, like to say thanks and congratulations in the first 

part of my speech, then move into the specific areas of northern 

governance as well as education, health, social services, and 

economic development and jobs before making my concluding 

comments. 

 

On the first part, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say thanks very much 

to the people of Cumberland constituency. This was my third 

time as their elected representative. And in many ways, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve learned a lot, you know, from the people of 

Cumberland throughout the different communities, and I’ve 

tried very hard to bring forth the issues from my constituents, 

whether it was trapping, fishing, hunting, mining, forestry, 

social and culture development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to also say thanks to my own family, 

my wife, Linda, as well as to my daughters, Koonu and Danis. I 

think they’re, as the previous member stated, our families are 

very important in our ongoing work as political people. And it’s 

also very important to have that support, you know, on a daily 

basis as we move forward on dealing with the issues of the 

people. 

 

I would also like to say a congratulations to yourself as Speaker. 

I know that when I first got elected in ’86, you were my bench-

mate. I used to remember, Mr. Speaker, that we used to say that 

I was a member from the North and you were the member from 

Moose Jaw North. And in that way we did share, you know, our 

time together in our first session year starting in 1986. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to congratulate of course the Sergeant 

at-Arms, Mr. Shaw, and also the pages of the House and the 

Clerks and the people that work right here in this office making 

our stay, you know, quite done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say thank you to the Premier 

of the province of Saskatchewan . In many cases, Mr. Speaker, 

on a personal level, he is something to be proud of, and he is 

something to look forward to in the things that he achieved for 

this province and in the many years of dedication he has put 

into this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I was 

the first minister in the province’s history to be a cabinet 

minister from northern Saskatchewan. You know, I thank him, 

you know, for that. And also being an aboriginal person, it was 

very important, you know, in this stage of history, that we’re 

looking at the different aspects of being visible in different 

situations, and becoming the first cabinet minister was 

important in that regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I would also like to thank him for the 

different roles that he has asked me to play in the cabinet. I was 

provincial secretary in 1992, and at that time I was dealing with 

constitutional issues. And it made me very knowledgeable, not 

only about looking back at Canadian history and all the 

different and unique parts of Canada, but it made me feel very  

good in recognition not only of my job as provincial secretary, 

but being a proud Canadian and knowing the importance of 

Canadian unity in that regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I also became the minister in charge of 

SGI, and I was very proud of the workers of SGI. I was very 

proud of the management, you know, the board members of 

SGI and our colleagues from the legislature when we passed  

and the cabinet members  when we passed the personal injury 

protection plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  I think that when we look that, it was, as 

a previous member said, it was the greatest change in SGI 

history in 50 years, and I again share my thanks with all the 

people who were involved in it. 

 

I was also the associate minister of Education in charge of 

northern development and also in regards to Indian and Metis 

people, and I was very proud to be part of that process being 

that education is such an important part of our system. In this 

last part, I was also now the minister in charge of Northern 

Affairs. I’ll have a bit to say about that a little bit later on. 

 

On the Crown side, I also learned quite a bit about how, and 

also on the finance side, how the different Crowns operated. I 

was in SaskTel, SaskPower board, STC (Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company) Saskatchewan transportation, as well 

as SaskEnergy presently. So I’ve learned a lot about Crowns as 

well as being in Crown Investments Corporations, CIC, and 

also on Treasury Board. So I’m in a learning process in learning 

how government works and how the Crown works through my 

stay in the legislature. 

 

In the office of Northern Affairs, of which I was appointed just 

before Christmas, again I was proud being born and raised in 

northern Saskatchewan, having become the minister in charge 

of Northern Affairs. When I look at that, Mr. Speaker, it also 

. . . the first order of business was to try and get, you know, a 

person at the senior civil service level to take charge of the 

North. I was very proud again of the Premier when the 

appointment came in in regard to Ray McKay. Ray McKay, 

again, is a first Northerner and the first aboriginal person in the 

province’s history to become a deputy minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Again it shows commitment and 

leadership from the Premier and the Government of 

Saskatchewan in dealing with issues of people from northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to say that in regard to the office of Northern Affairs, 

we have the northern development fund, along with the 

administration, at $4 million out of the $36 million expenditure 

that the province has in the province as a whole. As we look at 

that expenditure, we will be dealing with CREDOs, community 

regional economic development organizations, from the North  



122  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

and helping them out in regards to community development. 

The idea of partnership becomes very important in that 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now turn my attention to some of the 

comments made by the member from Athabasca and try and 

deal with this in the context of trying to get that accurate 

statements and also to try and get away from the doom and 

gloom that the context of liberalism has presented him with. In 

one of these statements he says, stop turning our backs on 

northern Saskatchewan people, especially native people, and 

that was the member’s statement from Athabasca. 

 

Well I’d like to say this in regards to an NDP government in 

regards to the North. I know that the member from Athabasca 

was a mayor from Ile-a-la-Crosse. When you look at the history 

of governance in northern Saskatchewan in the 1970s, it was 

not the Liberals or the Conservatives who brought elected 

governance to northern Saskatchewan; it was an NDP 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When you look at the northern municipal 

council  of which the former member of Athabasca also was 

elected in, Fred Thompson  that was an important stage of 

development in the governance of the North. Through that 

involvement of the northern municipal council, the first elected 

municipal government in the North, we had the options-aided 

proposal, and from thence we had The Northern Municipalities 

Act  again a development in regards to the partnership 

between the people of northern Saskatchewan and an NDP 

government. 

 

When we look at the issue of education boards . . . again the 

member from Athabasca should know this because he’s from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. Again the first elected board of education in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse was done in the early ‘70s, and it was done 

again, not by a Liberal government, not by a Tory government, 

but by an NDP government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  The first elected northern school board in 

northern Saskatchewan, again in the ‘70s, was by an NDP 

government, in addition to the elected boards in Creighton and 

in Uranium City at that point in time in history. 

 

When we look at the history of adult education, we saw that 

there was four regional community colleges that were 

established in the province in ‘74-75. One of them happened to 

be in northern Saskatchewan: the La Ronge regional community 

college. And that again was a first that was done by an NDP 

government. When you look at the aspect of development 

therefore in 1976, of which I took part in the development and 

evolution of . . . and that was NORTEP, northern teacher 

education program. It is one of the best programs that was 

developed in the North, and where we have now over 150 

graduates from there teaching in our schools in northern 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker. And which government put that 

program together in partnership with the people of the  

North? A NDP government, not a Liberal or Tory government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When we look at the ABE (adult basic 

education program) issue . . . and he brought the issue of health 

in his speech as well, I would like to say that it is not going to 

be a Liberal government or a Tory government in regards to the 

elected control of health by Northerners. Again it will be an 

NDP government that will put that together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When we look at the issue of social 

services reform, I listened to the definition of who the Liberal 

was and what his definition the Liberal was in his speech, and 

he said it was of course the usual rhetoric of private property 

plus social conscience. But I’d like to ask the member what 

social conscience really means. 

 

When you look at the Liberals at the federal level, in the next 

four years they will devastate the people of the province, $700 

million  a 40 per cent cut on the social development area 

when you look at education, health, and social services. Is that a 

party with a social conscience, Mr. Speaker? No. A Liberal 

talks good before elections and when they’re in opposition. 

When they govern, they save the higher élites of the system and 

cut the poor. And that’s exactly what they’re doing again. 

 

So when you look at the Liberals, Mr. Speaker, even on this 

year on education, health, and social services, it’s $106 million 

tax. That is not a social conscience; that is social disaster to the 

people of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the whole issue of liberalism, 

there is a lot of fine speeches in opposition and fine speeches in 

regards to different areas. But the reality is that liberalism 

caused a lot of hurt and a lot of conscious raising for people. 

And we will be dealing with that as we move forward in the 

legislature. 

 

I think that’s why, Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the member 

from Athabasca, I recognize his sincerity. I know him from 

before, and I still know him as a person today. I know he is 

very, very sincere about what he is talking about. But I look 

back at his comment yesterday and he says, “it is difficult to be 

a politician, and yes, even a Liberal.” 

 

(1615) 

 

I know that the member is finding it hard to be a Liberal. Even 

in the politics of parties, we saw that he was a tremendous 

supporter from the member from Saskatoon Greystone. He 

knows the highly divisive politics that took place at his party. 

He knows how hard that is; he knows how hard it is to be a 

Liberal. He knows how difficult. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he knows that in regards to being a Liberal, there 

are many things that he had problems with. When he looked at 

the federal government again, it’s not only the cut in education, 

the cut in social services and health. He looked at the problem  



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  123 

of the politicians that ran before him at the federal Liberal level 

in northern Saskatchewan. They said they would be sensitive to 

the North. One of the first things that the member from P.A. 

(Prince Albert)-Churchill did was support the gun control Bill. 

 

Many people live from hunting and trapping and fishing in the 

North. They need game to eat. They need their guns in regards 

to working as trappers, and yet the Liberals supported gun 

control. They gave all kinds of fancy speeches before the 

election of respect for the culture or the way of life of the 

North. I even saw the member dancing the jig at the trapper’s 

convention one time. 

 

But I know that when the truth came to support either his 

striving to be a minister at the federal level or to support the 

trappers in northern Saskatchewan, he supported himself in the 

hope of becoming a minister at the federal level. 

 

And I would say that when you look at that, good speeches, yes; 

statements of concern, yes; but the reality is they did not 

support the people of the North in regards to the issue of gun 

control. 

 

I knew that the member says it’s difficult to be a Liberal 

because there are other issues that Liberals have talked about, 

and let’s take the issue of housing. When we look at the issue of 

housing and housing development in the North, we saw that the 

largest number of houses were built during the NDP times 

during the ‘70s. It fell off when the Tories were around in the 

‘80s. But when I look at the historical development, we used to 

cost share on a 60-40 basis, housing: 60 per cent from the 

federal government, 40 per cent from the provincial 

government. And many of the houses were built in that way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberals have gone against their word 

again. They have knocked out the last two places in regards to 

cost sharing . . . was in La Loche and Cumberland House. I am 

hopeful of course that maybe the federal Liberal budget today 

may say something on that. But they have neglected all the 

other communities in northern Saskatchewan in regards to their 

policy of cut-back on a hundred per cent in that regard of 

housing. 

 

And I must say that in regards to Indian economic development, 

they did that last year too. And also they have done very many 

other cuts that they said they would never do. 

 

I also look at the issue of children that was raised by the 

member. It’s interesting that the Liberals made a promise of 

50,000 acre spaces all the time, and we still haven’t seen any, 

you know, at the federal level. And we hear a lot of talk on 

children. But I’d like to refer to the issue of children in regards 

to the parents of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

When we look at the economic development program of the 

North, one of the major success stories, not only in this 

province but internationally, is the gains that we made on 

employment of people in the North in the mining sector. There 

is no place that has records like this. We are at 50 per cent 

employment of people in regards to northern Saskatchewan 

right now in mining. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When we look at that record, when the 

Tories were around, we used to have 45-50 per cent in the late 

1970s and early ‘80s when we were government. With the 

Tories it went down in the Key Lake area to about 15 per cent. 

We have now got it back up, in partnership with the mining 

company and in partnership with the communities, at a 50 per 

cent level. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  So when I hear the member getting into 

the Liberal scenario of doom and gloom, I tell him, beware, 

don’t get caught up into that trap. You’ve got to be proud and 

stand up beside those workers in northern Saskatchewan that 

drive heavy equipment. You’ve got to be proud of those 

workers that are in carpentry. You’ve got to be proud of those 

millwrights from northern Saskatchewan that are trying hard to 

make a living and putting food on the table for their own 

children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  When you are doom and gloom, you 

forget that you are putting your own people down in the North, 

who are striving hard to make a living. 

 

When I look at the issue therefore of economic development 

and jobs, I look at the mining sector again. When the Tories 

were around, they made a gain of  let’s say  up to $12 

million worth of contracts in partnership with the mining 

companies in regards to contracts for northern business people. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to report today that from $12 million 

we are now close to $60 million worth of contracts for northern 

contractors in today’s history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  So, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to make some 

comments, and I wanted to make some comments in regards to 

forestry and our record. I wanted to make some comments in 

regards to wild rice, trapping and fishing, and many other areas. 

But, Mr. Speaker, because of the time factor and with due 

respect to the other speakers, I’d like to just make some 

concluding comments. 

 

I know that the member from Athabasca finds it very difficult to 

be a Liberal. And I made my points on that, in regards to what 

is said and what is actually practised by Liberal governments. 

 

But I want to leave everybody in the province with a positive 

message. We are heading for the 21st century. We are making 

gains in partnership with the people of the North. We are 

making gains in the jobs aspect. We are making gains in regards 

to businesses and business development. We are making gains 

on the history of governance, whether in the municipalities or 

the school board area or now moving into the health field. 

These are positive, proactive developments, Mr. Speaker. When 

we look at it from a northern perspective, we  



124  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

say in Cree, mamuwi-utoskewein. Mamuwi-utoskewein we say. 

That means, we work together. 

 

This government, as we move forward into the future, is a 

government of partnership with the people of the province. It is 

a government of partnership with the people of northern 

Saskatchewan, and it is a government that’ll move forward into 

the 21st century and support our grandparents, our parents, our 

children, and all our relatives and friends in this province. Mr. 

Speaker, I am proud to say that I support this great Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 

represent the Saltcoats constituency on the eastern side of the 

province and I’d like to thank those same people for electing 

me and getting me to where I am now. 

 

I’d like to take a minute, Mr. Speaker, though, to congratulate 

you on your election to the prestigious position you now hold. I 

would like to also congratulate the Deputy Speaker on his 

position. 

 

I’d like to mention, Mr. Speaker, that we also had a person that 

sat in your chair by the name of Jim Snedker and he didn’t get 

there through the democratic process. I think he possibly was 

put there to quiet him down. He was a very boisterous man but 

a very interesting man to say the least. Mr. Snedker has passed 

on now, but I had the benefit and the good fortune of having 

Mrs. Snedker as one of my supporters and it brought great 

credibility to my campaign. 

 

In a moment I’ll address certain issues that have arisen from the 

contents of the Speech from the Throne but first I feel I must 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’m a little on edge. You see, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve been having nightmares, reoccurring nightmares 

since the opening of the legislature was announced. 

Nightmares, Mr. Speaker, about mice, a plague of big, hairy 

NDP mice with crooked smiles and long teeth. They’re 

everywhere I turn. It’s a vision that shakes me even in the light 

of day. And the most amazing part of this reoccurring dream is 

that these mice are starting to look more and more like cats. I 

awaken, Mr. Speaker, crying out, where are the cats? Bring on 

the cats. Not a happy dream, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, by the end of this 

speech I’ve found an answer to my problem. Now on to more 

important things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not a career politician but just an ordinary 

blue-collar farmer from Saskatchewan. My reason for getting 

involved in politics is because I cannot stand by and watch what 

is happening by choices made by this government. I know I can 

voice my opinion and do something about it better from inside 

these walls. 

 

I was enraged by the dismantling of the GRIP program along 

with every other farmer in this province. I might mention, Mr.  

Speaker, that I have a number of Manitoba-Saskatchewan 

farmers that have land on both sides and they had the benefit of 

seeing first-hand what the demise of our GRIP program did to 

people on this side. It was amazing. 

 

That, coupled with the closure of rural hospitals, downsizing of 

other facilities, and choices being made to use our Crown 

utilities as another form of taxation when we are already one of 

the highest taxed provinces in this country — all of these 

choices prompted me to take the advice of friends and family 

and run for office. 

 

This I have done in the hope that my concerns and ideas will be 

better heard from the floor of this legislature. Mr. Speaker, I 

feel I have always been community minded. Regardless of my 

own agenda, the interests of my family and the people around 

me have been uppermost in my mind and actions. 

 

I have been involved in community organizations and worked 

with people of all ages throughout the years. My tenure as reeve 

of the RM of Saltcoats, and councillor before that, I feel gives 

me a good insight into the needs and wants of the people of 

rural Saskatchewan. And I really don’t think these needs differ 

much whether urban or rural. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my experiences have taught me that all people ask 

for is a secure environment to live in, and the opportunity to 

succeed with hard work and some imagination. Mr. Speaker, at 

present that security is disappearing and the opportunities are 

not there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I have spent the last 23 years 

farming in the Saltcoats area and the nine years previous to that 

working for IMC (International Minerals and Chemical 

Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) at Esterhazy. My wife Pat, without 

whose unconditional support and understanding I could not be 

standing here today, is currently working in Saltcoats at the 

Lakeside Manor Care Home. Together we have raised three 

children. Our oldest son, Grant, teaches in Saltcoats. Our 

daughter, Jodi, is a teacher and works on the Cumberland 

House Reserve. My other son, Garnet, who works at IMC 

Canada, has a degree in economics and finance. 

 

After hearing all of this, Mr. Speaker, you may understand why 

so many of the current issues and cut-backs personally affect 

me. Farming, already enough of a gamble, has become an 

unattractive career choice and yet the concerns of farmers are 

being ignored. Cut-backs to health that have closed over 50 

hospitals now threaten care homes, and I am aware that 

education is next on the chopping block. 

 

Most upsetting to me is the situation of my son, Garnet, and 

other young people like him. Although he is a graduate of the 

University of Saskatchewan with a degree, he is unable to 

locate work in his field here in Saskatchewan. While he is 

grateful to be employed by IMC, I fear the day will come soon 

when he must decide to leave and seek employment more suited 

to his education elsewhere. 

 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  125 

There should be no need for this. Our youth should not be 

raised and educated here in Saskatchewan for the sole benefit of 

other provinces and countries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Every day we are losing more and more of 

our most natural resource  our promising young people. All 

of these things have hit me hard. I promise you, Mr. Speaker, 

that do I not intend to stand by quietly while the very fabric of 

our province is torn to shreds. I’d like to take a minute and talk 

a little bit about the little bit in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Number one, wide-ranging reforms to education. And I believe 

these reforms have already started, Mr. Speaker, because I have 

three schools closing at the end of this term in my constituency. 

These reforms are showing through already. 

 

(1630) 

 

Next stage in health renewal, Mr. Speaker, scares me. The first 

stage we closed 52-plus hospitals. And I’m worried that the 

second stage is to maybe close the rest of the hospitals in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Restructuring of government at every level is one that’s near 

and dear to my heart, Mr. Speaker, as being a past reeve. The 

RMs and towns could not deficit budget so they kept their 

books balanced and their houses in order. They have been 

downloaded on us of up to close to 40 per cent of government 

funding over the last number of years. I would think the 

government should take direction from municipalities, not try 

and give direction to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed in the lack 

of any direction or anything in agriculture. Really after you’ve 

read the throne speech and heard it, it shows that agriculture is 

not a top priority in this province. 

 

Also disappointing, Mr. Speaker, was highways. I saw nowhere 

anything about highways. My constituency, as many others, 

needs vast amounts of work done to these roads with the new 

amount of traffic coming from the extra transportation and 

trucking traffic out there right now. I have a feeling, Mr. 

Speaker, that there’s also going to be cuts to the highway 

departments  I have that little hint  and that they are also 

going to be downsized. Our highways need more attention, by 

far, not less. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Every one of these subjects, Mr. Speaker, 

either directly or indirectly affects the citizens of my 

constituency and its people. 

 

I’d like to talk, Mr. Speaker, about my constituency now. 

Saltcoats is a large constituency containing some of the most 

beautiful terrain to be found in this province. It is bordered on 

the north by Duck Mountain Provincial Park and on the south  

by the Qu’Appelle River; to the east by the Manitoba border, 

and to the west by the constituencies of Melville, Yorkton, and 

Canora-Pelly. It contains two reserves, Cote and Keeseekoose, 

in the northern section. 

 

And we have a population of close to 20,000 whose Russian, 

Ukrainian, German, English, and first nations’ heritages, 

amongst many others, brings a richness of diverse cultures to 

everyday life. These people are hard-working, honest folk who 

understand that sacrifice is necessary for the benefit of all. 

However, they must see sacrifice from every quarter. To 

continually ask them to do without and to give more, when 

certain others seem to be above that, is not fair and it will not be 

stood for. 

 

Agriculture is the main industry in my constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. In an average year, between 600 and 700,000 acres of 

land are seeded. Since coming to office, I have had many upset, 

confused, and disgruntled farmers bring their concerns to me. 

Of late the subject has been the confusion over the GRIP bills. 

Farmers don’t understand why it was promised that those bills 

would never be sent out and never have to be paid back, and yet 

 lo and behold!  they arrive in the mail. I am afraid that I 

don’t understand this either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Upcoming closures of elevators, the failure of crop insurance to 

adequately cover all our problems, even the unfairness of 

denying farmers the right to deal with the wildlife problem, is 

robbing them of their crops, and just another example of other 

worries being brought to my attention. 

 

The bottom line, to use a favourite phrase of this government, is 

that agriculture is the backbone of the Prairies. I think this 

needs to be more seriously addressed, especially by those who 

have forgotten just exactly where they came from. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, tourism plays a positive and 

growing role in my constituency. Duck Mountain Provincial 

Park, north of the town of Kamsack, last year drew close to 

180,000 people from across Saskatchewan, Canada, and 

beyond. Throughout the Saltcoats constituency tourists and 

locals can find enjoyment and relaxation golfing, fishing, 

camping, downhill and cross-country skiing, and 

snowmobiling. 

 

We have the pleasure of both the Assiniboine and the 

Qu’Appelle rivers, and numerous lovely lakes such as Madge, 

Lake of the Prairies, Anderson, Round Lake, and Carlton Trail. 

The promotion of tourism and the encouragement of arts and 

culture have the potential to create new and permanent 

employment and flood our area with monetary benefits. I plan 

to investigate ways to stimulate the development of this in the 

future. 

 

Earlier I stated that we have a population base of approximately 

20,000 people. Of concern to me is the need to consider the fact 

that 45 per cent of my constituents are over 40 years of age and 

older. With lengthy waiting-lists for placement in care homes 

and upcoming cuts in beds in these homes, as well as the loss of  



126  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

funding to level 1 care to seniors, I am afraid that the provincial 

government is setting a scene for a dangerous situation for 

many of our current and future seniors. 

 

Without the aid of government subsidization, private care 

homes will be cost prohibitive to the elderly whose limited 

monthly incomes do not meet the required fees. Both 

unemployment and low incomes for the working class and the 

continued migration of our youth suggest that many seniors will 

not be able to depend on extended family for their care. So what 

is to be their fate, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Our seniors have built and paid for this province with their tax 

dollars. Surely they deserve better. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  On a more productive note, I am proud to 

say that the local municipalities in the Saltcoats constituency 

are working hard to find attractive and viable solutions to these 

problems and to bring industry, income, and increased 

populations to their towns, villages, and RMs. 

 

We are blessed to have a good corporate citizenship of IMC 

Canada at Esterhazy. This potash mine employs 931 people 

with a payroll of $58 million a year, Mr. Speaker. Their annual 

tax bill, all things considered, is $70 million a year, and they 

purchase $49 million worth of goods and services right here in 

Saskatchewan  all of this from one thriving company. 

 

It is essential, Mr. Speaker, that our government find the ways 

and means to entice other industry to this province, and we 

must create a credible atmosphere that attracts both 

entrepreneurs to invest in our province. To ignore this is 

economic suicide. 

 

Overall I have seen a steady decrease in our most basic 

democratic rights. Regardless of the opinions of the people of 

this province, this government continues to cut without 

consideration of the negative effects it is creating. Now urban 

and rural municipalities are being threatened with 

amalgamation and told to cut costs. This arrogant demand has 

been made while here in Regina the government has seen it fit 

to increase staff, enlarge cabinet and payrolls. The old adage  

do as I say, not as I do adage  well it just doesn’t wash, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, where is our long-term 

provincial plan? Highways need to be improved to bear the 

weight of the trucking industry which is ever increasing. We 

need to focus on improving our educational services  not 

cutting funding  to be ready for the 21st century. We need to 

be planning for our ageing population. We need to take 

advantage of our local resources and create industry, not drive it 

away. Centralization of government agencies, the loss of 

hospitals and care homes, the cuts to education, closure of Crop 

Insurance offices, and lack of support of our farming 

community  all this further robs rural Saskatchewan of jobs 

and is creating ghost towns. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  The constant cut-backs aimed at the general 

populous, the masses, are now being blamed on the exaggerated 

decreases in the federal transfer payments. Excuses, false 

propaganda and the turning of a blind eye appears to be the 

platform of the current government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, our people are being taxed to 

death and yet receive less and less for their tax dollars. Maybe 

now, Mr. Speaker, you can understand the reasons behind the 

horrific nightmare I described to you earlier in my speech. We 

are suffering from pestilence, Mr. Speaker. My only hope lies in 

the knowledge that it only takes one farm cat to clean out a barn 

full of mice. And as you see, we have ten rural cats sitting here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge 

comments made by the Minister responsible for SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), who I 

might add . . . main function might be looking after pencils, 

erasers and paper-clips. He made the comment in the Yorkton 

This Week & Enterprise, he said jobs will be high on the agenda 

of the throne speech. He must have been referring to the 26 jobs 

that are being eliminated at the Yorkton Hospital announced 

last week. It’s the only jobs I can think of; it’s the only ones 

I’ve seen. 

 

He also talked yesterday about being the dot in the centre of red 

square. Well, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues from Canora-Pelly 

and Melville and myself have been asked a number of times 

why we feel we won when none of us were given a chance 

when the election was called. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have come to this conclusion. The sun comes up 

on the east side of this great province. The people in our 

constituencies, we’re just the first to see the light. By 1999, Mr. 

Speaker, I feel the rest of the province will also have had time 

to see the light. So I would suggest to the hon. minister from 

Yorkton, enjoy your last four years in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m here for the sole purpose of giving a voice to 

the fears and concerns of the people of Saskatchewan and, even 

closer to home, the people of the Saltcoats constituency. And, 

sir, their voices will be heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all the reasons that I have talked about above, I 

cannot support the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and good 

afternoon to you. I’m very pleased to be able to rise in the 

legislature this afternoon in this the first session of the 

government’s second term as the member representing the 

constituency of Meadow Lake. 

 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  127 

I want to take this opportunity to first of all sincerely thank the 

people of the Meadow Lake constituency for re-electing me to 

be their representative in this House for yet another term. I want 

to brag just this one time by telling you, Mr. Speaker, that this 

was the first time that any New Democrat or CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) member before me has ever been 

elected twice in a row in this constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  It is with a bit of chagrin though, Mr. 

Speaker, that my friends refer to me as the two-timer from 

Meadow Lake. Anyway, it is truly an honour and a humbling 

experience to have been chosen by one’s peers to fulfil what I 

believe to be a very important job. 

 

The longer I’m in this Assembly  and I think of myself as a 

bit of a veteran now, Mr. Speaker  the more I realize that 

most elected people, both government and opposition, are good 

and decent folk whose objective it is to serve the communities 

they represent to the very best of their ability. We will have 

widely differing opinions on many issues, but something that 

we should all cherish and defend is that so few of us in this 

world are privileged enough to be allowed to publicly voice our 

differences, and at the end of the day, through a structure that 

we refer to as the parliamentary process, are able to make laws 

and govern this fine land with some sense of civility. 

 

This is truly a gratifying job. And if I have my way, and as long 

as I feel motivated, I will attempt to represent the constituency 

of Meadow Lake for the foreseeable future. One really is in a 

fish bowl though, and it reminds me of the quote from a 

well-known NHL (National Hockey League)goalie, Jacques 

Plante, who said: how would you like a job where every time 

you made a mistake, a big red light came on and 18,000 people 

booed you. Well that’s how I feel some days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election 

to the position of Speaker, the first democratically elected 

Speaker in the history of this legislature. Your reputation as a 

fair and honourable member of this House in your position on 

various committees is impeccable. I know that this will hold 

true as you take on the role as Speaker. You probably know this 

job won’t be an easy one. Not all of the members in the House 

are as quiet and well-behaved as I am. Like myself though, sir, I 

know you will be able to deal with the House in your quiet and 

unassuming manner. 

 

All humour aside, Mr. Speaker, your job is a very important 

one. In some ways your job is the final control in this 

Assembly. So again, congratulations. 

 

I suspect, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that might make your term 

more rewarding was if you were able to represent the 

constituency of Meadow Lake. But then I know of at least 56 

other members in this Assembly who desire that as well. My 

suggestion is that you hang on to your Speaker role and not set 

your sights too high. 

 

I also want to acknowledge the member from Regina Victoria, 

who would have served as a fine Speaker. I personally feel  

badly that both of you couldn’t assume the position that you 

now hold. You both certainly have reputations as statesmen in 

this Assembly. 

 

I’d like to acknowledge and congratulate my old seat mate from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood for his election as Deputy Speaker 

to that position. I didn’t have much to work with when the 

Premier first sat the two of us together in 1991, but it is a real 

pleasure to see how far I’ve been able to bring him along in 

four and a half short years. Congratulations to you. 

 

To the member from Moosomin, I commend you also. It takes a 

bit of courage to put your name forth as you did. 

 

I’d like to commend the mover of the throne speech, the 

member from Battleford-Cut Knife and the seconder, the 

member from Regina South, for their great maiden speeches. To 

the seconder, I’m sure that you are disappointed, after realizing 

what I did with the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, 

that we weren’t seat mates for a longer period of time. I hope 

though, in that short period of time, that my gentle guidance has 

touched you in some way. 

 

(1645) 

 

To the new members on both sides of the House, my 

congratulations. You have been entrusted with a large 

responsibility. In fact, to all the members of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, I offer my congratulations. 

 

To our new Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw, and to the new 

pages  welcome. And to the Clerks, welcome back. There 

will be days when I am sure you will think we have all gone 

mad but please put up with us and we’ll probably not put glue 

on your chairs too often. Seriously, we really do appreciate 

everything that you do. 

 

And to my room-mate, who I’m sure will be listening to me, the 

member from Rosetown-Biggar who’s been my room-mate for 

the past two and a half years, thank you for your friendship. 

When I feel I’m losing control of my life, I need only look at 

him each evening to realize that I really do have a fair bit of 

breathing space yet. 

 

And finally to my family, Mr. Speaker. To my parents, John and 

Dorothy Sonntag, to my six brothers and sisters and their 

spouses, and to my 21 darling nieces and nephews, I thank you 

for your support and encouragement. It is to you that I often go 

to seek my sanity, though with 21 nieces and nephews, they 

might seem a bit hard to swallow. They certainly do inject me 

with a healthy dose of reality. With a family that size, all I need 

to do is poll them to find out how I’m really doing in the 

constituency. Come to think of it, Mr. Speaker, actually all I 

probably have to do is get 50 per cent plus 1 vote from them 

and I’ll probably have the election okay. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, not only am I extremely proud to represent 

Meadow Lake in this House, I’m also very proud to be a 

member of the government with such a strong fiscal and social 

record  a government with a commitment to community 

involvement and a government that believes in Saskatchewan  



128  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

and this great province. In its first term in less than four years, 

the government, working with Saskatchewan people, brought 

the province back from the edge of bankruptcy. Together, Mr. 

Speaker, we eliminated the deficit, we began reducing the debt, 

and we brought in balanced budget legislation while continuing 

to protect our most vulnerable residents. 

 

I can tell you that I’m very proud to have been a member of that 

government. I know I’ll look back on this term in four years 

time with the same kind of feeling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now that as a province we have got our fiscal house in order, 

we will be able to focus our attentions on other areas with the 

same amount of zeal. As we head into the 21st century, the 

world around us is changing. We have an opportunity right now 

to redesign our structures, programs, and services to ensure that 

Saskatchewan people are equipped to deal with those changes 

so that our province continues to be a place we are proud of.  

the place we want to live and have our children grown up in. 

 

This window of opportunity, though, may not be opened for 

very long. In this rapidly changing global environment, we 

either have to now redefine and redesign services that will 

allow our structures and programs to survive and that will meet 

our needs in the future, or we will be forced to follow the lead 

set by other governments, other agendas, at a later date. 

 

I don’t know about others here, but I want to be remembered 

for being a part of a government that wasn’t afraid to climb that 

mountain and see the new dawn first, rather than a government 

that stood at the base of the mountains in the shadows forever 

believing it was impossible to climb. It may not be easy to 

climb that mountain, Mr. Speaker, and we may in fact slip and 

fall a number of times, but at least we will see that new dawn. 

As Dolly Parton said, Mr. Speaker: If you want the rainbow you 

gotta put up with a little bit of rain sometimes. 

 

In Saskatchewan we’ve always been leaders and masters of our 

own destiny. I believe we can make this happen again. As a 

government we are placing a great deal of emphasis in the area 

of job creation and economic development. Consultations with 

business, working people, cooperatives, and communities have 

resulted in the release of our new economic development 

strategy called Partnership for Growth. This new strategy will 

continue to enhance the climate for economic growth. 

 

The development of a supportive economic climate is paying 

off for the Meadow Lake constituency. As I mentioned 

yesterday in my private members’ statement, Mr. Speaker, last 

month the Meadow Lake Tribal Council signed an agreement 

with the Miskito and Sumo Indians in Nicaragua. These two 

groups will spend $250,000 to study the feasibility of 

establishing a small scale logging operation. That partnership is 

expected to create jobs for people in the Meadow Lake area and 

profits for the Meadow Lake Tribal Council. I would like to 

commend the tribal council for their innovative work on this 

project. 

 

And while I’m speaking of first nations, I would be remiss if I 

didn’t refer to the Waterhen Lake First Nation and the 

celebration that they will be having this summer. Starting July  

4, Waterhen will be asking the north-west to join with them in 

celebrating the 75th anniversary of their signing of Treaty 6. On 

their behalf I extend a warm welcome to each and every one of 

you. Chief Fiddler tells me that he will have a buffalo steak for 

every one that attends. And trust me, I’ve had them; they are 

very, very good. 

 

I want also to acknowledge and recognize the Metis people of 

Saskatchewan and the different locals within the constituency 

of Meadow Lake. Recently most of the major leaders from the 

Metis community in the north-west signed an agreement for 

better cooperation between the municipal councils and the 

Metis nation of Saskatchewan. I know our Minister of Northern 

Affairs was on hand for that signing and I commend him for his 

commitment to the North and to the Metis and first nations 

people of Saskatchewan 

 

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the newly 

elected members of the Metis executive in our area. I’m also 

very pleased to be able to say that this government is placing an 

emphasis on its partnership with first nations and Metis people. 

This is an issue which is extremely important to me. I’m very 

proud of the work that we have been able to do as partners in 

developing new economic opportunities for the first nations and 

Metis people of this province and in promoting greater 

self-sufficiency. 

 

I look forward to the many exciting innovations and 

opportunities that I am sure this continued partnership will 

foster in years ahead. The recently announced agreement 

between Canada and the United States over softwood lumber 

certainly has had a very positive impact on the industry in our 

area. The agreement should end the constant appeals by the 

American lumber companies who impose tariffs on Canadian 

lumber exports in the United States. This should mean more 

stability and inevitably better prices. Better prices means more 

money; more money means more jobs in our area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Historically the lumber industry has been one of the mainstays 

of our area. It has grown in the last number of years to be one of 

our major employers, and I want to commend everyone in the 

industry for the responsible approach they have taken towards 

forestry management. 

 

I am told that Mistik Management, the company that oversees 

the management of the forests in our area, has developed one of 

the world’s leading forest management plans, a plan that 

includes unprecedented amount of detail of the inventory in the 

forest; an inventory that does not simply include lumber, but 

does include detailed information on trap lines, outfitting areas, 

first nations traditional hunting areas, and much, much more. 

 

And where did they get much of the detail from, Mr. Speaker? 

They got it right from the communities themselves. Through the 

many co-management boards that have been established across 

the North, there is now a venue for most affected people to have 

real input into how the forests are managed in their areas. 

 

This is progress. This is cooperation. This is fairness, Mr. 

Speaker. To the many people involved in the forest industry 



March 6, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  129 

and the members of the co-management boards, you have my 

greatest respect. What you have accomplished was almost 

unthinkable a few short years ago, as I know the Minister of the 

Environment can attest to at that time. Congratulations. There is 

yet a long way to go but you have a phenomenal start. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, agriculture too is a major industry in 

the north-west and continues to be the foundation of 

Saskatchewan’s export economy. We have been hit with 

successive droughts in our area and now a depressed cattle 

market, but with high grain prices the economy has remained 

buoyant. Like most Saskatchewanians, farmers are resourceful 

individuals. They are survivors, and as agriculture changes they 

have adapted. 

 

Like probably the majority of the people in this room today, Mr. 

Speaker, I grew up on a family farm. Everyone had their chores 

to do; we all worked together. And that’s the real history of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it?  working together. 

 

I continue to be in awe, Mr. Speaker, of how quickly agriculture 

really is changing when I look at the things like the dramatic 

expansion of the ag biotech industry to the point where we are 

hosting the international agricultural biotechnology conference 

this summer. I realize that we have come a long ways. I am also 

equally excited by the crop insurance review. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  I know that this is primarily driven by the 

federal government, but I commend them for that and I hope 

that all public meetings are meaningful. It is important that 

producers get out to these meetings with suggestions for 

making it a better program, one that is affordable, sustainable, 

and is tailored to meet the needs of the producer. 

 

The reduction of regulations on business is important in 

ensuring the viability of existing businesses and in encouraging 

the development of new ones. Small business is very important 

to our economy in the province and contributes greatly to job 

creation. So I am pleased that we have been able to find ways to 

assist businesses without incurring further costs to taxpayers. 

 

As we head into the new century where the global market-place 

has an impact on all industry sectors, we need to examine the 

roles that our Crown sector plays in the economy and work to 

ensure that it remains strong and dynamic. I think a review of 

the province’s Crown sector is crucial to its very, very survival. 

 

As a part of our plan to rebuild this province for the future, this 

government is examining our social programs, and with the 

help of Saskatchewan people we’re redesigning them so that 

they better meet the needs of vulnerable children, families, 

taxpayers, now and in the future. 

 

Since 1991, with the help of Saskatchewan people, we have led 

the country in redesigning our health care system to a 

community-based model, Mr. Speaker. Now that we’ve moved 

health care into communities, we need to begin working toward 

a team model of health care. 

I am pleased that we will begin focusing on making better use 

of nurses, therapists, and counsellors so that health care 

becomes a community issue rather than an individual one. The 

development of a province-wide 9-1-1 service will be a positive 

addition to an already strong, healthy delivery service in the 

Meadow Lake constituency. I am pleased that the service will 

be developed through a partnership of fire and police services, 

health providers, communities and governments. It’s very 

important that if the service is to be effective it be developed by 

groups in the community who will use it and be most affected 

by it. 

 

As a part of a restructuring of government, the Department of 

Social Services is proposing to redesign the social assistance 

plan. We need to ensure that our services for the most 

vulnerable in our society protect and support these individuals 

in the years ahead. Consultations have been held around the 

province and our Minister of Social Services met with a wide 

range of individuals in Meadow Lake on January 22. Thousands 

of discussion papers on a redesigned program have been 

distributed. I look forward to the development of this program 

over the next year. 

 

I am pleased to be able to say that the work that I was involved 

in in the last term in the Committee on Driving Safety has 

resulted in what will, I am sure, be a piece of very, very 

progressive legislation which will be introduced into the House 

this session. 

 

Very soon government will be introducing the highway and 

vehicle statutes amendment Act. This Act will substantially 

toughen laws against drinking drivers, introduce rules 

governing new drivers, and probably, most importantly, provide 

avenues for rehabilitation. The input the committee received 

from the numerous groups and individuals across this province 

was at many times very, very moving and will certainly be 

instrumental in developing this Act. I want to again commend 

all those individuals who took part in this process and for the 

courage many of them showed in making their presentations to 

the committee. 

 

As a nation, I believe we are at a crossroads now, Mr. Speaker. 

The programs we’ve grown up with are about to change 

whether we want them to or not. If we want these changes to be 

positive for this province, we all need to become involved. 

 

We have a history in this province of strong volunteerism. In 

fact, Saskatchewan has one of the highest rates of volunteerism 

in the country. For evidence of this we only need look at the 

recent Kinsmen Telemiracle. It was again hugely successful. All 

across this province people give of their time and of their 

money and make things better for everyone. We really are but a 

small community in a big land. 

 

I believe if we focus our efforts on working together we can 

build a strong future for our children and for this province. I 

believe we can lead the country again in developing programs 

and structures which support people and are fiscally 

responsible. 

 

In conclusion, I want to say that this will be a very exciting  



130  Saskatchewan Hansard March 6, 1996 

time for government but it should also be a very exciting time 

for Saskatchewan people. If we are to revitalize our government 

structures, programs, and services to build for the future, 

communities, individuals, and governments must work together. 

 

I look forward to partnerships that are forged over the next four 

years and the innovative directions that we will take together. 

And we will be successful working together. It is by working 

together that we will overcome many of the obstacles placed 

before us. 

 

As Joseph Crossman says, obstacles are things a person sees 

when he takes his eyes off his goal. I will wholeheartedly be 

supporting the original motion and voting against the 

amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I think the hon. member from Meadow Lake 

had not quite finished his speech. 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  I thought as well, Mr. Speaker. I will move 

adjournment on debate. No. I move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:03 p.m. 

 


