













































April 15, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 891 

 April 15, 1996 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education 

Vote 5 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When we 

broke, Madam Minister, I think one of the areas I had touched 

on was the stakeholders as far as the key stakeholders that are 

involved in education. 

 

And I understand from your comments, of course, that you see 

many different groups wanting to become . . . I won’t say 

special interest groups but playing a role. I wonder, I guess, 

when I look at the High School Review Committee of which I 

was a member of . . . and I understand the valuable 

contributions of the many different people that we had on that 

committee from the aboriginal sector and from the business 

sector. 

 

Because of the changes in the enrolments that we will have for 

the future, in terms of the number of students of aboriginal 

ancestry, how do you see the department looking at the entire 

picture of an increased aboriginal population not only on, you 

know, the key cities of Regina but across the whole province. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’ve had an opportunity to meet with 

Chief Blaine Favel about the aspirations that first nations have 

for their children and their children’s education. I can tell you 

that we have an Indian and Metis curriculum advisory 

committee. I can tell you that we have a committee that deals 

with Indian and Metis issues. I can say that Indian and Metis 

people are involved in looking at the curriculum from their 

perspective to ensure that it meets their concerns in terms of 

portraying Indian and Metis spirituality and culture in an 

appropriate way. 

 

We are working on an accreditation process for first nations 

tribal councils or bands to ensure that teachers working on first 

nations reserves, or for first nations tribal councils, will be 

accredited, if they desire, in order that their students do not have 

to write departmental exams. And because of the way northern 

economic development occurs, we are in the process of 

ensuring that departmental exams can be written at the end of 

May to ensure that kids that need to go out on the trap line can 

do that without losing their entire school year. 

 

I should also tell you that we are looking at a protocol 

arrangement between first nations people and the Department of 

Education to ensure that we can begin to break down some of 

those systemic barriers and obstructions that first nations people 

have had when it comes to dealing with our historic partners in 

education. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  When we look at specifics in the last little 

while, Madam Minister, I think we agree that the province is 

small enough that all stakeholders have to be working together  

to solve the concerns around education. I think it doesn’t matter 

which stakeholder you talk to, I think that’s key. 

 

What role does the department or will the department play in 

trying to bring together or resolve . . . that seems to be the 

public perception that there is a split right now between the 

department, the teachers’ federation, and the school trustees 

association. How do you see this resolving itself in terms of 

bringing everybody back together on an equal playing-field? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I should tell you, member, that there is 

no public perception that there is a split. Yes. There is no public 

perception. 

 

If you were to ask the public, how do the trustees and the 

teachers get along, I think that the public would believe that 

they get along and they work in collaboration and partnership 

with each other. So there is not a . . . the public does not have 

an understanding that there are differences between the 

Saskatchewan teachers and the Saskatchewan school trustees. 

 

Now if you’re involved in all of the intricacies of the 

stakeholders and so on and so forth, you know that there are 

different issues that from time to time will arise and there will 

be differences of opinion. So how does the department propose 

to have the two groups cooperate? 

 

I should tell you the two groups I’m talking about, the teachers 

and the trustees, I can share with you that the department has 

taken a leadership role in terms of trying to get the various 

partners in education together so that we can begin to address 

issues that are not only of concern to teachers and trustees, but 

also to directors of education, to parents, the home and school 

federation, as well as the colleges of education, and as well as 

the department. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Whether or not 

. . . I agree with you in that the teachers’ federation and the 

boards of education must work together, and that public 

perception maybe is not there. 

 

I was referring more to the department than the trustees 

association and the protocol agreement that seems to have 

worked and not worked; the tentative agreement that has been 

reached and the possibility that in fact, as we hear it, that the 

trustees association may not even be involved in signing the 

agreement. To me that is a bit of a breakdown. I was wondering 

if you could clarify whether those perceptions are accurate. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  You will remember, because I think 

you may have been the president of the school trustees 

association, that the trustees did not sign the last agreement, and 

that this will not be the first time that the trustees may not be 

there to sign the collective agreement, if the teachers agree to 

the new collective agreement. 

 

If you are wanting me to get into the details of where I think the 

protocol agreement should go or shouldn’t go, I can share with 

you that I want to meet with the trustees, and we are meeting 

next week, and I think any discussions about this should occur  

  



892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

there before we take those discussions into the legislature. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that comment. I appreciate 

that. 

 

Could I just for a moment go back to the native schools that are 

operating on reserve. Clarify, what amount of funding does the 

province actually put into native schools? Is it zero? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  The provincial government does not 

put any funding into first nation schools located on reserve. 

First nation schools on reserve come under the jurisdiction of 

the federal government. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  When we have funding  and I understand 

your concerns around ensuring that the schools are following a 

provincial curriculum and that we’re now talking about 

accreditation of teachers regarding grade 12  the payment of 

employees of native schools, are they paid directly by the band 

council and that is then money that is transferred from the 

federal government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As far as I know, they are paid by the 

band council, but once again, this does not come under 

provincial jurisdiction and we do not involve ourselves in band 

schools, per se, in terms of the administration  how teachers 

and other support staff are paid. That comes under the 

jurisdiction of the band. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. In previous discussions we’ve 

talked about the number of students that we have in rural 

Saskatchewan and I think you and I have both noted that the 

declining enrolment in rural Saskatchewan is not necessarily 

due to strictly lower numbers of students that are being born; in 

fact it’s a movement of students. And we talk about the creation 

of the conseils scolaires and we talk about the creation of the 

native schools right now. That is posing a bit of a dilemma for 

rural education in terms of the number of students. 

 

We hear and we see articles in the newspaper where rural 

Saskatchewan enrolment drops by something like 1,700 

students from the year before. But if you really take an accurate 

look at the numbers, you’ll note that some of those numbers 

were transfers to the conseils scolaires with the creation of 

those school divisions last year. Some were in fact transfers 

back to Indian reserves where the students were off reserve 

attending a public school for a while. 

 

How do you see . . . how can you address that? How will the 

department address that concern for those rural school divisions 

that will continue to face that transfer of student? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised by my officials that there 

are 3,500 first nations students that attend rural schools or 

schools in the province of Saskatchewan where the band pays 

tuition. 

 

I’m advised as well that, as more band schools are built, some 

bands are choosing to have their students attend band-controlled 

schools. Now that’s not the case everywhere because parents 

will make decisions whether their child will go  

to a band school or an off-reserve school. 

 

I can also share with you that in this budget we have redirected 

some funds, some $2.35 million, to community schools and the 

Indian and Metis educational development program so that we 

can support  begin to support  rural schools that have first 

nations kids attending those schools in order that appropriate 

programing can be made available that’s in tune with what first 

nations desire for their children, so that we can perhaps ensure 

that those 3,500 students that are presently attending off-reserve 

schools will stay attending those off-reserve schools because we 

have appropriate programing. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. I’d just like to ask a few 

questions connected more in general terms to the department 

and the department staff. You talked about the creation of the 

department responsible for post-secondary education and I 

know that moved some people. Could you tell me what the 

present senior management structure is of the department? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We could send you over a copy of the 

management structure. But we have Dr. Craig Dotson, who is 

the deputy minister, and then we have the assistant deputy 

minister, Ken Horsman. And then there’s an executive 

complement under their management. But we’ll send a copy of 

our structure to you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Has there been a significant 

change  and I guess I’d go back to maybe the first term of 

your government, ’91-92  has this management structure 

significantly changed since then or is this more or less the same 

type of management? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised . . . I should tell you I 

wasn’t here . . . I wasn’t the minister in 1991. The same 

functions . . . the department has the same functions in terms of 

management function. There’s been some changes to the 

reporting structure, but basically the department and what it 

does has not changed since 1991. Some of the people have 

changed, but in terms of what the function of those management 

positions, has not changed per se but some of the reporting 

structure has changed. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. When we look at the FTE 

(full-time equivalent) staff component of the department, I note 

that in your estimates, you indicated that there is almost 

virtually no change. How does that tie with the creation of the 

department responsible for post-secondary education. Did any 

people move and now are totally within the department? This 

would suggest that it didn’t. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m not sure I understand the extent of 

your question. As you know, we have two departments. As I 

said earlier, we have some shared people. The administration 

and facilities branch are shared people; human resources, shared 

people; multi-media, the multi-media part of the department is 

shared by both post-secondary and K to 12. We did not lose any 

staff in this budget; we did not gain any staff. It’s basically 

stand pat in terms of full-time equivalents. 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

Mr. Krawetz:  What I was referring to, Madam Minister, is 

on page 41 of the Estimates, you state that the full-time 

equivalent staff component is 383.3 and the ‘95-96 component 

was 283.1, so that tells me there’s no change. When I look at 

the Estimates for administration salaries, I see in education, K 

to 12 education, for ‘95-96 your projected costs are 2.073 

million and for ‘96-97 they are projected to be 2.216 million. 

That’s a significant increase of well in effect of $140,000. 

 

If I do the same in the post-secondary area, administration 

salaries, I also see that the salaries are from one million six 

hundred and eighty-seven to one million seven hundred and 

sixty-eight, also about a million and something . . . sorry, a 

hundred-thousand something. So we’re looking at well over 

$300,000 in salaries for administration for the two departments, 

an increase. 

 

And I recall when the two departments were created, yes, there 

was going to be some sharing and there was the talk that, in 

fact, there may be some reduced costs. I don’t see that now 

happening, especially in the department of kindergarten to 

grade 12. I see an increase of . . . significant salary increase in 

administration. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Okay. I’m advised that the increase is 

due to the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 

Union) agreement with our in-scope employees. As well we 

have moved contract dollars to salary so we’re not contracting 

out as much work as we have in the past and it’s being done 

inside the department. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Are you referring to subvote 1, the 

administration side? The 2 million? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Yes. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  With the suggestion that you’re doing some 

of the work in house and when I look at the number of people 

that you’ve indicated  283  and I see $2.2 million, what is 

the average salary of someone in the department then? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’d have to get that for you; we don’t 

have that with us. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Could you also . . . when you are providing 

some of the information, I would appreciate a breakdown of the 

number of people in  especially in the first three sections  

the administration section, the accommodation and central 

services, and the teacher pensions and benefits, in terms of how 

many employees there are in those particular categories, and the 

salaries. Okay. 

 

For a moment, I’d just like to revert back to the questions 

around native schools  actually a reversal. We know now that 

in many instances native bands are buying a school that might 

even be off reserve, or they’re creating a reserve now that 

includes a school. 

 

And in many instances, there will be students that are in the 

present public system, that are non-native, who may choose to 

attend the native school. What will be the monies that will be  

transferable, or will you be working out a tuition agreement 

with the native schools? How will we see the money going the 

other way? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  School divisions make those kinds of 

arrangements. At present, bands enter into tuition agreements 

with school divisions and if a student off reserve wanted to go 

to a reserve school, the school division would enter into a 

tuition fee arrangement with the band council. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In terms of transportation now  let’s use 

that same scenario  in terms of transportation, there must be 

an agreement, you’re saying. Will there be an agreement then 

for the band school or the native band itself to actually have a 

transportation agreement with a school division to transport 

these non-native students to the school? Will that be within the 

divisions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  It will be up to the community and 

what they would be able to negotiate between the band and the 

school division. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  If I could, I’d like to just turn to the current 

status of the schools in the province, Madam Minister. We’ve 

talked a little bit about the number of students in rural 

Saskatchewan. That figure has declined rapidly over the last 

number of years. And you’ve stated those numbers before; I 

believe we’re at around 79,000 students right now if I look at 

the 61 rural school divisions. That number has come down 

significantly. 

 

I guess my question would be in the area of what is the plan of 

the department of your government regarding education in rural 

Saskatchewan. Where will the schools be located? What kind of 

a plan do you see as a vision for the future of where schools 

might be located in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I have for some time been worried 

about the future of education in certain parts of rural 

Saskatchewan, given the demographic trends, given the 

enrolment decline. At my encouragement, we had the first 

national rural education congress in this country just a month 

ago where we brought people interested in rural education from 

across the country together to discuss the future of education, 

not only in this province but in other provinces and territories. 

 

I should tell you that we have changed our funding formula in 

this budget cycle where we now treat all school divisions 

outside of Saskatoon and Regina as rural school divisions. So 

for instance the city of Moose Jaw, the city of Prince Albert, 

they now receive funding that is similar to rural schools. And as 

you know, a student in rural Saskatchewan receives more 

money from the province than a student in urban Saskatchewan 

because it costs more to deliver an education in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Given the enrolment declines  and it doesn’t appear as though 

those demographics are going to change  given what has 

happened in this country because of the federal Liberal changes 

to the Crow benefit . . . and we will see branch line 

abandonment, and we will see the consolidation of our grain  

  



894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

handling system in this province and in the West. Given that we 

will see the changes to the wooden elevator moving to inland 

terminals, I think it’s fair to say that the grain handling system 

in this country and in this province is planning  and they’re 

planning  to determine where communities are going to be 

located in this province. It seems absolutely crucial to me that 

those of us interested in rural Saskatchewan, those of us 

interested in ensuring that we have a quality education system 

in rural Saskatchewan, begin to plan to ensure that students in 

rural Saskatchewan are not put at a disadvantage over their 

urban counterparts. 

 

So what have we done? We had, for the first time in this 

country, a rural education congress. We have a paper that is 

going to the public to look at some options for restructuring 

education, particularly education in rural Saskatchewan. That 

paper will be out in April, and people in rural Saskatchewan 

will have a chance to sit down and think about how they want to 

govern themselves when it comes to the delivery of education 

and how they want to structure themselves. 

 

I think, given what we have done in this budget to create a rural 

technology fund, given some of the changes we’ve made, I 

think that we’re on our way to ensuring that education in rural 

Saskatchewan is sustained and that kids growing up in rural 

Saskatchewan are not penalized because of their location. 

 

It troubles me very much when I hear a doctor from Eastend, 

Saskatchewan saying there are very few rural students going 

into medicine, and if rural students go into medicine we have a 

better chance of having doctors in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

My question is, why aren’t rural kids going into medicine? And 

I think that that’s something that we as leaders in this province 

have to think about and have to do something about if we are to 

ensure that people in Saskatchewan, regardless of where they 

live, have access to a modicum of services. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Yes, I would 

fully agree that we have to have a plan. And I’m not sure that if 

you consider railway abandonment as the issue as to whether or 

not a school exists, that isn’t going to matter because we 

already know that there are schools in this province, due to 

declining enrolment, are operating with 20 or 30 or 40 students. 

And whether or not the railway continues to operate through 

that community or whether the elevator is going to be there isn’t 

going to matter a whole lot about whether or not that enrolment 

is going to go down a lot, or indeed whether or not that 

enrolment is going to stay stagnant. 

 

We have seen communities in this province that not too many 

years ago had hundreds of students attending the school in that 

community. And whether or not it’s due to the societal change 

and the fact that families are smaller today; whether it’s due to 

the fact that our farms have increased in size, whether it’s due 

to the fact that we are a more mobile society  those things 

have all helped to contribute to the fact that we have many 

small schools that are operating and many small schools that 

have closed. 

My question is  and I agree with you that there has to be a 

plan  my question is, when we start to look at transportation 

of students we have in many instances reached the point where 

students are riding a bus, right now, one way in the morning, an 

hour and a half, an hour and thirty-five, an hour and forty-five 

in some instances. If the school closes, for whatever reason, the 

next nearest school in some instances, if I look at the south-east 

corner or the south-west corner of the province, we’re now 

talking that the nearest school might be another 35 or 40 miles. 

A two and a half hour bus ride? I mean you can talk to any 

parent  that is known. I see you shaking your head negatively, 

and I appreciate that reaction because that is an impossibility. 

 

So my question  and I care very much about rural 

Saskatchewan  I want to know whether or not we’re working 

with our partners, whether you are working with your partners, 

to develop a plan now. Not a year from now, not two years from 

now, when already we’ve had to have students move to 

Saskatoon because they fear riding a bus for two and a half 

hours. I want to know if you are putting in place a plan that’s 

going to look at distance education or whether you’re going to 

look at saying the mandatory maximum time on a bus is X 

number of minutes, etc. Like what are you doing to address the 

concerns in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Let me say this. This is where you and 

I are going to disagree. As soon as you take a railroad out of a 

town, and as soon as you take an elevator out of a town, things 

change. And I think you will acknowledge that much. You take 

a post office out of a town, a railroad out of a town, an elevator 

out of a town, the bank leaves a town, things change. 

 

And so what I’m saying to you is that you change the 

infrastructure, you change the infrastructure in rural 

Saskatchewan by one policy change  that has a dramatic 

impact. And surely, Mr. Member, you should understand that. 

Even if it is your Liberal cousins in Ottawa, there are lots of 

Liberals in this province that understand what the Crow benefit 

means to this province. 

 

Now I know the Tories. I know they don’t understand because 

they’ve been trying to get rid of the Crow for years. They just 

didn’t expect  I didn’t expect  the Liberals to do it, but you 

did. And so, given that you’ve done it  it’s a done deal  

you’ve got to start thinking about what does the infrastructure 

of this province look like. Municipalities are planning road 

construction, how the transportation system is going to be in 

this province, and we’re going to do some planning about what 

do our rural . . . what does our rural education system look like. 

 

Now you asked me what have I done. We have a over $1 

million enhancement fund that has gone into wiring and cabling 

schools for distance education. We have a $3 million rural 

education technology fund to deal with the people that you’re 

talking about. I don’t expect a kid down in the south-west part 

of Saskatchewan to get on a bus and drive for two hours one 

way and two hours the other way in order to get their high 

school education. We do have the technology in this province to 

deliver, through distance education, the appropriate subjects 

that will get that young person off to post-secondary education. 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

Is it going to be a year from now when we have our plan in 

place. We’ll see what the public has to say. We will make the 

appropriate legislative amendments a year from now if the 

public wants us to go in a particular direction. And I would say 

that if there is to be restructuring, it’ll be in place by the fall of 

1997. 

 

The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the 

member opposite for allowing me to interrupt the line of 

questioning, and the minister as well. I’m sure the young people 

here today are finding the questioning of the Education minister 

and the responses to the budget allocation for education very 

interesting. 

 

And with that, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 

all my colleagues in the Assembly, 12 fine young people from 

the White City, Balgonie area in the constituency of Regina 

Wascana Plains. They’re all members of the High Prairie 

Scouts movement, and they’re accompanied by their Scouter, 

Laurie Buck, and Scouter, Greg Herr. They also have with them 

a parent, Donna Trafiak. 

 

They’ve had a tour. They’re listening now in to some of the 

debate in the Assembly. I’ll meet with them shortly for a photo 

and a time to visit and share some refreshment with them. I look 

forward to meeting with the Scouts from the High Prairie Scout 

group. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them here 

this evening. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Education 

Vote 5 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I was interested to hear you 

talk about the effect of railway closures and elevator closures 

had on the education system. Last night I attended a meeting in 

Annaheim, Saskatchewan, where they’ve never had an elevator 

or a railroad. They have a very viable community, but they have 

a problem with their school closing. 

 

This seems to be a little strange to me because Doepker 

Industries has managed to keep this town alive by its . . . 

basically by itself, but because the school is closing, it’s going 

to have a direct effect on that town because they can’t get 

families to move into town if the school isn’t going to be there. 

 

I think that these . . . When I hear that your government’s main 

priority is job creation and yet some of the other acts that  

you’re carrying on is affecting the job creation in rural 

Saskatchewan, we can’t blame railway closures, railways 

closing down, on all the schools’ problems, so I’m just asking 

you to consider that there are other circumstances in this 

province besides just federal offloading. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well it’s my opinion that the railroads 

in this country have had a dramatic impact upon where 

economic development has occurred. I think any farmer in this 

province will acknowledge that the railroad and where the grain 

elevator was located impacted upon his or her business. 

 

I’m saying that if you go to large inland terminals, which it 

appears as though we’re moving towards  large concrete 

elevators  and you abandon rail branch lines, and it appears 

as though there is some hurry to speed this process beyond the 

10-year period, to speed it up quickly, that that will have a 

dramatic impact upon the infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan. 

And I think regardless of whether you’re a Tory or a Liberal or 

a New Democrat, we need to acknowledge that. 

 

That one policy change of the federal Liberal government . . . 

And I have heard this from people who don’t sit in this House, 

but certainly reflect your views, political views; they have said 

that this one policy change by Ottawa will dramatically change 

the way this province is structured, the infrastructure is 

structured. And I find it interesting that you wouldn’t, that 

Liberals in this House would not, acknowledge that fact. 

 

Now given that that is a fact  we have had a change to the 

Crow benefit  given that the branch lines will be abandoned 

and inland terminals will be created, that’s a fact, it seems to me 

that given that there is planning going on in this province, we 

have to  capitalist planning  government needs to plan as 

well. And that’s what we’re going to do. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a comment that I 

feel I should make. I’m from rural Saskatchewan  we have a 

farm  and I know very well that school enrolments have 

declined in Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, long before the 

Crow benefit was changed. It seems to me that it’s been 

dwindling away at the infrastructure of rural Saskatchewan 

throughout the years, gradually, that has eroded the population 

in rural Saskatchewan in more ways than one. And it has not 

only been attributed to the transportation of our grain. 

 

I noticed that people throughout the province, no matter what 

their work is or what their occupation, have certainly had to 

adapt to travel. And our farmers now do have to take some of 

their grain to inland terminals, but that would not, in itself, be 

reason for me to move off of my farm and out of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What really does make a difference to me is in effect, if all of 

the businesses in my community are suffering, if I don’t have 

access to Crop Insurance offices and all of those things that 

really, I guess, make my life a little bit easier, those are things 

that would make me end up thinking about moving. And they 

would also be things that would make my children 

second-guess whether they can live in rural Saskatchewan at all. 

  



896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

So I would suggest that there is a bigger picture here than just 

transportation of grain, because we know that rural 

Saskatchewan has had some difficulty with population and 

school population long before the Crow benefit was changed. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Deputy Chair. Madam Minister, 

we fully agree with a demographic change that we won’t be 

able to prevent. And that’s reality  that’s fact. You state that 

elevator companies are going to be moving to large concrete 

terminals  that’s fact. In fact there are maps out and you can 

talk to the major grain companies that will tell you where 

they’re going to be or where they hope to be located in a short 

while. 

 

I also would like to inform you that in many instances 

communities that I have heard from over the last, well not just 

the last six months, but over the last number of years, where 

there have been decisions made about downsizing schools, 

about closure of schools, that these kinds of changes, Madam 

Minister, took place in communities where there used to be 30 

viable businesses a short 15 years ago. And the population of 

that particular community used to be 400 or 350, and today, 

Madam Minister, it’s barely 200 and it’s an ageing population, 

and there are about seven businesses left in town of which 

you’ve identified a few of them  the co-op store, the post 

office, a service station, a grocery store, and yes, the elevator. 

 

Now when that elevator leaves because it’s the choice of the 

grain company, it won’t matter a hill of beans to that school 

that’s there. Okay. So we have to realize that. And those kinds 

of changes are taking place. As you said  fact  I would like 

to know . . . and you’re saying that you’re going to rely on the 

feedback that you will hear over the course of the next six 

months, I take it, because you’re looking at next winter. Are 

you proposing anything else other than the four options that 

you’ve put forth? 

 

Are you looking at any criteria or guidelines to communities or 

to school boards, as far as what you would see the school being 

or how far it must be before you would see another school, the 

location of the next school? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I can tell you that we have set up our 

rural technology factor in our operating grant. We fund rural 

schools to a greater extent than we fund schools located in 

urban Saskatchewan. We aren’t planning on changing the 

funding formula other than what we’ve changed it this year in 

terms of some of the factors. 

 

We do not have any criteria in mind. We’re going to wait to 

hear what the public has to say. We’re not going to say grade 2 

should be on the bus for 20 minutes and grade 10’s for 50 

minutes, and we’re not going to get into that sort of discussion. 

We want to look at the big picture  how do we want this 

province to look in terms of how we deliver education in this 

province? 

 

And we will see what the public has to say and maybe the 

public will have a different option. They may have a fifth 

option that we haven’t thought about. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  So I’m hearing that you’re totally open to 

suggestions from the public and that you’re going to be looking 

at them with, I guess, all stakeholders involved in giving you 

ideas and giving your department officials ideas. I look forward 

to that. 

 

One concern that I’d like to ask you before some other 

questions are asked by other members  bussing, 

transportation. Were there any significant changes made to the 

bussing program this year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  When I look at the equalization  not the 

equalization, the foundation grant formula, and I see the 

allotment of monies in the area of transportation. We know that 

the fuel price increases, all those kinds of things, have taken 

place, yet there was no addressing of that for school boards. 

And I see that as a burden on school boards and I know you’re 

talking about shifting monies within the budget and trying to 

work within the dollar figure that you have. How do you see 

school boards being able to address the increased costs for 

transportation without any increased money? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised that we’re paying more 

money for rural transportation than what is actually being spent, 

so in fact, just so we’re clear here, we don’t pay the actual cost 

of transportation; we pay more than the actual cost of 

transportation in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Do you work into that cost a certain amount 

for capital in terms of bus replacement? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m advised we do. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Could I ask what that percentage is of the 

total budget? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We don’t have that here but we can get 

that for you. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, among all the institutions 

that change, I think schools are one of the ones that change very 

slowly, just by the nature of the kinds of things that they are. 

And so they need a lot of lead time to get going. 

 

So my question relates to the change in education funding 

between the last budget and this one. And I know the reason 

given was the offloading from the federal government. 

However you were quite aware of what that offloading was 

going to be before the last election, and the school boards were 

given a hope that there would be a certain amount of funding 

coming through, and basically that didn’t happen. 

 

And so my question is, why did you promise a funding increase 

that you knew you couldn’t deliver and playing politics with an 

educational system that has a very hard time adapting in a 

hurry? 

 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I don’t know if you know this, but we 

made the  you weren’t in the House here  but we made the 

funding announcement for K to 12 before the last federal 

budget. The Minister of Finance got her budget in February. 

The federal Minister of Finance did not bring his budget in until 

March 1995. 

 

And I think it’s fair to say that we were not at all clear what the 

changes were going to be to EPF (established programs 

financing) and CAP (Canada Assistance Plan) and the impacts 

that would have on the province. We thought it would be 

around $100 million, but the federal Finance department was 

not that forthcoming. And we did not know until we got the 

budget documents from the federal government on their budget 

day that in fact it was $114 million for this fiscal year, 1996-97. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I guess, Madam Minister, that compounds 

the problem as I see it. If in fact you didn’t know what the 

federal offloading was going to be, then why the various 

commitments that were made? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I don’t know if you understood 

what I said. We made our commitment to the 2 per cent funding 

increase in February 1995. The federal government did not 

deliver their budget until some time in March 1995. 

 

In their budget documents, there was no transparency in terms 

of impacts in 1996-97. There was a reference to changing EPF, 

established program financing, and CAP, Canada Assistance 

Plan, into the Canada Health and Social Transfer. But there 

were no numbers given to the province in terms of ‘96-97. And 

as I said, it wasn’t until Mr. Martin delivered his ‘96-97 federal 

budget that we had transparency for the province in terms of the 

actual funding reduction. When it came to rolling CAP and EPF 

into the CHST (Canada Health and Social Transfer), the 

province was $114 million short. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  My next question relates more to the recent 

settlement that was made. Our information leads us to believe 

that the increased cost of salaries and benefits that are coming 

down the pipe will be some place between 14 and $20 million. 

The $2 million for the K to 12 system doesn’t come anywhere 

near that. 

 

So the question is, well why the discrepancies? And I guess the 

real critical question is  there will be a shortfall. There’s no 

doubt about that. The school boards are already working 

through that and I’m sure you’re aware of that  how do you 

expect the school boards to make up that shortfall? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As you will realize, member, we have a 

tentative collective agreement. I can’t discuss what is in that 

tentative agreement until the teachers have had an opportunity 

to vote on this. I believe it’s April 24 and 25. I can say this to 

you, that we disagree as to the cost of this collective agreement. 

We do not at all agree that it will be 14 to 20 million. We are of 

the opinion that it will be a $2 million cost to the school boards 

across this province when you look at incremental salary 

increases associated with the collective agreement. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  As you stated, Madam Minister, we do  

disagree on that particular fact. However we’ll probably have to 

agree on the fact that there are a lot of other costs that have 

gone up which are not covered by your funding  inflationary 

costs, further transportation costs, all manner of various costs 

that come through there. And if those are not being covered by 

the provincial government grants, then my question to you, 

Madam Minister, is how do you propose that these school 

boards, who are already facing a taxpayer group that is paying 

very high taxes, is supposed to cover that? Cut-backs or taxes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well for your information we do not at 

all agree with the trustees that this will cost . . . this collective 

agreement with the teachers will cost between 14 and $20 

million. We just do not agree. They are including items that 

have nothing to do with the collective agreement. So we 

disagree, and I know that you have a partner or a spouse that is 

involved with the school trustees association, and I know that 

this is something that they’re of the opinion . . . and we do not 

agree because they are including things like increments for 

teachers that would have gotten increments anyway. So that is 

our position. 

 

Now in terms of this budget, I mean if you look in the blue 

book and you look very carefully, you will note that no other 

third party  even though there have been wage increases in 

this province  got any increase. K to 12 did. 

 

You will also know that assessment in this province is going up. 

There’s a $20 million increase in assessment. The value of 

property that has been built in this province or added to in this 

province is a $20 million increase which means that school 

boards will have access to more property taxes because of 

increasing assessment. We have made arrangements through 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy to decrease utility costs for those 

particular utilities to school boards. They got a bigger reduction 

than citizens did because we realize that school boards are 

important, and we realize that we’re living in times where we 

will not see significant increases in funding to school boards or 

other third parties. 

 

I’d just like to remind you that this is one of the few provinces 

in this country that will see an actual increase in grant to the K 

to 12 system in this fiscal year. Many other provinces . . . I’m 

just thinking of Ontario; I think they’re cutting their school 

funding 10 per cent  like that. That’s not happening in this 

province. We’re beginning to make our way out of some of the 

fiscal problems that developed in the 1980s under a previous 

administration. We’re starting to make our way out, and we can 

see the light at the end of the tunnel come the next century. But 

it’s slow, and it’s tedious, but we’re all in this together. And I 

think that we’ve had a very good relationship between the 

trustees and the government, and I expect to continue to have a 

good relationship between the trustees and this government. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, it’s an interesting 

conclusion when we are not allowed to use, for example, as you 

mention the cost of increments as a cost in education. I’m not 

exactly sure whether we’re supposed to use the same activities 

we saw at the other side of the House where, you know, trustees 

are supposed to pull this money out of the air somehow. But I 

don’t think it works that way. 

  



898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

Your Finance minister claims there are no new taxes in this 

budget. I think this will translate into new taxes. It will do that 

by an increase in mill rate and alongside of that with some other 

very serious cuts. With reference to this, I would like to quote 

from the Catholic education director, Ken McDonough’s 

comments about this budget. And the quote is: 

 

. . . we’re still not sure about whether there will be a mill 

rate increase. 

 

We’re still looking at a $472,000 shortfall in our estimates 

. . . 

 

Now that statement, by the way, doesn’t include any additional 

costs of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 

settlement. And there are costs aside from the salary part which 

you maintain you’re going to be covering. 

 

Al Klassen from the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) amplifies this comment a little further. And he 

says: 

 

By law, school boards must balance their budgets. 

 

With local taxpayers absolutely tapped out in many areas 

of the province, school boards will have no choice but to 

cut staff, eliminate programs and close schools. 

 

Those are all pretty disastrous sorts of things. Those are the 

things that happen in rural Saskatchewan first and most and are 

the most hurtful. 

 

Already the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the ones you 

were working with for that collective agreement, estimates that 

the number of full-time equivalent teaching positions lost since 

your government took office is 821, which is substantial and 

that relates right back to kids and to classrooms. 

 

A final quote on that subject is: 

 

The government is cutting back on their own 

responsibilities for education, loading it up on the local 

property taxpayers, and that’s wrong. How about standing 

up and facing up to your responsibility for the children of 

tomorrow. 

 

And that’s by Mr. Roy Romanow speaking in the House in 

1990. 

 

So let me ask you, Madam Minister, in your view, what will be 

the ultimate impact of this year’s Education budget  higher 

taxes or closure of schools? 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Order, order. Order. I simply wish 

to draw to the hon. member from Rosthern’s attention, you used 

a proper name of a current member of the legislature. As the 

member knows . . . order. Order, order. I know the hon. member 

is aware of the rule regarding the use of proper names and I just 

caution the member not to do so. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  You should know that when Mr.  

McDonough made those comments he did not have all of the 

information. In fact St. Paul’s Roman Catholic School Division 

in the city of Saskatoon will receive an additional $1.5 million 

over and above their grant from last year. They are very happy. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, I would like to move to 

something that’s happened in Alberta. I’m wondering if we 

need to look at that and if you have? It’s the business advisory 

group that they have established there. And it’s in order to cope 

with your funding cuts the educational system is going to have 

to become more effective at delivering the real needs of 

students. 

 

One step the Manitoba government took was to establish, as I 

mentioned, a business advisory group on education. Terms of 

reference include: advising the minister on matters in priority; 

promoting leadership and partnerships; developing strategies to 

strengthen business education links  and I’d like to underline 

that one if we’re going to have to look at all the possible 

fundings for education that one needs to be looked at; ensuring 

that business interests are reflected; and advising the minister 

on priorities in skills training, development, and delivery. I 

think that last one’s critical as well to make sure that education 

does for our kids what we hope it will. 

 

Your government has used these kinds of bodies in the past for 

such things as trade and tourism policy development. Have you 

monitored the Manitoba group’s work at all, and if so, what are 

your assessments? 

 

(2000) 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We are not familiar with this report, 

and if you would like to share it with us quickly, we’d like to 

see it. Or obviously, we can write the Manitoba and Alberta 

governments and get it. 

 

As I said earlier, we are trying to develop partners with all kinds 

of different people, all kinds of different groups in the province. 

We all have an interest in education and that certainly would 

not exclude industry in this province. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Okay, as you mentioned, you’re not that 

familiar with that. I’m sure the Manitoba government and . . . 

(inaudible) . . . occasion are willing to share that with you. 

 

I think universities in the past have looked at doing work 

together with business to get some funding. What are your 

general feelings about business partnerships in education 

especially as it relates to K to 12? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We have work experience programs all 

over Saskatchewan where school divisions, through their work 

education teachers, enter into partnerships with business to 

ensure that our young people can develop work experience in 

businesses’ workplaces. So we’re not at all opposed to having 

these kinds of partnership arrangements to ensure that our 

young people have access to learning opportunities, their skill 

development opportunities that will hold them in good stead 

once they leave secondary education. 

 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, switching gears somewhat 

here, one of the current issues in the past has been the delivery 

of sex education components and curriculum and I’d like to 

spend some time on that aspect of it. 

 

Last year, there was considerable controversy over a so-called 

value-free curricula. And I think you’re fairly aware of that. My 

question  I have two that deal with that. One is, what, if any, 

elements of that value-free course were implemented and can 

you tell us of any other changes to that particular curriculum 

component that has been made over the past year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I’m sorry, we don’t . . . could you be a 

little more specific in terms of what you’re talking about? 

We’re not familiar with what you’re talking about. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  On the value-free thing dealing with the sex 

education, and it had some videos with them and the 

information that was involved involved concepts on how 

students, if they wished to, could perform oral sex effectively 

and enthusiastically and interestingly . . . I take it from your 

advisers shaking their heads they have no knowledge of any of 

this? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  This kind of stuff that you’re talking 

about would not be recommended for use in our schools, so I’m 

sorry, I don’t know what you’re talking about. I haven’t seen 

the video and none of us have, so it must have be something 

that we’re not familiar with and it’s obviously not in our 

schools. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, my 

question, the last question that I ended with regarding 

transportation . . . and I’ve been looking through some statistics 

that I’ve been sent by various boards of education. And I see 

over the last three documents that I have, which is the last three 

years, that the allocation of funding, recognized expenditure for 

transportation, is a daily per pupil allotment and a daily 

kilometre allotment. And the funding that I look at, and I look 

at the cost factor or the number of kilometres travelled in these 

particular school divisions, and I see a factor of about 80 to 85 

cents per kilometre travelled over the course of a year. 

 

And when I take a look at the actual expenditure arrived at, I 

see in the instances here that it was almost equivalent, or in fact 

the expenditure that the school division actually had was just 

slightly more than the amount that was in the column on the 

recognized expenditure. 

 

And those school divisions did not purchase a bus in that 

particular year. In other words, no capital investment. If we 

look at school divisions of this size that are running about 15 or 

18 routes, the replacement is usually about one or one and a half 

buses per year on a regular basis to get through a fleet of 15. 

Bus costs now $60-plus thousand for one bus. I would like 

some explanation as to how that daily kilometre rate actually 

includes capital. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Just for your information, the province 

of Saskatchewan recognizes about $54 million in rural 

transportation. We pay a per pupil and a per kilometre rate to  

school boards, and built into that is the cost of replacement. 

And as I said earlier, we pay as much as the actual cost or more 

than the actual cost. And I think you will know, because school 

boards often tell me, do you realize that you’re paying us more 

than the actual cost of transportation; we make money on 

bussing? And we know that, but we’re not going to change it 

because we think that the way we presently fund transportation 

is appropriate, and we have built in replacement costs of buses. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I have heard 

from school divisions over my time involved with the trustees 

association that there are some inefficiencies in terms of how 

students are bussed. And I think we’ve encouraged the 

department to take a look at that in terms of trying to be as 

efficient as possible, and I know school divisions are trying to 

do that. And I guess I will just say that that’s where you and I 

disagree in terms of whether or not they’re funded to the full 

amount. 

 

I would like to have the information provided. And I know I 

would understand that your officials wouldn’t have that. When 

you say 54 million for transportation, I would like to know, 

based on either the ’95-96 school year or the ‘94-95 . . . or 

‘95-96, what number of kilometres were buses using in this 

formula in terms of transportation? And is that number working 

close to about 80 or 85 cents per kilometre? Do you have that 

information today or will you be tabling that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’ll send it to you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that answer. 

 

Could I take a look at the budget document, Madam Minister. I 

want to bring to your attention some historical data that I find 

very interesting. In 1991, according to your numbers, you have 

indicated that the foundation grant to boards of education was 

about $374 million, and the educational development fund for 

that particular year, and this number is coming directly out of 

the audited financial statement, was about $7 million. So the 

amount that was actually transferred to boards of education in 

this province in 1991 for operation, and I’ll refer to that as 

operation, was about $381 million. 

 

In 1995, you have indicated in your document, $353 million 

was the amount that was in the line item referred to as the 

foundation grant, and there was about $2 million worth of EDF 

(education development fund)  the final year of EDF. That 

number translates into a sum of about 355 million. 

 

My first comment there is that over that space of that short four 

years, there was a decline in funding to K to 12 education on 

the operating side, of $26 million. At the same time, I 

understand, Madam Minister, that there were increases from the 

federal government to the province of Saskatchewan almost on 

a yearly basis. What was happening with the federal monies 

when at the same time you were reducing funding to boards of 

education by 26 million over that four years? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We sent a document on March 18, 

1993 to every director of education in the province. I’m sure 

you were the chairman of your board of education, and you  

  



900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

would have seen this document. And it says that the educational 

development fund will be wound down beginning April 1, 

1993. And it goes into how it’s going to be wound down. This 

is not news; it was known two or three years ago that this would 

be wound down. 

 

And you should also know that EDF was used for things like 

technology and those kinds of things; curriculum supports, 

resource materials, and so on and so forth. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Yes, Madam Minister, I was aware of that. 

And I guess as my colleague from Rosthern has indicated, his 

spouse gets him into trouble, and my past job gets me into 

trouble. I’m not sure if that’s what you were alluding to, but I 

don’t think it did get me into trouble. 

 

I think what it tells me though, Madam Minister, is that if I now 

move to 1996 year . . . and I need clarification on your numbers 

because you’ve indicated that Education is one of the few 

departments that did not receive a cut. And if I look at the 

educational development fund plus the operating grant of 353, 

which I’ve already stated to you, that number was 355 in total 

last year, this year the line item for the EDF, as you’ve 

indicated it ended last year, so this year the monies for EDF are 

zero. 

 

So therefore if boards of education were spending $2 million 

last year on library technicians, purchasing resource materials 

for their resource centres, their libraries, buying computer 

hardware or software in terms of improving their technology, 

and they’re going to continue to do that this year, they have to 

find that $2 million from some other source because it’s not 

there. 

 

You’ve also indicated that the $353 million foundation grant 

has been increased to 355. Plus zero EDF means it’s the same 

355 that boards received last year. However you’ve told us . . . 

and I understand your reluctance to discuss items of contract 

that are still to be voted on. But the word is out, Madam 

Minister; we know that there is a 1 per cent increase taking 

place on September 1 if the agreement is ratified, and that cost 

is $2 million. 

 

You have said $355 million is the amount of money being given 

to boards of education, the same number as last year. And 

you’ve said that there will be a $2 million increase in 

expenditures. The boards of education of this province are not 

in the same financial position as they were last year. Would the 

minister like to comment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I just want to comment that EDF was 

never for operating. I think you know that. It was one-time 

money for one-time projects. It did not go into operating grant. 

 

Now I don’t want to do this to you, but I’m going to do it. Add 

up . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well he’s a new member, and 

I just want to be kind. Let’s just add up grants to schools, school 

capital, and EDF. If you look at 1995-96 in comparison to 

1996-97, there’s a $3 million increase. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I would like to look at the capital. We’ll  

disagree on that for now, Madam Minister, and we’ll talk about 

the full funding, okay. Boards of education over the last number 

of years have had a great problem with capital projects. And 

I’m glad that you’ve introduced that topic because I’d like to 

spend a few minutes there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh 

we’ll get back to that point. 

 

When we talk about capital funding, we have seen dramatic 

change in the amount shared between the department and the 

amount shared by the local taxpayer, that is, the boards of 

education. 

 

(2015) 

 

I recall that, I think it’s about the late 1980s, that the share for a 

particular school division that I was associated with, the fee for 

capital construction, was about 20 per cent of the project. Now 

that share is about 40 per cent. Is there any plan in the 

department to level that off? Is it going to continue to increase? 

 

Because, Madam Minister . . . and I raise this very sincerely. 

I’ve had school divisions phone me to say we have a need for a 

capital project, and we understand that there are many capital 

projects before the facilities department. But they are saying to 

me that if they receive a capital project of significant amount  

$2 million, $3 million  based on the fact that their share has 

increased so dramatically, they will be in a position to say thank 

you, Madam Minister, for the project, but no thank you because 

we can’t afford it. 

 

Has there been any look at the division of monies for capital 

and how the department is going to assess the needs of school 

divisions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  I can tell you that we are reviewing our 

capital allocation formula, but we’ve made no decisions. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  You’ve made no decisions on a review? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We’re reviewing it, but we’ve made no 

decisions. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for clarifying that. I didn’t hear 

your first words. 

 

Okay, so if the formula is to stay the same and the school 

division is going to be paying 35 or 40 per cent on its ability to 

pay, as I understand now, and if that doesn’t change, we will 

see this year . . . and this is the point, Madam Minister, where I 

wanted to congratulate you and the Finance minister for 

something that I see as a change in the capital structure. And 

we’ll get back to then the total amount that you’re spending 

back on operating because it shouldn’t include capital. 

 

When I see a transfer of money in capital where you’re saying 

that line item is now increased from 22 million to 24, and I see 

at the bottom of page 43 a footnote there, could you explain 

why there is a discrepancy in the interest? Is it due to the fact 

that there were no projects at a particular year? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  There’s a variety of reasons, but  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

basically interest rates are down. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Interest rates are down. It has nothing to do 

with the fact that there were no capital expenditures a number 

of years ago and therefore that the department is no longer 

picking up a share of interest? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  As you know, there was major building 

10 years ago. We haven’t had as much capital construction in 

the last few years so consequently our interest rates are 

shrinking. 

 

In fact, as you probably know, we have schools that were built 

in the ‘80s that are now abandoned. A good example is 

Paddockwood. This is where public policy does make a 

difference. When the previous administration entered into its 

agreement with Weyerhaeuser, small woodcutters couldn’t go 

into the forest. Well there were a lot of small woodcutters that 

located in Paddockwood. We built a brand-new school in the 

1980s. It’s now empty because of that policy change. So policy 

does impact upon infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  That may have some bearing on it, yes, 

Madam Minister, policy would. But I also know of schools that 

had small capital projects done to them in the middle ‘80s, and 

due to some extremely declining enrolments, those schools have 

closed and they’ve become public property, and indeed school 

divisions are still paying the last little shares on that. You know, 

I don’t think it’s because of anyone’s error, that’s just what has 

happened. 

 

I’m glad to hear you confirm that indeed the interest reduction 

from $14 million to $12 million is due to the fact that it’s a 

block of interest that’s missing, okay. And if I read this 

correctly then, if I look at last year, the 22 million that you had 

as a capital expenditure, 14 of that was for interest and 8 was 

for actual, real projects, okay. And therefore the 24 million that 

I see this year, you’re saying that 12 of that is for interest and 

12 is for capital projects. Correct? 

 

By your nodding, I see that that’s correct. So therefore, as I 

said, I congratulate you for having $4 million more for boards 

of education to look forward to in terms of capital projects. 

 

Back to my original question, or comment, about monies for 

operating then. I still see the fact that the school boards of this 

province are out $2 million for operating this year versus last 

year, excluding capital. 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Not true. Not true. 

 

Education development fund, we announced it  let me see  

March 18, 1983. It was going to be phased out beginning April 

1, 1993. And it would be paid out . . . in 1993-94 we paid out in 

total of 5.8 million and the annual budget estimates will include 

2.25 million for the EDF with a balance of 3.55 million 

appearing as an accounts payable against the province’s 

accumulated deficit. The intention is to pay out the remaining 

$3.75 million over the next two years. The EDF never went into 

operating. With all due respect, it went into . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . well maybe some school boards put it into their  

operating grant or operating, but they shouldn’t have. It was for 

one-time projects like computer technology, like resource 

material, like conservation technology that would lead to 

savings, but it never went into the operations of the school. It 

was one-time funding. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam 

Minister, many school divisions, when they looked at 

improving their resource rooms or their resource centres, spent 

money on material and spent money on a staff person. Now 

those expenses are real; they’re operating expenses of a school 

division. They don’t just disappear because the grant 

disappeared. They’re still there this next year. How do you 

expect the boards to maintain the continued expenditure of 

buying materials for resource centres or employing the person 

who’s there? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well you see, like let me give you an 

example. We have a million dollars for the telecommunications 

enhancement fund to wire and cable. I mean that’s not 

something that shows up in operating. It’s something outside of 

operating. It’s one-time funding. And I think, with all due 

respect, Mr. Member from Canora . . . or Pelly, I’m sorry, 

Canora-Pelly, I don’t think you’re being fair here. Look at the 

budget book. There’s an additional $2 million for operating. It’s 

2 million for operating. EDF was never part of operating. And if 

you’re going to do that, then I must include capital. And if 

we’re going to include capital, there’s a $3 million increase this 

year. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Okay, Madam Minister, if we hear the 

numbers correctly, what you’re telling me then, that if we talk 

about $353 million worth of grant last year and you’re talking 

about a $2 million additional revenue to boards of education for 

this year, you’re talking about 355 million, but you have added 

a $2 million expense if indeed the contract is ratified for 1996 

only and I’ll just talk about that year. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  We have said that the $2 million 

increase is basically for incremental increases associated with 

the salary increase that was tentatively negotiated but which we 

shouldn’t talk about because teachers haven’t yet accepted the 

collective agreement. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, some of my colleagues 

would like to ask further questions and so do I, but I guess what 

I would like to look forward to then, if we can’t talk about the 

contract, the negotiated contract, will we have that opportunity 

yet after the 25th? 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d just like to 

ask the Minister of Education, when the EDF fund was 

established, who were the contributors to that fund? Were there 

a number of contributors? Who were the contributors? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  This fund, I believe, was established in 

1986. And the provincial treasury, the provincial government, 

were the contributors to the fund. 

 

Ms. Julé:  So there were no funds put into the EDF from the 

teachers themselves in any way or form? 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  No, teachers never contributed to this 

fund. It was an appropriation that the provincial legislature 

made every year after 1986, I believe  ’85. And as I said 

earlier, there was an announced phase-out in April of 1993. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, if I could spend a few 

moments on the foundation grant formula in terms of how you 

have distributed the money to boards of education. 

 

I note that in your release to boards of education, you have 

indicated that there is an increase in the per-pupil allotment. 

And after receiving some documents from various school 

divisions, I’ve noted that in many instances, because of the 

slight increase in the per-student allotment for kindergarten to 

grade 12, that number that is used now as a recognized 

expenditure, if there has been no reduction in enrolment, that 

indeed is a higher number than it was the previous year. 

 

And you have stated in this House that there are additional 

monies provided for rural technology, there are additional 

monies provided for special needs funding, there were . . . core 

implementation I think was another one that you’ve indicated. 

And there’s a significant number of dollars, millions of dollars, 

that you’ve now placed in the area that I’ll call the recognized 

expenditures, okay. 

 

When I have received phone calls from boards of education 

over the last four or five days since they’ve received their grant 

printouts, they’re telling me that they have significant 

reductions in grants  150,000, 160,000. So my question to 

them was, well then your enrolment must have declined 

significantly. And they tell me no, we lost a few students  in 

one example, 15; in another example, 23 on a fairly large rural 

school division  so that’s not a significant amount. 

 

And in three cases they have said to me, the numbers that we 

have as far as recognized expenditures for our student allotment 

is up, even though we lost 14 kids. We’re still up. So my 

question, and my inability to answer the questions from boards, 

is, if that is true and you’ve increased the funding, how then do 

boards of education, how do they now face $150,000 grant 

reductions if indeed they were supposed to be getting more 

money? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  They may have faced an enrolment 

decline. They may have faced . . . we’ve changed sparsity of 

small schools. As well, they may have seen an increase in 

assessment. And as you know, if your assessment goes up, you 

receive more funds from your assessment. Then the grant from 

the province goes down. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. As I look at the 

numbers though . . . and it’s not enrolment decline because the 

instance that I’m talking about or instances, there’s virtually no 

change to the enrolment of one school division. There is a slight 

decrease to the enrolments of another school division. And I see 

their printouts from last year and the year before this year and 

the year before, and the recognized expenditure for per-pupil 

enrolment is up. So there isn’t there. 

But when I look at the other side, I see a change in the 

equalization factor of 2 mills. For the benefit of many people, 

could you explain how the 2 mills then is going to relate to the 

amount that the school division now has to pay? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Well I’m sure you know that 

equalization tends to benefit lower income school divisions. 

This is where we really do have equity in education because 

lower income school divisions with lower assessment receive 

more support from the province than higher assessed school 

divisions with higher income. 

 

(2030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Beside me is 

Dan Perrins who is the deputy minister of the department. 

Behind Mr. Perrins is Lily Stonehouse, assistant deputy 

minister. Behind me is Mae Boa, the executive director of 

finance and operations. Also present along the back of our side 

of the House, Mr. Chair, is Margaret Ball, assistant director of 

facilities planning; Brady Salloum, who is the director of 

student financial assistance; Merran Proctor, who is the 

president and CEO (chief executive officer) of New Careers 

Corporation; and James Benning, president and CEO of the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome to 

the officials with the Department of Post-Secondary Education. 

 

Mr. Minister, with the creation of the new department, I 

imagine that you’ve had a chance to take a look at what was the 

previous vision of the department when it was a joint, combined 

project with the kindergarten to grade 12. Could you elaborate 

as to whether or not that vision has changed and indeed what is 

the vision for post-secondary . . . for the post-secondary 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think that the vision is quite similar 

inasmuch as we are still talking about post-secondary education 

and skills training, and the universities are still there. SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) is 

still there, and the regional colleges are still there. However, a 

number of things have happened which have intensified the 

public attention and provincial concern about the 

post-secondary education and training system. And the member 

will know that, but let me recount it briefly. 

 

We have some adjustments in the cost-sharing arrangements 

and we’ve discussed those before in this House. I won’t have to 

go into detail there, but the cost-sharing arrangements involving 

the federal government have created problems. In addition, 

changes to the unemployment insurance arrangements and the 

participation of the federal government in the purchase of  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

training has changed and that has created problems. 

 

One of the problems that I might mention specifically that has 

arisen from the change in the federal philosophy is that they are 

getting out of the training field in the sense that they will no 

longer be involved in the provision of training but will simply 

be assisting some of the people who are on their unemployment 

lists in a chronic way to purchase training. This leaves 

Saskatchewan in a position where we are going to have start at 

square one with respect to a training strategy. 

 

As I have explained before in the House, this province, along 

with a number of other provinces, have adopted a training 

strategy built around federal programing. And we’ve become 

quite adept at taking advantage of the opportunities that that 

presented to mount training in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And we supplement and fill in around the federal programing. 

We did that for something like three decades. It seemed to be a 

rational approach at first, and it served us over the 30 years. 

 

But with the withdrawal of the federal government from that 

field, we are in a vacuum situation. And we’re moving as 

quickly as we can to try and fill that vacuum. I think it’s a grand 

opportunity; I don’t think it’s an entirely negative situation. I 

think it’s something probably, with the benefit of hindsight, we 

probably ought to have done 30 years ago, that is, to stake out 

our position with respect to training in Saskatchewan and to 

establish a training strategy built around Saskatchewan 

priorities, the needs of our labour market, the needs of our 

population, and to fashion our own program and allow the 

federal government’s programs to supplement that. This 

therefore is not an entirely negative situation, although it’s a 

difficult one because of the cost implications. 

 

All of those combine to intensify the concern for people 

involved in public policy with respect to post-secondary 

education and skills training. And I don’t know what that says 

in terms of vision. The vision is, I believe, what it always has 

been, namely, that in order to support economic development in 

this province, we have to support the training of our people. We 

have to support it in whatever way is appropriate, and in 

conjunction with that, of course, is to provide our young people 

and some who are not so young with the opportunity to 

participate in the workforce and to acquire the education and the 

training that they need in order to participate, in order that they 

will be able to enjoy their life to the fullest. 

 

Now those are not new ideas; those have been common to what 

we used to call manpower policy all across this country, 

probably all across the world. But those are the two specific 

public policy elements that drive our department at the present 

time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that reply, Mr. Minister. Mr. 

Minister, with the creation of the new department outside of the 

umbrella of the K to 12 and post-secondary training before, do 

you see the people of Saskatchewan being served any better, 

any differently, than the system that we had prior to the splitting 

of the two departments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think that the answer probably is that  

the proof of the pudding will be in the eating, and we’ll see how 

it turns out. 

 

I regard the present system as normal. It has, for 25 or 30 years 

in this province, been the case that these have been two 

departments. And only during the period from about ’86 or ’87 

to this past fall did we have an attempt to join the two 

departments and to meld them, merge them into one functioning 

department. The member will know that it just simply didn’t 

work, that it was like a . . . there was a marriage that never 

became a marriage, a marriage that was never consummated. 

And if you look at the organization chart, the two parts of the 

department never really merged and the marriage was never a 

complete success. 

 

And I think that’s natural because the issues are so different. 

The issues that I heard the member talking about with my 

colleague, the Minister of Education, involving bussing, 

involving rural schools, involving the capital program for K to 

12 facilities, are just a long way away from the issues that 

involve SIAST and involve the university. And the kind of 

questions that arise there are substantially different. 

 

And in the 10-year experiment to put the two together, it 

became evident that there wasn’t enough common features to 

really create one functioning department and that probably the 

normal situation should be reverted to. I call it the normal one 

because it probably has been apart more years than they’ve been 

together in the modern era at least. And I think it probably an 

appropriate one. 

 

Frankly, I don’t know how one minister could have done both 

jobs. I take off my hat to my predecessors who tried to do that 

from the period of ’86 to ’95, and I don’t understand how they 

could possibly have carried such a burden. I think now is the 

more appropriate kind of organization. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In terms of the 

structure of the department now, I heard the Minister of 

Education respond by saying that there are shared staff, there 

are shared services. Do you see the expenditure for the 

department now versus the expenditure of then the joint 

departments, do you see your department saving some money 

for the province because it has been separated and you are 

becoming more efficient? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I don’t claim . . . I haven’t claimed that 

there’ll be any savings in it. There were two ministers of 

Education; there are now. There was an associate minister prior 

to my appointment. 

 

I think that I have a larger office than the previous associate 

minister, although I’m not certain of that. I think that . . . I have 

a complement of six staff and I’m not certain that he had six, 

although he may have; I’m just not certain of that. 

 

There are two deputy ministers instead of one. But I think that 

. . . I haven’t examined the documents closely in the two 

departments, but I think we have about the same size in terms of 

the full-time equivalents as was the case when they were one 

department. 

  



904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

But I wouldn’t claim that there’s any particular savings. We 

have tried to avoid duplication by sharing services, which is 

quite an unusual thing in governments  to share the kind of 

services that we’re sharing here. And in that sense this is really 

a kind of experiment to see whether this sort of sharing is a 

workable idea. And if it is, who knows, we could implement it 

with respect to other departments as well. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  When I look at the Estimates and indicate 

that the staff complement for post-secondary education has 

been reduced by four from the estimated ‘95-96, and as I 

indicated previously, the post-secondary salaries for 

administration have increased 1.687 million to 1.768 million, 

with a decrease of four in staff, with an increase in dollars, can 

you elaborate whether this is due to a new agreement in wages, 

or is this the extra deputy minister? 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I am 

advised that the reason for the increase in cost was due to the 

SGEU collective agreement, and some changes in the mix 

between salaried employees and in-scope employees. I’m not 

able to expand on that and give the member a great detail, but I 

am advised that it’s just the operation of the collective 

agreement that results in the increased cost. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. As you’ve 

indicated, your staff component for the actual department itself 

is relatively small and you haven’t noted any significant 

changes from the year before. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just want to change to a slightly different topic 

rather than the numbers. post-secondary education involves 

universities, SIAST programs, the different campuses that we 

have operating. And it involves also a third component of that, 

and that’s regional colleges out in rural Saskatchewan that play 

such a tremendous role out there in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Is there a plan to look at the entire picture of how the 

universities fit in with the technical institutes, how they’re 

going to fit in with the regional colleges, and as I asked the 

Minister of Education who talked, I believe it was November, 

she addressed the concerns around an expansion of K to 12, the 

role that the current school division boards play have always 

looked at kindergarten to grade 12. And there was a suggestion 

from then the combined departments that maybe boards of 

education would look at K to 14. I think she was referring to 

classes beyond grade 12. 

 

Many have suggested that regional authority, if indeed that’s 

what the public is going to tell the Minister of Education, that it 

might expand its mandate or its umbrella as far as the 

responsibilities that it has. How do you see that coordinating 

with your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The whole question of the regional 

colleges and their relationship to the whole of the education 

system is on the top of the mind of both departments, as it is on 

the minds of the hon. member, as I understand his question. 

 

Certainly it is our view that we will see over the course of time 

a strengthening of the regional colleges and a delivery of more 

education and more training at the level of the region. We have 

been having discussions to this effect with the two departments 

and we have indicated this wish to the universities and to 

SIAST. And I think that as the processes proceed in those two 

institutions  the universities and SIAST  the development 

of things like distance education and the more brokering of 

university courses and SIAST courses at the regional level will 

be a significant part of those discussions. I think that the future 

lies in that direction. 

 

As to the possibility of the K to 12 and the regional colleges 

having some closer kind of relationship, the answer to that is 

going to have to wait for a few months, I think, until we’ve 

gone through a consultation process with the province and come 

to some conclusions about what would work and what would 

not work. 

 

The idea that the member referred to, Mr. Chair, of a K to 14 is, 

I think, one of the options but it’s not the only one by any 

means. I think at the end of the day we’ll certainly have an 

arrangement where the regional colleges and the K to 12 

system, particularly the high school portion of the K to 12, work 

much more closely together. 

 

They do in fact work closely in some communities  Melfort 

being a good example  and there are others also. But 

generally I think they will be working more closely together 

than has been the case in the past. What that means in terms of 

structure or organization, we’ll just have to wait and see. A lot 

of consultation about it and a number of very, very tricky, very 

difficult questions that arise because the training situation is as 

complex as it is. There are so many participants in it  so 

many stakeholders, to use a term that you used earlier  that a 

lot of these things have to be worked through and thought about 

before we come to any conclusions. 

 

But let me just repeat. At the end of the day, I think for certain, 

the regional colleges will be playing an increasing role. A role 

that’s increasingly important and their relationship with grades 

. . . with the high school part of the K to 12 system will be much 

closer, I think, than it has been in the past. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The K to 14 

concept are the quotation of the Minister of Education; those 

are her words from the fall. And I’ve repeated them because I 

think that is an option and I know you’re serious about taking a 

look at it. 

 

What I’m hearing from students in the province, Mr. Minister, 

is that . . . and I believe we are looking towards the new 

millennium; the new century is around the corner, and I think 

for Saskatchewan to prosper, we must have an educated 

populace. And the concern that I’m hearing from students is 

that, as we move through the next year or two or three and look 

at the delivery of post-secondary education across the province, 

not just at the four SIAST campuses and at the two universities, 

when we look much broader than that, I’m hearing from 

students that they want to ensure that there is a quality 

education system at the end of the line and that it is affordable. 

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

And when I hear you talk about, you know, we have to wait 

until we hear this or we wait until there is a review of the 

universities that is taking place right now, my fear is that we 

don’t have the broad picture in mind, that we try to fix the small 

pieces and miss out on that entire program. We know that there 

probably are going to be significant increases in tuition fees, 

which is another great concern. As we look at costs of operating 

the programs  and you’ve indicated, you know, training 

strategies and funding, a new way of funding  students are 

aware that they’re going to be looking at tuition fee increases. 

 

So when we take a look at the role that the universities may 

have to play in delivering that education system . . . the Minster 

of Education commented that she’s very concerned that in 

talking to educators that there are fewer people from rural 

Saskatchewan enrolling in the College of Medicine. And this 

was a doctor from Eastend who was, I believe, making the 

comment that, you know, this is a problem. 

 

Well the problem might be, as we move along in terms of 

increased cost to students, that we’re going to have to adjust 

that. Rural Saskatchewan students who are going to be moving 

to the city, Regina or Saskatoon, to take a university program, 

or to Moose Jaw or Prince Albert to take a SIAST program, the 

cost of them attaining education is greater. 

 

Yes, there are students loans, and we’ll talk about that a little 

later. But I think what we have to look at is to see whether or 

not there’s a possibility of delivering an education system to 

people in their areas. And I’m not talking about every little rural 

community; I’m talking about strategically placed programs. 

And I’m wondering if that’s part of a plan that you’re looking 

at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, I think we move further and 

further in that direction as time goes on. A significant amount 

of that is done right now. The member will be aware of that. 

There are a significant number of university programs that are 

brokered through the regional colleges. The same can be said of 

SIAST. And I think it’s a good thing, and I think we should 

continue to move in that direction for the reasons that you’ve 

indicated. 

 

I’m not sure what is the right amount or how much or how 

many class credits you should be able to obtain. Those 

decisions can only be made after you get a lot of advice on the 

point, and we’ll work that through in time. But I can indicate in 

a general way that it’s my belief that more and more of these 

courses have to become available in rural Saskatchewan so that 

people can afford to do it. 

 

And I think that technology is going to be a great ally for us 

here. I think the technology of communications will enable 

more and more programs to be delivered more and more 

cheaply into the regional college system. And technology, I 

think, will help and work with the economies of the situation to 

substantially improve the education for people who are 

interested in obtaining a university degree as well as interested 

in obtaining SIAST certification. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, you mentioned one word and it  

just reminded me of class credits and flexibility. I’m hearing 

from the different post-secondary institutions that there is a 

need to address recognition of credits from one level, that is the 

university level, to the SIAST level, and vice-versa. And I 

wonder if you would comment on whether or not that is a 

possibility. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I have said a number of times that this 

year, 1996, is the year to solve that problem. I think we have 

made some progress in that through a Post-Secondary Advisory 

Committee that we have in existence that includes the 

universities and SIAST and the regional colleges and the Indian 

and Metis institutions. And a lot of work is going on in that 

direction and it’s my personal priority to hurry that work along 

and to extend recognition as far as we possibly can. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to ask the Minister 

of Post-Secondary Education to refer to page 105, under skills 

training and labour marketing planning. And I noticed there that 

the New Careers Corporation funding for administration is up 

about $3 million  is that correct?  from 1995-96. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The amount that will be coming out of 

this budget has increased by that amount. That’s correct, yes. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I would refer you to page 122 of the 

budget estimates, referring to Social Services. And there is a 

decrease of $3 million in actual allotment for training and 

employment opportunities for individuals receiving benefits 

under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. 

 

Now my question is, why is there $3 million more in 

administration than, in fact, there is in the actual training which 

would directly target assistance for people who need it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member. You’ve 

got it about right  it’s just the amount of money that’s 

missing in Social Services turns up in the Post-Secondary 

Education budget. 

 

But the amount that is dedicated to training is unchanged. What 

came over is some grant money and that sort of thing, not all of 

it administration. But we pay, for example, grants to various 

NGOs (non-governmental organizations) and that came over. 

What’s left in Social Services is the amount that’s paid in 

respect of Social Service clients. They’re funding the clients. 

 

The Department of Post-Secondary Education will be funding 

the training, if you know what I mean. So that in the end you 

have substantially the same program, but the training part of it 

moves over to the training department and leaves Social 

Services financing the, you know, the recipients that they’re 

attempting to assist through the various programs offered by the 

New Careers Corporation. But in the end we have the same 

total package as we had before. 

 

(2100) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In all due respect, as 

they say, it states under Post-Secondary Education that the 

financial services provided here are for “development, delivery  

  



906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

and evaluation of training.” So that would mean that it’s sort of 

an administrative structure for people that are working in the 

administration of that. 

 

If in fact there is not the same monies, in fact 3 million down 

for the actual training and employment, it seems to me as 

though this translates into something like a wage hike for 

administrators possibly, or is it something to do with our new 

learnfare that we’re talking about and getting prepared for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I’ll just 

read you the various heads of expenditure that are involved 

here. 

 

Regional program development and administration is the same 

as it was, essentially the same as it was last year, a very small 

increase in costs that would reflect probably the collective 

agreement more than anything else. Accommodations, same 

amount; work experience program, slightly less; community 

employment program, slightly more; work preparation contracts 

and private contracts, about the same; employment centre 

delivery costs, exactly the same. And the amount staying with 

Social Services, which is just over $6 million as the member 

observed, is the Saskatchewan skills development program, 

which is the program that provides training to social welfare 

recipients and that remains with Social Services. 

 

But all of the programing that I have just mentioned moves over 

to the Department of Education, but it doesn’t change. It is the 

same programing but consolidated into the Post-Secondary 

Education department. So that as you say, the financial support, 

the program support, and the administrative support to 

institutions and agencies involved is consolidated in the 

Department of Post-Secondary Education, but doesn’t change 

the programing in the New Careers Corporation. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The question I’m about 

to pose to you may be a little premature, but it was suggested to 

me. And maybe this question actually should be for the Minister 

of Social Services, but I’ll ask you anyway. 

 

A question was posed to me, and a suggestion, that in fact if 

there was going to be skills development training for Social 

Service recipients, that rather than to create another layer of 

bureaucracy and add to administrative costs, etc., that there is 

no reason we cannot use our community colleges for that kind 

of training. Do you know whether or not you will be looking at 

that very advantage that we have right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The program has been using regional 

colleges and will continue to do that more and more as time 

goes on. A lot of this programing, as you will know, is done 

with individual employers and with NGOs and municipalities 

and that sort of thing. It’s work experience  work experience 

 on-the-job work experience so that it doesn’t involve the 

kind of training or education that you would find in the 

community colleges. But about a third of our money is spent on 

programs delivered by SIAST/regional colleges and we expect 

. . . I’m advised that the regional college component of this will 

probably increase as time goes on. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I know I’m asking 

you here with this next question to project your thoughts a little 

ahead of time here or into the future but I’m wondering whether 

or not learnfare, if it’s going to be in fact happening, whether or 

not that, Mr. Minister, is going to include an education that 

would be suited to the needs of the people involved? In fact, 

would it include post-secondary education say through SIAST, 

or would it just be through work experience and in conjunction 

with business in communities? What is the latitude, I guess, that 

people may have as far as accessing education or the education 

facilities out there for learnfare or has that been determined yet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The policy elements that underlie the 

member’s question, Mr. Chair, are rather broader than my 

particular responsibilities, but let me take a crack at it anyway. I 

think that it probably involves all of the things that the member 

mentioned  more access to adult basic education; more access 

to skills training; more access to work experience; more access 

to every opportunity that can strengthen the connection between 

an individual and the world of work. So I believe that the 

member covered it all. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Minister, we spent some time talking 

about some of the possibilities that may happen in the future in 

education and I think that’s good. I think when we look at some 

of the future things we need to make sure we don’t create a 

situation that stagnates us in time some point down the road to 

the extent that we may have done at various times throughout 

history. And I’m wondering, as we look at the various things 

we’ve talked about, universities and colleges and how they can 

work together and combine and these sorts of things, are there 

any things that are being considered sacred and untouchable, 

and if so, what are they? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, that’s a 

very challenging question. I start out from the position that 

there isn’t anything sacred or untouchable here, but it has to 

make sense and it has to fit. The ideas that are generated in the 

various processes that are under way have to be appropriate and 

have to have some meaning. You don’t change something just 

for the sake of changing it; it has to be changed for a particular 

purpose and there has to be some consensus that that purpose is 

one worth pursuing and will give us a better quality education 

or a better functioning institution or whatever. 

 

But I think that the short answer to the member’s question is 

that there are no sacred cows here. All aspects of the whole 

system are up for discussion and analysis and debate. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I appreciate the part where you 

said everything is up for debate because I think we need to do 

that if we want to end up with an optimum situation. However I 

have a feeling that if we do that and we look at the systems 

honestly and all the changes that may be needed in there, we 

may also find that at some point in order to achieve those kinds 

of changes, whatever they are  we’ve decided those  we 

may need a fairly major cash injection to make those kinds of 

changes and integrations. Is that kind of commitment there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Cash is always a problem as the 

member will appreciate, so that you have to be guarded when  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

you answer a question like that. But you have to be sensible 

about it too. And if it meant that by expending some money 

now you would save money in the medium term, long term, 

then I think we’d likely spend the money. You have to be 

practical and pragmatic about these things. I’ll just finish my 

answer as I started  cash is always a problem. But certainly 

you have to be wise, or at least prudent, with respect to your 

decisions in a situation like that. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. My next question deals a bit with 

process and I think the public’s talked a fair bit about what 

might happen with various colleges on university campuses, 

things like where maybe both universities have a campus in a 

particular college and maybe bringing those down to one or 

something of that sort. 

 

What’s the process working on that? To look at that, is that 

done from your office or will the universities just sit down on 

their own and make that decision without our input? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The two universities are engaged with 

each other and those are the sort of questions that I believe that 

they’re prepared to discuss. I don’t think they’ve reached the 

point where they’re actually discussing those questions yet, but 

they’re fast approaching that. The work has to be done at the 

university level. 

 

There is a tradition in this province, and indeed in the western 

world, of the autonomy of universities, and we are very much 

aware of that and we respect it. And we want to be present and 

offering the perspective of the public to those discussions, but 

we insist that those discussions will be carried by the 

universities. After all, they’re the people who understand their 

programs and what’s involved in delivering the program and the 

content of those programs and how they may or may not fit 

together; and they will, in the end, be coming to conclusions 

with respect to those questions. 

 

And we want to be present and we want to participate from the 

point of view of contributing the public perspective, but we’re 

not going to make those decisions. We want them to make 

them. And that’s appropriate and we want that to happen. 

 

(2115) 

 

At the same time, there is another process going on internal to 

each university as they look at their own array of programs and 

determine what action may be necessary there in relation to 

their long-term fiscal viability. And we also want to be present 

during those considerations, again bringing to that process the 

perspective of the public and the public interest. But again, 

those are decisions to be made within the university. 

 

It’s our objective, in so participating, to try and encourage the 

best quality of a university that we can have at Saskatoon and at 

Regina. But the decisions will not be made in the department. 

We’re assuming that they can be made entirely at the level of 

the university. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. I appreciate your respect that you 

mentioned for the traditions of the universities, but I’m a little  

fearful that sometimes that tradition may overshadow the needs 

and the concerns that we voiced with reference to the students 

of our province and their education. So I think we have to make 

sure we put that first. 

 

A number of years ago, there was a good move made between 

the various provinces when we put the veterinary college 

together, and the three provinces worked on that. Because of the 

expense of some of the colleges, is there any discussion going 

on between the three prairie provinces on working together on 

some of those colleges? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There is a fairly high level of interest 

with respect to further development of that model, both in 

Alberta and in Manitoba. I visited the two ministers some two 

or three months ago, in Edmonton and in Winnipeg, and this 

was one of the items I raised at both those meetings. And in 

both cases there was a high level of interest, and that’s 

especially the case in Manitoba. 

 

The veterinary college in Saskatoon is the example that the 

member used, and it’s a good one. It’s operated now for 20 or 

25 years, and everybody likes it. And everybody in western 

Canada who wants to become a veterinarian, wants to be 

educated in the West, goes to Saskatoon. And it really has saved 

the whole system a great deal of money and has operated very 

well. 

 

We’re interested in pursuing that idea, and Manitoba is 

certainly interested, and Alberta is also quite interested in 

pursuing the idea. I’m expecting to meet with those two 

ministers again in the next four to six weeks, with a view to 

pushing that idea some more. Certainly it’s going to need a 

good deal of political commitment to the idea and then involve 

the universities in seeing where that can be done. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. And I would hope that that 

discussion bears some fruit, that we’re as fortunate as we were 

with the veterinary college and get it in Saskatchewan. That 

may be hoping for a little too much. 

 

I would like for you to make a comment on moving into the 

area of getting some funding from businesses for probably some 

of our community colleges and technical institutes, to increase 

the amount of funding that we get from businesses for those 

areas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, there has 

been an increasing amount of employer involvement in training 

over the last about 10 years and that involvement is growing. 

There’s increasing interest in the employers in becoming 

involved. They’ve learned that there are great advantages for 

them because they can have a contribution to the design of the 

training to insure that the people that they hire have the kind of 

skills they need. 

 

Probably the most dramatic recent example is the multiparty 

training plan involving the mines in the North, and that is 

proving to be very, very successful. This item is high on the 

agendas of SIAST and the regional colleges, to get more and 

more employer involvement, and in part, that is a solution to  

  



908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

some of the funding problems that exist in the system now. So 

the answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I just 

want to clarify on one point under skills training and labour 

market planning. The expenses for grants, $25.1 million, are 

those grants that will be paid primarily to government agencies 

and/or departments? Or is some of that funding . . . will it be 

directed to private industry that’s involved in skills training, 

management training, effective presentation, and the like? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, the item 

that the member refers to is the grants of 25 million. And about 

just something more than 5 million of that will involve 

employers directly through either work-based training or some 

of the employment development initiatives that were part of the 

strategic agreement that we signed with the federal government 

just two months ago, three months ago, something like that. So 

5 million will involve employers directly. The other 20 million 

will be SIAST and the regional colleges. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So there will be no 

private agencies, consulting firms, management firms, that will 

be involved in any of the training that might be subject to those 

grants? Just to clarify that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We won’t be directly funding anything 

like that. I’m advised that it could be that an employer might 

use a consultant in order to do the things that that employer 

wants to do in organizing his own participation in the program, 

but we wouldn’t be paying for such consultants, nor would they 

be employed as a result of any direction from us. That would be 

up to the individual employer. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Again to clarify, Mr. Minister, thank you. They 

would receive the money, a grant, to operate a certain program, 

and then they would spend it as they see fit to meet the criterion 

for that type of program that they’re involved in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, I should have been more clear. We 

approve the training plan that would be involved, and we fund 

the training plan. How the employer develops that training plan 

will be up to the employer. We will approve it though, and we 

will fund it. We won’t be funding any consultants. I should 

probably not have mentioned it. 

 

What the employer does is up to the employer in how he or she 

organizes their presentation or designs their plan or chooses to 

deliver the training. But we would not be funding any 

consultants. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. But the plan or the 

program that that employer would initiate would be subject to 

your approval before implementing it. Is that correct? That’s the 

way I understand it. 

 

An Hon. Member:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question  

on the partnership program for students. Can you give me an 

idea of how many applications are received each year for this 

program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m advised that we’ve had over 1,700 

applications to this point. The deadline is not upon us yet. We 

expect that there will be in excess of 2,000 applications. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Is this number increasing or 

decreasing over the last two years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There were 2,500 last year and that was 

a substantial improvement over the previous year. It could reach 

that this year. It’s 1,700 at the moment and counting, and we 

certainly expect it to exceed 2,000. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So you’re able to use up the money each year 

from applications. Do you have to turn away students who have 

actually applied for funding? Pardon me, it’s not the students; 

it’s the employers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Last year the demand exceeded the 

amount budgeted and we had to go back and get some more 

money in order to accommodate all the requests. And if that 

happened again, we’d go back and try and find some more 

money. But we’ll just have to see. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’m just wondering if the amount of money  

this $897,000  is that all money that’s given out to the 

employers or is some of that money used in administration of 

the program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That’s all program money. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I’m just wondering, is any of the students that 

are . . . employers that are given money to hire students, are 

these students allowed to work outside of the province, or do 

they all have to work within the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  It’s an interesting question. We think 

they’re all Saskatchewan students and they’re all Saskatchewan 

employers. We think all the work is done in Saskatchewan but 

it wouldn’t have to be. I suppose if you were in Lloydminster or 

some other community near a border, it would be quite possible 

that the student would be working in Alberta say, from time to 

time, but we’re not aware of it. We think no doubt the great 

bulk of the work is done in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is there any attempt to match the students’ 

interests, or what they are actually going to be going into 

further education, on . . . with requests that the employers may 

have for when they fill out their application? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  What happens is that the employer does 

the recruiting and then we provide the money. So the match is 

down there. We don’t connect the student with the employer. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How do you determine each year how much 

money you’re going to be returning to the employer through  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

this program? Is there a calculation for the amount? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The subsidy is calculated at the rate of 

$1.20 per hour, to a maximum of 480 hours. And the formula is 

as simple as that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move to report progress. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have 

with me Stuart Kramer, deputy minister; Les Cooke, associate 

deputy minister, policy and program division; Ross 

MacLennan, assistant deputy minister of operations division. 

And over here we have Bob Blackwell, assistant deputy 

minister of management services; and the young lady behind 

Bob is Donna Kellsey, director of financial and administrative 

services; and back here, Don MacAulay, director of parks and 

facilities. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Minister, I’d like to kind of move 

around on some of these things, but with SERM (Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management) and the budget and 

job cuts there was 125 jobs lost. Could you give me a 

breakdown of where these jobs would have come from and 

which areas that they were lost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and for the question. 

We certainly did lose a number of positions in the department 

this year in our efforts to reach our budget target. A breakdown 

includes, from the education and communications area, 10 jobs; 

from finance administration, 2 jobs; information management, 2 

jobs; parks and facilities, 9; wildlife, 6; fisheries, 2; field 

operations, 11; commercial revolving fund, 2; forest fire 

management, 39; and environmental protection, 28; and policy 

and public involvement, 2; for a total of 113 jobs, positions. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 

neglected to welcome your staff here tonight. We feel a little 

intimidated. There’s pretty near more of you than there is of us. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister, if it’s all right, I’d 

like to kind of broadly go around rather than stick to the script 

for the start, and then I’ll get back into where we are here. 

 

Some of the concerns that have been brought to us, the one 

concern especially, has been with reforestation. Is this going to 

be hurt badly by the number of cuts this summer with the 

planting of trees and that? Will that be one of the areas that is 

going to be cut back? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And in response to 

that I’m happy to inform you that forest fire . . . reforestation, I 

should say, is a top priority. And in fact we have an extra  

$500,000 in the budget for reforestation. We realize that if we 

are going to have sustainable forests, we need to keep up with 

reforestations. So we do have an extra $500,000 in that. And we 

appreciate your comments and interest in that area as well. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would presume 

then that the number of students hired this year will then be at 

least equal of last year, if not maybe possibly even higher if the 

budget is higher? Would that be a fair . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chair, the people used in reforestation 

are hired under contract and in various scenarios, so we would 

assume that, because there’s more money being spent, that there 

will be more people employed in the reforestation area. And so 

we don’t hire through the department people to do this work; it 

is under contract. But we don’t have the exact figure but we 

suspect there will be more people hired. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Minister, is there any federal funding 

that also goes along with the provincial funding for stuff like 

reforestation and the hiring of students for summer jobs up 

there? Would part of that be under the federal plan too, or is that 

strictly provincial? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chair, there is a new federal plan in the 

works  we haven’t got the details yet  to increase the 

employment of students in various areas, and certainly 

reforestation is an area where young people, students, can be 

employed. And we are hopeful that once the details of that 

federal plan are out that the forest companies will be able to tap 

into those funds and make the best use of them in acquiring 

more manpower, student power, for reforestation. So we don’t 

have the exact details of the new plan yet. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 

some of the concerns also we have had are from the Hudson 

Bay area with the new project that was . . . is hoping to be 

planned to go ahead up there. But now with the new stumpage 

fees, the concerns we are getting from the people up there, that 

they’re not sure that with the extra cost this company is going 

ahead. Do you share our concerns? Like, have you had those 

same concerns brought to your attention that possibly this 

project may be on hold now because of the new stumpage fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. New Chair. With response 

to that, I am very happy to tell you that I just got back to Regina 

about an hour ago from Hudson Bay. I had the pleasure of 

meeting with the Forest Management Advisory Committee up 

there and we have a very good working group of people from 

the area  from trappers, industry, outfitters, wildlife 

federation representatives, and others. And it was great to meet 

these people, and they are doing a very fine job in pulling 

together the whole east side forest management area. And we’re 

really quite optimistic about the development of this FMLA 

(Forest Management Licence Agreement) in the east side of the 

province, but specifically with regards to the oriented 

strandboard plant at Hudson Bay. The environmental approval 

has been given for the project to proceed. It’s a very 

state-of-the-art mill at Hudson Bay that’s been approved  

zero-effluent discharge. It’s met all of the environmental 

requirements. 

  



910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

The main reason that the plant is on hold for a year is simply 

because the oriented strandboard product has taken a sharp drop 

in value. So the developers decided that there’s no real rush to 

jump into this and get it going. They also wanted to fine-tune a 

couple of technical areas within the mill. 

 

So we are confident the project will proceed and it will be a 

state-of-the-art mill. And I’m confident with the fine people we 

have around the table that we’ll have a state-of-the-art forest 

management area with everybody’s interest being 

accommodated. And I can assure you that sustainable forest 

management is a top priority for the people around the table at 

Hudson Bay and for people in the area, and in fact for 

everybody here in Saskatchewan. So we’re looking for the 

project to proceed. 

 

(2145) 

 

Specifically with regards to the stumpage fees that you asked 

about, we are in the process of intense negotiations with the 

forest companies. This has never occurred in the past. The 

forest companies and government are sitting down, going 

through the books. And we’re in the process of seeing if we can 

raise stumpage fees and how much, and how much the forest 

companies are able to absorb. And this is going very well. 

 

And we hope to have this process pretty well wrapped up in 

another month or two, a couple of months. So we are working 

at the table with the forest companies. They realize we don’t 

have a lot of money and we want to make sure that we have a 

viable forest industry here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s actually 

very good news. I think that area specifically really needs the 

boost from the new business that that will create up there and 

the jobs. 

 

Workers’ Compensation Board rates for outfitters in the North, 

in that same area actually — lot of the concerns have been 

brought to us — I think originally were set at a 70 per cent 

increase. Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, at this time they have 

been . . . the rates I believe have been readjusted. Can you tell 

me for the outfitters, at this point, what the new rates are now 

that Workers’ Comp has looked over their rates and readjusted 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry, I don’t have the 

specific answer for that question. And if the hon. member 

would like to direct it to the Minister of Labour, he would 

probably be able to have that. It is certainly an area of concern 

but we just simply do not have the answer here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Actually I’m 

having a lot more luck with you than I had with the Minister of 

Labour yesterday, so I’ll stick with you. You’re doing a fine 

job. 

 

I’d like to touch for a minute, Mr. Chairman, on forest fires and 

what they cost in the province last year. And correct me if I’m  

wrong, Mr. Minister, but I believe the budget last year was $25 

million. It ended up costing roughly, or approximately, 94 

million. Could you verify those numbers, or am I close, or . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, you’re 

certainly correct that we traditionally budget about $25 million 

for forest fire suppression. And that’s basically what it has 

worked out to on average over the years. But as you correctly 

identified, last year was the worst forest fire season we’ve ever 

had in Saskatchewan and we ended up spending about $89 

million on forest fire suppression. And it was a year that we had 

never seen before and unfortunately about 7 per cent of our 

harvestable timber was affected by the fire. And since then, 

we’ve worked diligently with the forest companies and 

everybody else involved with forest industry in salvaging this 

material  what we can salvage  to make the best use of the 

resource. 

 

So yes, we were way over budget on that but we view our 

forests as a very important resource and certainly the 

manpower, the many, many hours of overtime, the volunteers, 

the people from offices that went out and fought fires  we 

really appreciated all of their efforts. And business, and the 

industry, and everybody worked together to get us through this 

dreadful season and we hope that we’ll never see another year 

like that. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, it had 

been brought to my attention last year at the time of the forest 

fires that some of the social service recipients and people on UI 

(unemployment insurance) were in fact offered some jobs 

fighting forest fires. 

 

I wonder if your officials or if you might yourself may have any 

documentation as to how many of these people actually had 

jobs or got jobs related to forest fires and putting out the fires? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, and thank you for the 

question. We certainly work with northern communities in the 

forest fire season and we’ve traditionally worked . . . have about 

12 or so communities that we hire people at on a regular basis 

in a normal year when there isn’t near as many fires as last year. 

And we specifically, I can tell you, work with Social Services in 

hiring about 125 people annually in these communities to . . . 

the job would last throughout the summer, on the forest fire 

lines. And this is cost shared between Social Services and my 

department. 

 

And last year we had, during the peak fire season, 3,400 people 

employed. And undoubtedly a lot of those people certainly were 

northern people, and undoubtedly some were unemployed, and 

probably some were on social assistance, but we don’t have the 

breakdown on that. But we certainly try to utilize local and 

northern residents as much as we can for forest fire suppression. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering whether 

or not your department in fact approaches people on social 

assistance to inform them of jobs fighting fires or if you . . . for 

those people that are under your jurisdiction with UI, if you 

approach those people, offering the jobs to them. Do you offer  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

jobs to them in respect to the forest fires and fighting them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to inform the hon. 

member that we have about 6,000 people that we’ve put 

through some kind of training course for fighting forest fires. 

And we view this as being proactive. The days of just recruiting 

people off the street to go in and fight fires are over. And 

certainly for a number of reasons — for efficiency, for safety, 

and everything else. 

 

Now undoubtedly again, some of these, certainly 6,000 people, 

wouldn’t be employed in the wintertime but could be employed 

during the summer season by us. And I guess at the same token, 

if a resident of a northern community was away working at a 

mine, they wouldn’t be working on the fire line. 

 

So we just don’t have a breakdown, but certainly our goal is to 

provide jobs for those people who need them in the North, 

whether they’re on social assistance or unemployment. And we 

believe that we’re doing this very well and working with the 

communities in the North, and our leaders on these fire teams 

know who is available and their expertise. And we’re quite 

pleased with the progress we’re making in this area. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you have a 

mechanism of some sort in place whereby you can access 

information as to social recipients’ addresses or whatever so 

that you may approach them to inform them that there is work 

fighting fires? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, former Mr. Chair. Other than 

the 125 or so positions that we cost share with Social Services, 

there is no real linkage between . . . We simply do not have 

access to social service lists or unemployment lists of people. 

 

We are using our trained people who we have put through 

courses, and undoubtedly again a number of those people could 

be on social assistance or unemployed during a good part of the 

year. But we don’t specifically go out and look for people on 

social assistance, although a large number of this 6,000 people 

could be. 

 

And our goal is to train people to do the job. And if they’re on 

social assistance and can get a job through this process, all the 

better for the people as well as the communities and certainly 

for us in fighting the fires. But other than the 125 positions we 

cost share with, there’s no attempt to go out and look for a list, 

and we don’t have any lists, or we don’t pursue lists of people 

who are unemployed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would just like to 

make, or offer, a comment, in that your government mentions 

that they are working at integrated services between 

departments, and I would like to make the suggestion that this is 

one area where maybe a little more integration could take  

place as far as information between departments on how to help 

people recognize their worth and promote the work ethic. 

 

I would like to ask you one more question. If in fact someone 

was on UI, that’s under the jurisdiction of the provincial 

government right now, and they were offered this work of 

fighting forest fires and refused it, would they in fact be eligible 

for UI yet, or continued eligibility, would it be there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, again, what we do is we rely 

on the people that we know have training, and undoubtedly 

some of these people could be unemployed or on social 

assistance during the winter, or part of the year. 

 

And the only real contact we have with unemployment 

insurance is if sometimes they contact us for a list of people 

who worked for us, perhaps people we approached and they did 

not come and work for us; we would provide those names. But 

what unemployment insurance does with that information, we 

are not sure of. Perhaps somebody may refuse a job fighting 

fires because they have bad lungs or something, even though 

they’re on unemployment insurance. 

 

But I guess our goal is to rely on the people we know that are 

trained. And if we need new people in a northern community to 

help out, our team captains or experienced fighters would know 

who to call on. So as far as checking everybody, whether 

they’re unemployed or on social services, we don’t do that, but 

if those departments would like the information we provide it to 

them. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, for anyone 

who is employed by your department or ultimately, I guess, it’s 

by your government, fighting forest fires, I would just like to 

know who is responsible for paying workmen’s compensation 

in that instance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, the answer to that question 

is that we, Environment and Resource Management, are 

responsible for paying workers’ compensation. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister 

and get back to the forest fire, the cost, the over-budget that we 

ran in this last year, it was such a tremendous amount. Of the, I 

believe, it’s $64 million over what was actually budgeted, was 

there federal money involved in that? Or was it strictly the 

province that had to pick up the full tab of the shortfall? Or did 

the federal government pick up part of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Unfortunately we got very little money, 

Mr. Chairman. We have an agreement with the Department of 

National Defence which is for the Primrose Lake Air Weapons 

Range, and we got roughly 2 to $3 million for fire suppression 

last year in that area. And we also get a little money from 

Indian Affairs for fires which are on Indian reserve land. And 

we got maybe 600 to $700,000 for that. So as I say, very little 

federal money came in for the last fire fighting season. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 

that’s actually disappointing because that would have made 

good material for question period. 

  



912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

Mr. Minister, maybe you could tell me then where did the 

shortfall of money come from? Like where did you come up 

with the extra money? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, we simply got the money 

through government, through special warrants and 

supplementary estimates, and it just came through the Treasury 

Board process and obviously from other departments in 

government and other areas. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Okay, I think the 

point I’m trying to get to here, Mr. Minister, is that when the 

need arose with forest fires and the budget was here and the 

cost was here, we created the money from one spot or another. 

 

I’d like to get on the wildlife compensation thing now, and to 

farmers the cost and the problem that wildlife is creating is 

every bit as important to them as the forest is to the people of 

the North, I would say. If we can find money when the 

necessity arises in the North, why can we not come up with 

some more money to compensate farmers who are being 

expected to pick up the extra costs where everybody in this 

province enjoys wildlife, and we are asking just a few farmers, 

and the number is small compared to the population. Why can 

we not do the same for farmers in coming up with a few million 

dollars for compensation, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Well thank you, Mr. Chairman, and like the 

forest fire situation, the severe winter and the conflict between 

wildlife and landowners was also a record year  not a great 

time to be minister of this department. 

 

But with the . . . just going back to the fire situation, once the 

process got rolling, I mean when there’s fires burning we try to 

put them out. And with respect to the wildlife damage, as you 

are well aware, we had a record number of acres of crop out, 

196,000 acres of crop out, an early winter, and relatively high 

deer numbers; not record numbers. And everything sort of 

combined to produce a severe conflict between wildlife and 

some landowners. 

 

As in the past years, we’ve had 325-or-so thousand dollars to 

deal with this problem, which usually was confined to hay 

yards, bales, farmers’ yards, and this program has continued. 

We well overspent that budget by tens of thousands of dollars. 

We still have bills coming in for providing fencing materials in 

our efforts to protect the hay yards and feed in farmers’ yards. 

 

We’ve never experienced before such a widespread depredation 

on crops. Now a number of farmers did have deer in fields, 

some elk as well. And when you see a bunch of deer in your 

field in February, you figure there’s not going to be anything 

left. And what some farmers are saying, now that spring is here, 

we’re a little more optimistic; we’re going to go out and 

combine it. And maybe the losses won’t be as severe. 

 

Certainly there will be some losses, and we’ve asked a number 

of farmers to let us know how the yield was. Was it as bad as 

they said? Is it basically wiped out? Or was there still 

something there? And this will help us to gauge for other years 

as well. 

What we hope to do, because we don’t want to be in this 

scenario again, we certainly are going to continue the 

prevention program where we can, and we are looking through 

crop insurance to have perhaps a spot-loss component in there. 

Some farmers think this is great. Unfortunately a number of 

farmers who have crop out this winter didn’t carry crop 

insurance, but they might if there was a component for wildlife 

damage. So that’s an area we’re looking at. 

 

Also to combat this problem, we’re going to be opening the 

season two weeks earlier for does and fawns in areas that had 

high deer populations. We’re also looking at planting lure crops 

on wildlife development fund lands and some farmers even said 

they wouldn’t mind planting a few acres on their own land if it 

would mean keeping the deer away from their yards and 

keeping them in the field. 

 

We’re working very closely with SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), the wildlife federation, 

and landowners themselves to deal with this. Another thing 

we’re trying this year in the south-east part of the province, 

where vehicles are confined to roads and trails, if the hunter 

gets written permission from the landowner to drive on his field 

to hunt, this will be allowed. 

 

And so we recognize that some farmers are certainly going to 

incur losses this year and we are simply going to work together 

as best we can to see that we don’t end up in the same boat 

another year. 

 

(2215) 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 

Chairman, I really appreciate what your department is doing for 

another year. I think the farmers themselves will appreciate that 

down the road it’ll pay dividends. But as a farmer myself and, 

Mr. Minister, you’re a farmer, and if I had a half-section of 

linola or flax or peas or something lost to wildlife, I don’t know 

if I could sustain that and keep farming another year. 

 

And I think we really have to feel for these people who have 

struggled for the last 10 or 12 years with low grain prices. Now 

we get to a point where prices have come up, where they should 

have been a long time ago, but they’re up where we can turn a 

dollar and the wildlife has ate it. So I really feel that these poor 

farmers are being kind of left on their own and I sure wish there 

was something we could do, Mr. Minister. 

 

I’d like to go on to some of the complaints that I’ve got where 

farmers have had traps set up and have some assistance from 

your department, but there was such an enormous number of 

deer, that the amount that SARM put into these traps and then 

they carried on themselves, filling them themselves, they just 

couldn’t afford to do it. 

 

Now as you know, at the Melville meeting, all kinds of 

concerns were brought up that night, Mr. Minister, but in a few 

cases, the concern that has been brought up to me is some of 

these farmers got frustrated beyond belief seeing their crop 

being annihilated by the wildlife and have took the law into 

their own hands, in some cases, and have gone out, fed up, as  

  



April 15, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

maybe you and me might do if we saw out livelihood going 

down the tube, and have shot a number of deer. 

 

Can you tell me, Mr. Minister, are these farmers going to be 

charged or are they going to be held liable for their actions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I certainly share, as the hon. 

member said, the frustration that some of the people must have 

experienced with the depredation that was occurring in their 

land. And I know that we’ve heard many reports where people 

were going to go out and shoot all the deer. 

 

We are again working with the landowners and we issued 

hundreds, hundreds of depredation permits last fall right 

through into February. And one area we . . . one farmer we 

issued 50 permits to and I believe he harvested 42 animals; they 

came to the food bank. 

 

So we do know that certainly in those cases we did, as a last 

resort, work with the landowner. And it was a supervised hunt 

with the department people there. 

 

And again, we’ve heard of a couple of farmers, or cases where 

farmers or somebody  not necessarily farmers  but 

somebody shot some deer. They’re being investigated, but no 

concrete cases have been determined yet. And I guess if they 

were, if it was blatantly obvious somebody shot a deer and left 

him there, charges could be laid. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I realize 

that we cannot interfere with the law of the land, but I would 

hope at this point we could have some compassion for these 

farmers, because on the first side they have lost thousands of 

dollars and now if we turn around . . . and we can’t condone 

them breaking the law, but I think we have to go with a very 

broad and liberal view of what has happened out there because 

once again we’re going to be costing them money on top. So 

it’s good on top of bad. 

 

Mr. Minister, we’re running short of time and I have one 

subject that I know you wouldn’t want me to miss, is the 

underground tank issue. I’d be remiss if I didn’t get into that. 

 

This week, Mr. Minister, you had  I believe you had  a 

liability meeting, and could you inform as to what came out of 

that meeting. Like where did we get with the liability issue on 

the underground tanks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and that is 

another very important subject in my department. And we did 

have a meeting last week where we had perhaps 15-or-so 

individuals from industry, from small business, Environmental 

Fairness Association  Bill Albert who has been a strong voice 

on this issue  municipal governments. A wide range of people 

came to the table, and this is a serious problem in many areas of 

Saskatchewan. I know a number of communities where there 

are underground fuel tanks. Many of them are abandoned, and 

they are causing problems now in homes and businesses and so 

on and so forth. 

 

Of course the issue is, who should pay to clean up this mess.  

Should it be the local government? Should it be the last owner 

if he or she is still alive? Should it be the government? Who 

should pay? And that’s why we set this committee up; it’s to 

look at the liability of these sites. It’s not just underground fuel 

tanks but other sites where there’s pollution involved as well. 

 

It’s a very complex issue; usually every case or situation is 

different. And so we’re really looking forward to this group’s 

report. They will be meeting throughout the summer and 

reporting to us in early fall, and we really appreciate them 

taking the time. 

 

We also have lending institutions on this committee as well, and 

we really appreciate them taking the time to work together and 

get everybody’s views on the table to see how we might best 

resolve this problem. Because it’s not going to go away and we 

need to deal with it, and we’re looking for input from 

everybody on this important issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think, Mr. 

Minister, as we look back at what has been done with the 

digging up of tanks . . . and I’d just like to touch on a few issues 

here. I’m sure you are familiar with some of them. But I’m 

wondering if common sense is also being used along with logic 

from the labs, etc., etc. But is common sense being used here? 

 

I’d like to give you the example of my home town where there 

was a Shell bulk station. It was closed; the lot was cleaned off; 

there was nothing there any more. A few years later, the 

department came along and they checked. And we have a small 

lake beside our town, and it was decided that the whole lot 

would have to be dug up, hauled away and cleaned up because 

there had been a leak at one point previous. 

 

Now keeping in mind that we have clay base in our area, as 

many areas do in the province, that is very solid and, from what 

my information I can get from many so-called experts, is that 

with this clay base this spill was going nowhere. 

 

What was done, Mr. Minister, is all this soil was dug up. It took 

days with semi-trucks. They hauled it from point A to our 

nuisance grounds, spread it out, and it was to be cultivated. 

Well now the catch there is that our little lake that kids swim in, 

in our town, it runs right around our town. The run-in runs right 

by our nuisance grounds. The rain would come down  the 

year that this was done was a very wet year  would wash 

through this soil, into this water, back into our lake. 

 

The question I have, Mr. Minister, for you and your officials is, 

how on earth could this be safer than leaving it where it was in 

the ground, above this clay base? 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, this is very important. Thank you, Mr. 

Chair. There’s a number of things that we need to look at. 

Perhaps the owner of the site knew that he couldn’t sell it until 

it was cleaned up because he couldn’t get financial 

arrangements to sell the site. Nobody could buy it. Also  I 

don’ t know the exact details  but if you wanted to pursue it  

  



914 Saskatchewan Hansard April 15, 1996 

with, we could get the case study for you. Perhaps there was a 

danger of the fumes getting into a sewer or storm channel or 

something. I really don’t know, but that’s certainly a 

consideration, as well as the water areas you said, even though 

there was a clay base. 

 

So there are a number of things to consider. And the idea of 

spreading the soil out and working it over is so that the 

pollutants will evaporate and the soil will become more 

purified, although I guess what you raised, the danger of rain 

coming right after they put the soil out, it could have been a 

problem. 

 

This is relatively new to all of us and we are learning as we go 

too, and every site is different. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hamilton .................................................................................................................................................................................... 895 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Education  Vote 5 
  Krawetz.............................................................................................................................................................. 891, 896, 899, 902 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 891 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 895 

  Julé ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 895, 901 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training Vote 37 
  Mitchell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 902 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 902 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 905 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 906 

  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 908 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 908 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Environment and Resource Management  Vote 26 
  Scott ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 909 

  Bjornerud .......................................................................................................................................................................... 909, 911 

  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 910 

 


