













































June 10, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2351 

 June 10, 1996 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Vote 53 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. This 

evening with me I have Mr. John Wright, who’s the acting 

president of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation); Mr. Al Moffat, who’s the vice-president of 

commercial services  where is Al? right here  Al Moffat; 

Deb Koshman, who’s the acting vice-president of finance and 

accommodation, seated directly behind me, Mr. Chairman; and 

Mr. Rob Isbister is the budget director of financial and 

planning. My officials, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to welcome 

the officials for Sask Property Management Corporation. Mr. 

Minister, I wonder if again . . . this may have been done in our 

earlier session, but just once again to refresh our memories, 

your global mandate as far as that corporation, your 

responsibilities as far as your corporation and your mandate is 

concerned. Could you just give us an overview, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Member. I 

think that it’s easiest for me to describe the mandate of 

Saskatchewan Property Management, really, in three kinds of 

areas. The corporation really addresses itself to providing 

support services to the delivery of services within government 

and for government. And by and large, I think, if I were to say 

to you that the three areas of mandate really would include that 

of making sure that we have appropriate accommodations, so 

this would be both owned and leased  so it’s housing for 

government services and operations. 

 

I think the second one, Mr. Member, would be that of providing 

transportation services through that of Central Vehicle Agency, 

so accommodation and transportation. Included in that, of 

course, is that of air travel as well. So you have your air 

ambulance services and your Executive Air Services. So it’s 

really about vehicles and property and buildings, Mr. Member, 

would be the simplest version that I might provide to you in 

terms of the areas of responsibilities that the government would 

be providing. And it’s basically to provide support services to 

all of government services. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The accommodations, 

would you have a handle on the space or the buildings that you 

currently have under lease, and what the total cost or amounts 

of those leases would be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The total number of properties that we 

would have around the province, which may be of interest to  

the member as well, is that we have approximately 1,400 

properties across the province which would be located 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of 200 to 220 different 

communities across Saskatchewan and where you could find 

those properties. The lease contracts that we currently have in 

place now are 346 of that number that I provided to you. And 

the budget around . . . of the total leased expenses is, I think, the 

other question that you had asked, is 44,00761. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Of all those properties, do you have a handle on 

the number that are currently vacant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Currently the properties that we have 

around the province that are vacant, that are leased prior to 

October of 1991, we have . . . I believe there are six properties, 

five properties, that are currently leased, Mr. Member, that 

don’t have anybody in them at all. 

 

That space . . . And one of your questions of course will 

probably lead to the amount of time that some of those 

properties are leased for. Those leases are expiring, some of 

them, in 1999, the latest being the year 2001. As of March 31 of 

1996 SPMC has no buildings that are completely vacant which 

were leased after October 1991. And of course we’re currently 

working with a number of the departments and agencies to 

finalize details of space that will be returned as a result of this 

year’s budget. So my response to that would be that we have 

then, I think, five properties that are currently . . . across the 

province that were leased prior to 1991 that don’t have any 

occupancy in them at all. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or, Mr. 

Chairman. First of all to the minister, welcome to yourself and 

to your officials at this part of Committee of the Whole. 

 

A couple of things we were talking about when we’re talking 

about the Saskatchewan Power . . . or Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation. Has there ever been a thorough 

examination of really what the role of SPMC is? Because you 

look at the leases that you speak about, $14.7 million in terms 

of leases, and really the point I’m trying to get at here is when 

you look at the role of SPMC, is there any way, shape, or form, 

has there been any consultation, any discussions that your 

department has taken to study the role of SPMC? 

 

And what I’m trying to get at here is, that is there a role in the 

1990s for a department such as SPMC, considering the tough 

financial constraints that we’re under and the fact that perhaps 

the government can contract out more of the services. 

 

And of particular interest to me is, has there been any of that 

consultation or studies done, much like the study on the Crown 

corporations being undertaken? Has SPMC ever suggested or 

ever researched any of these options that I’m raising this 

evening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much. I welcome the 

question from the member from Athabasca. 

 

I want to indicate to the member that since coming to  

  



2352  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

government in 1991, along with all of the examinations that 

government has undertaken to review its operations and its 

work, a part of that has included of course the work and value 

of Saskatchewan Property Management as it aids the delivery of 

services across the province. And so more specifically I can say 

to the member that when the Gass Commission undertook its 

work, a part of that review during the time that the Gass 

Commission was doing its examinations of government services 

and departments and some of the Crown operations, 

Saskatchewan Property Management was also given a 

bird’s-eye view as well in terms of examination of its services. 

 

Certainly the role throughout the ’90s . . . and I know that the 

member asked the question about has there been any 

examination  thought  given to whether or not there are 

some services that can in fact be contracted out, that can be 

provided by the private sector. And I think part of what I want 

to say to the member is that we have all sorts of partnerships 

within Saskatchewan Property Management today that include 

of course the direct service delivery of some of our programs 

within Saskatchewan Property Management by the government 

itself. On the other hand, we are involved in a number of 

contractual arrangements with the private sector at this point to 

provide some of our services in terms of making the work of 

government and its services more efficient across the province. 

 

And certainly as we move along with the work of Saskatchewan 

Property Management we’re ongoing evaluations of its work on 

a regular basis. So I have to say to you that the process of 

looking at the value of Saskatchewan Property Management in 

terms of the services it provides are not only current but they’re 

ongoing. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. When you talk about the 

Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, are we also 

incorporating the use of vehicles from the many departments or 

are the departments generally, you know, responsible for their 

own vehicle and their vehicle maintenance and also their 

vehicle costs such as fuel and oil changes and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The question that the members asks, the 

department is certainly responsible for ascertaining the vehicles 

that are currently in the fleet for the government. However, the 

individual departments are responsible for determining, first of 

all, the number of vehicles that would be required by a 

department. If I might use the public health department, if they 

require in their fleet to provide services to rural Saskatchewan 

and that might be 400 vehicles, that determines . . . and the 

types of vehicles that they might require, that decision would be 

made, by and large, by the individual department. In that case, it 

would be made by the Department of Health. 

 

But SPMC, of course, would take on the responsibility of 

ensuring that the appropriate number of vehicles that are 

required for government services be provided, would then make 

the request or RFP (request for proposal) and do the purchase of 

the vehicle. Because certainly on that process we can buy 

vehicles significantly cheaper because we buy them at such a 

large volume. 

 

(1915) 

Your question regarding how do we maintain the vehicles 

across the province, what we would do, what SPMC does of 

course, is they enter into contractual agreements with service 

providers across the province. So what you might find of course 

in my community or in the community that you’re from, that 

there would be someone there who would be providing some of 

the service to the vehicles that the government owns right 

within those communities. 

 

So previous to your earlier question about whether or not we’re 

contracting out some of those services to the private sector, 

that’s one example of how we’re doing some of that already. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I guess the second part of the question is, in a 

sense that when the Department of Health, for example, 

requires 40 vehicles, SPMC purchases these vehicles and they 

transfer the vehicles to the Health branch. And then does the 

Health branch get the actual cost out of their budget or does it 

come out of SPMC’s budget? How does that process work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The departments are billed for the cost of 

the vehicles on a cost-recovery basis is how that works. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  How often do you purchase vehicles, and 

what’s the process for re-selling vehicles, and where are your 

vehicles generally purchased from, as SPMC? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  On an annual basis . . . you’re correct in 

assuming that on an annual basis what we do is we replace a 

portion of our fleet. In Saskatchewan we currently have just in 

excess of over 4,000 vehicles that Saskatchewan Property 

Management would be responsible for. What we have . . . the 

current policy that we’re following of course is that it’s an 

eight-year, 160 kilometre target. 

 

So once the vehicle gets to that level, what we would then do is 

we would put it on the block, if I might use that, because you 

asked a question about whether . . . how we dispose of vehicles 

across the province. And what we would do is we would put 

them up for public auction. And from time to time you see that 

in local newspapers across the province, that gives information 

regarding types of vehicles, which include mileage, and then 

they’re sold at public auction across the province. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Would you have a copy of the vehicles that 

you sold, say the last five, six years, and what the value of those 

vehicles in terms of what they’re auctioned off for? Is that 

information that’s available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  On an average basis, what we would sell 

off is somewhere in the neighbourhood of 5 or 600 vehicles. 

What we can do is we can go back over a period of five years, if 

the member would like us to do that. Of course it’s a fairly 

extensive and onerous kind of an exercise but certainly we 

would be prepared to do that and then provide the member with 

the information of the types of vehicles that were sold, the 

locations that they were sold, and the amount that we would 

have realized from that on the sale of those vehicles. 

 

On the average, I would expect that some of those vehicles 

might be in the neighbourhood of 3 or $4,000 with that kind of  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

mileage that they would have on them. But if the member is 

wishing that kind of information, there’s no reason why we 

couldn’t provide that for you. As I say, it would be a fairly long 

exercise from the point of view that we’re selling somewhere in 

the neighbourhood of 5 or 600 vehicles on an annual basis. And 

we would have that information for you over a period of about 

6 years, or 5 years. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you for your gracious offer, but even a 

couple of years would be fine. I just wanted to do some quick 

calculations. I guess the . . . jumping into the situation of actual 

buildings, I’d like to go into northern Saskatchewan, if I may. 

In northern Saskatchewan when you do have a building that the 

government owns, the provincial government owns, are 

municipal governments allowed to tax your property? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  There isn’t a tax on the property but what 

there is, is that there’s a grant in lieu that’s provided to the 

municipalities across the province where there are provincial 

buildings located. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So I imagine if you do lease a building off a 

private person, that that individual would be responsible for 

taxes if it was privately owned by himself. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  That’s correct. The individual who would 

own the property would then be taxed by the municipality. 

That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Could you give me a brief list of the 

buildings that you do lease in the Athabasca constituency, and 

the rate which you lease them for, as well as the names of the 

owners of the buildings that you are leasing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The significant leases in the Athabasca 

constituency that the member talks about, there would be five 

that I would like to report and share with him. They would be at 

Beauval, POB (provincial office building). We’re leasing there. 

The tenants are SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management), Health, and Social Services, in that 

facility  248 square metres would be the amount of space that 

we would be leasing there. 

 

At Buffalo Narrows the tenants are as well SERM, and Health, 

and Social Services. Justice are in that facility as well  961 

square metres in that particular building. At Ile-a-la-Crosse we 

have the tenants of SERM, Health, Social Services, Justice, and 

New Careers are in that facility and we’re currently leasing 440 

square metres in that building. Of the amount of space that’s 

occupied at Ile-a-la-Crosse as well, the health centre, that one 

we have 200 square metres and the tenants are currently Health. 

And at La Loche the tenants are SERM, and Health, Social 

Services, and Justice. And they have 543 square metres in that 

particular building. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Could you also share with the 

House as to who you’re leasing these properties from. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We don’t have that information with us 

here this evening but we’d be happy to provide that to you very 

shortly. 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much. In reference to 

looking at properties, suppose SPMC or the government needs a 

new health care centre in Pinehouse. How would you determine 

the value of going to a private lease versus to the government 

actually constructing this facility? Is there a process in place 

that you generally have to use in terms of determining that 

outcome? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Part of the responsibilities that we have in 

Saskatchewan Property Management of course is to  and this 

has happened over time  is to become somewhat expert in 

determining what the costs of facilities might be across the 

province, based on specific needs for which space might be 

used for. 

 

And the member can well appreciate that all facilities don’t 

necessarily make themselves conducive to a variety of different 

uses. So in many occasions when you’re developing space or 

needing to acquire space, it needs to be suitable or specific to 

the kinds of needs that it has. 

 

And so what Saskatchewan Property Management would do, by 

and large, is determine from its own expertise what the 

approximate cost of a facility like you suggest might be in a 

particular community for a particular purpose. After we had 

completed that process what we would then do is we would 

actually then go to the private sector and have them provide for 

us their estimate cost of what a facility might be in that 

particular community for that particular purpose; then, of 

course, would make a determination. 

 

This would be an open proposal call that we would put out to 

the province so that people might submit then their bid as to . . . 

and provide their estimates on what the cost of operating and 

constructing a building of that type might be. And then at the 

end of the day, making some comparisons then in terms of what 

it would cost the government to provide the service in their own 

facilities versus what in fact it would be if we were to lease that 

property from somebody who constructed it and privately 

owned it. 

 

So it would be a combination of those factors that would, at the 

end of the day, determine what kind of facility would be both 

required and ascertained for use for a particular purpose. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  In reference to the points that you raised, 

when you look at the lease versus construction of a needed 

facility, obviously because of the financial constraints the 

province is under, it would be much easier to negotiate a 

20-year lease where you’d pay a thousand dollars per month in 

year one, in terms of the cash flow point of view, as opposed to 

having a $500,000 cash outlay for a construction project. 

 

So from the cash flow perspective, I imagine leasing as opposed 

to constructing would be a favourable option. So in that 

reference, when many people want to build a building and lease 

it back to government, there is obviously the premiss of profit 

for the individual or for the company. 

 

(1930) 

 

  



2354  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Is there a rule of thumb that you use to determine the cost plus 

their mark-up, I guess you would say, in terms of the building? 

Is there a 12 per cent mark-up or a 15 per cent mark-up? 

Because we know many of these businesses or some of these 

private companies would not build just to recover their income. 

Obviously profit’s got to be part of the picture. 

 

So is there a rule of thumb that you use to determine the 

profitability of a leased building towards the owner itself, or 

himself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think what’s important here is that, as I’d 

mentioned earlier when I was commenting on the process, what 

we would always be looking to do and what we always do is we 

always go to the RFP process to determine what would be the 

lowest cost in terms of the particular space that we have 

requirement for. 

 

Now I think the other piece that’s also important here is that 

what we would be doing is looking at lease agreements that 

would only be for periods of five years. I know that the member 

is familiar with previous practices that Saskatchewan Property 

Management has been involved in. And certainly when you 

look at  and as I described to you earlier  some of the lease 

arrangements that we have across the province with properties, 

you see that we’ve had 10- and 12- and 15-year leases for 

particular pieces of property. And of course some of them, as 

you’re certainly familiar with, are no longer occupied. They’re 

vacant space across the province. 

 

What we’re doing, however, though, is after we’ve determined 

what the lowest cost of that particular facility is, keeping in 

mind that the taxpayer is the individual who bears the 

expenditure here, we would then be entering into the lowest 

cost arrangement and that wouldn’t exceed a period of a 

five-year term. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just a point that I wish to make to you, Mr. 

Minister  and I certainly appreciate the effort you’re taking to 

get me that information as soon as you can, in terms of the 

vehicles and some of the owners of some of the properties that 

are being leased by the government, in particular the Athabasca 

constituency  am I to expect that information say within a 

week, or several days? How does your schedule work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We could have the information that the 

member asked for somewhere between a week and 10 days, if 

that would be satisfactory to him. We could provide that 

information for him, over that period of time. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the other point I have is, 

I’m a bit confused when you talk about the $14.7 million in 

terms of the . . . I’m sorry, $44.7 million in terms of the current 

leases. And we spoke about the vehicles leases. And then we 

see in your budget itself, you have approximately $10.5 million 

estimated for 1996-1997. Obviously it’s, you know, the 

spending is somewhere. Could you just basically explain to me 

why your budget’s so low yet your costs are quite high in terms 

of some of the facts that you gave us this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think I might answer the member’s  

question by indicating first that Saskatchewan Property 

Management, of course, operates itself on a cost-recovery basis. 

So what we would be expecting then is that . . . and as you go 

through the Estimates and look through the Estimates in each of 

the various departments, what you will see is you will see an 

expenditure designated from each of the departments in terms 

of those costs that are related to the services that are provided 

by Saskatchewan Property Management. And those costs are 

charged out to each of those departments, as I’ve indicated, on a 

cost-recovery basis. 

 

So what you see here on your bottom line in the Estimates, 

which is that one individual number, that really reflects the 

portion that we go to Treasury Board for in terms of the net 

grant after all of the cost recoveries are obtained from each of 

the departments. That’s the portion that we returned to Treasury 

Board for a specific amount. 

 

Now SPMC receives a subsidy which funds a portion of the 

operating costs which are not covered through the corporation, 

which I’ve already indicated on the cost recovery. 

 

And included in that, for your information, would be SPMC’s 

own accommodation and corporate overhead that we would 

have to provide the support services to all levels of government. 

If we have some vacant space that we may end up with at the 

end of the day, it would cover that. 

 

Certainly the custodial services for programs administered for 

the government, like that of the purchasing agency, project 

management, central survey and mapping, telecommunications 

 those would be the areas that the net grant would be 

covering off after the cost recovery is obtained from each of the 

departments that we provide services to across the piece. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  So I guess that answers also the question in 

reference to staff. I see you haven’t got what most departments 

have in terms of staff breakdowns. Is that referred to as FTE 

(full-time equivalent) staff complement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay, I guess the second part of the question 

is, I’d like to recommend or perhaps to point a direction that 

SPMC should look at when it comes to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

As you’re probably aware, Mr. Minister, northern municipal 

governments do have a very tough time operating governments 

in northern Saskatchewan. And one of the things that they’ve 

looked at, and time and time again this has been a roadblock to 

many of the northern municipal governments, when there is a 

specific need . . . And I’ll use my home community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse as an example. 

 

When there’s a specific need for a community to . . . or for 

government to construct a facility or look at leasing a building 

for its purposes, that you should consult and make the right of 

first refusal to the local municipal governments to build that 

building and lease it back to governments. 

 

Because what you see in northern Saskatchewan anyway  I’m  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

not sure about the rest of the Saskatchewan situation  is you 

have a lot of outside interests coming into these northern 

communities, building these buildings, leasing them out to 

government at a profit, and then again pulling the money out of 

the community and pulling everything down to southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I would suggest to you and maybe support any efforts that 

you had to try and see if the local municipal government, or a 

local business person, or a co-op of some sort, can do that for 

you, where you would talk with them on a competitive basis, 

say we have an opportunity for you to build a building and lease 

it back to the government here, so you guys could make profits 

and keep some of the profits at the local level. 

 

And again I go back to our situation in Ile-a-la-Crosse where we 

. . . there was probably two or three, maybe four or five 

occasions in which government has needed a building, yet the 

community was not advised. It was in no way, shape or form 

able to build a building because they weren’t made aware of the 

needs and as a result they lost out on a very lucrative 

opportunity to lease a building back to government. 

 

So are you prepared to look at that particular part of your 

responsibility as Minister responsible for SPMC to see if there’s 

an opportunity that in the future that we could perhaps 

incorporate some of these ideas I speak about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I want to first of all indicate to the member 

that the suggestion that he puts forward and the ideas that he 

puts forward in terms of partnerships that the provincial 

government might enter into with local municipalities, or for 

that matter tribal councils, are ideas and concepts that are 

already in place. 

 

And we’re doing some of that already, not only in the . . . and 

certainly one of the examples that I might share with the 

member and he probably is familiar with that, and that’s a lease 

that was awarded to construct a new facility in Buffalo 

Narrows. This new facility of course will replace the 

substandard provincial building and health clinics. SPMC 

previously met with representatives of affected departments and 

developed a design layout prior to that. 

 

And here is one example of I think what the member from 

Athabasca is talking about. I think that not only is  just to 

give an example  of not only SPMC being involved in some 

of that process, but having responsibilities of another portfolio 

and that of Liquor and Gaming, what we have of course in La 

Loche. 

 

La Loche, which you’re obviously I think familiar with as well, 

there is probably a prime example of what you’re talking about 

where first of all the Liquor and Gaming Authority actually 

went to the municipality and had a discussion with the 

municipality about what their needs would be. And then the 

municipality designed the plan for how in fact they would want 

to see the facility designed in the community, who would be the 

owners of the facility in the community. 

 

And of course what’s happened is that it is their building, and  

the revenues then that Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming pay to 

the community make its way back into the municipality in the 

way in which you’re suggesting. So this of course is our idea of 

how we can include municipalities, how there can be joint 

ownerships, how there can be partnerships in both the sharing 

of determining what the needs might be in the community, but 

at the same time making sure of some of that revenue gets back 

into the communities to do the kind of work that you’re talking 

about. And certainly very important, as you suggest, in northern 

Saskatchewan for that to be happening. 

 

And we’re not only going to be supporting that idea to a greater 

degree, but that we’ll also be ensuring that there is that kind of 

inclusiveness as we continue to expand and develop facilities 

for joint needs both from a municipal perspective, from a 

government perspective, and also include our federal partners, 

by the way, in some of that work that’s going on. So I 

appreciate your comments and just share with you that some of 

that process is already ongoing and continue do further. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, and I guess the point that I could 

take at this point in time is that the answer to my suggestion to 

you is that yes, that if there is an opportunity to construct or to 

lease a building in these northern communities, that you as a 

minister will undertake to consult with the municipalities and 

say, there’s an opportunity here for you and we need these type 

of facilities in the future. You are committing to that process, is 

that correct? 

 

(1945) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  There’s no question, Mr. Chairman, to the 

member, that that process will continue to go on as it has in the 

past. We’ll continue to ensure that that process will continue to 

work in the way in which you suggested and we’re practising. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just a couple of 

other questions here. In reference to some of the units that you 

may have had in northern Saskatchewan, there has been times 

where say a SERM officer heads to Buffalo Narrows. And as 

far as the employment condition, he’s given a unit. And I’m 

assuming that SPMC owns that unit, which is a housing unit. 

And after a while I’m aware that you have had some sales of the 

surplus units. And could you advise the House today as to how 

you determine the resale of your units, and how many 

properties did you sell in northern Saskatchewan, and basically 

your determination of how you valued both the buildings and 

the properties with respect to staff housing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  In respect to a couple of the questions that 

the member has asked, specifically on the number of properties 

that we have in the North that were used for the kinds of 

purposes that he suggested, particularly SERM, we don’t have 

that number with us currently, and can provide for you the exact 

number of units in the North that in fact we had and then were 

disposed of. 

 

To the second question that the member raises as it relates to 

the amount or the value of what those properties were disposed 

for, of course we wouldn’t determine that within the 

corporation. That would go of course to an open bidding  

  



2356  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

process. And of course what the value of the properties would 

be, would be determined of course on who wants it or who 

needs it for a particular purpose. 

 

And by and large, it’s often important to recognize that you 

might have a significant asset that’s situated in a particular part 

of the province where government might have a fair bit of 

equity in it. The problem with it might be, of course, is who 

wants it? 

 

So if you have a willing seller and a willing buyer, and they 

have a need for a particular facility you have, where you have 

all of your asset tied up in it, then of course it’s always 

beneficial then to . . . then of course you get the best value for 

that particular piece of property. But in many cases, that doesn’t 

necessarily hold true. But the market-place would determine the 

kind of return that you would get on the asset that you would 

have for disposal. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. Just three more questions. In 

terms of actual housing requirements in northern Saskatchewan, 

would you also be in a position to go to the community and 

discuss the construction and potential lease of housing units in 

the event that SPMC may need private housing accommodation 

for some of the staff that may be relocated to northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I’d like to be able to assist the member 

with that; however the housing for northern Saskatchewan is 

really handled under the portfolio of Municipal Government. 

And so when that opportunity, you know, arises again, the 

member may want to ask the question of the minister 

responsible for Municipal Government as it relates to housing, 

because housing isn’t a part of the portfolio that Saskatchewan 

Property Management addresses itself to. 

 

What I do have though, the member had earlier asked me of the 

number of properties that SPMC sold in 1995-96. And as I was 

advising the member of a number of other issues, I do have 

some of the properties that were disposed of in 1995-96 with 

the value attached to them and who the purchaser of those 

properties were with the project number and the RFP under 

which it was tendered. And what I might do is pass this over to 

the member so that he might have an opportunity then to review 

it at his leisure. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, you may have 

misunderstood the question in reference to housing. Is it my 

understanding that if a housing unit is required to fill a SERM 

position in Buffalo Narrows, that you’re saying that it’s 

municipal housing division responsibility and not SPMC 

responsibility to find that unit for the potential employee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I want to just indicate to the member, I 

was of the impression that he was talking about northern 

housing, and northern housing as I described is in the portfolio 

of Municipal Government. However if it’s specific to an 

individual within a program department, as you’ve indicated, a 

SERM employee, then that would fall under the purview of 

Saskatchewan Property Management. 

 

And just to say to the member that we haven’t disposed of any 

properties in the last several years that certainly we’ve been 

involved in administering. So I can’t give him that specific 

piece of information that he’s requiring because we don’t have 

it. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Okay. I guess the point I want to raise though 

is that the same manner in which you’re going to allow local 

contractors and municipal governments the opportunity to build 

a building, lease it back to the government: what I’m saying, 

would you also extend that opportunity to private housing for 

the potential employees that may be relocated to their 

community? 

 

Like suppose SPMC needs accommodation for three families. 

Instead of you guys leasing or building the buildings on your 

own or having somebody from the South come and build them 

for you, would you also afford that opportunity in the same 

manner which you would with your commercial properties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think the answer to the member’s 

question is that what we would do is, in either case, whether it’s 

an acquisition or a disposal of property that we would have 

within a municipality for the particular purpose that you’re 

talking about  in this case it’s a SERM employee  we 

would certainly exercise the same opportunity as we did . . . as I 

talked earlier about the office space. We would go to the 

municipality, go to the community and try to determine, with 

their interest and their effort, to what the needs might be in a 

particular community and who might be able to provide that for 

us best. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess the final few questions. 

In terms of the buildings and the excess equipment that SPMC 

may own in a number of rural, city, or northern communities, 

would you also be in a position to entertain potential invitations 

from different communities to use the, you know, the building 

or equipment in such a manner as to help them in some of their 

objectives? And of course their objectives are wide-ranging. 

 

The point that I’m making here is that obviously there are a lot 

of buildings and a lot of excess equipment out there. And has 

there been any interest from any municipalities or any groups in 

reference to any particular asset that you have that you aren’t 

using and that you could possibly dispose of? And if so, can I 

get a list of those enquiries and potential companies that might 

be interested in accessing those properties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Currently what we have in the province is 

a fairly extensive policy as it relates to how we dispose of 

properties. And certainly the way in which the policy is crafted 

and drafted today is that what we would first do, of course, is go 

to our own departments. For example, if we had a particular 

space that was currently being used by the Department of Social 

Services and they were using it for the benefits of their 

programs and that space became excess for whatever reason 

that might be, we would then of course go to each of our other 

departments within government to try to determine whether or 

not they had need for it first, within the operations of 

government. 

 

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

The second group of folks that we would then go to would be to 

our federal government departments to see whether or not they 

had any need for that property to use for some of their programs 

or services that they might have within that particular 

community. 

 

And then, of course, would then go to the third parties, which 

would be the municipalities, to recognize whether or not they 

had particular needs for property. In some locations, certainly 

then go to school boards, which would be in our opinion 

included in that whole third-party group, because there are 

occasions where you might have school boards who might have 

need for particular facilities. I might give the example of a 

surplus Highways building, for example, where they might need 

a place to store their school buses or things of that nature. So 

they would be included in that review as well as health district 

boards, of course, currently would be another group of 

individuals who we would go to and see whether or not they 

have any need for that property. 

 

Included in that policy, of course, is our involvement contact 

with first nations people to see, as well, as they’re expanding, in 

determining what their property needs are, building needs are, 

across the province. We include them in that policy framework 

as well and discuss with them whether or not they have any 

particular needs. 

 

So the policy is, in my opinion, somewhat over-encompassing 

and addresses not only municipalities but all sectors within the 

departments and the Crowns, other levels of government, as 

I’ve said to you, which include the federal, municipal, and first 

nations people. NGOs (non-governmental organizations) are in 

that as well. 

 

And at the end of the day, if no one, you know, has a particular 

interest in the properties that we have, then we would go to the 

private sector and put that property out there for people to try to 

access through an open bidding, fair, open bidding process. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you very much. And I’ll just close 

with my final question here, but I wanted to point out the fact 

that you mentioned the particular facility in Buffalo Narrows, 

and this is the reason why I’m more or less insistent that your 

department look at the opportunity of going to the local 

community at first when you require a building, as government, 

and affording them the first opportunity to either build that 

building and lease back to the community from the government 

point of view  And the reason being is that many of these 

northern communities, and many of these small northern 

businesses in these northern communities, do need extra 

revenues and they do need extra support. 

 

(2000) 

 

As well, when you have excess buildings and excess equipment 

that nobody else is interested in, as part of the support towards 

the smaller centres, be it rural or northern Saskatchewan, that 

perhaps in the community development aspect of life in these 

smaller communities, that perhaps flexibility and support could 

be shown by government when it comes to property and excess 

equipment, to try and assist that community in either  

developing a new service or setting up a new facility for some 

needs. So it’s always a two-way street. 

 

And I mention back to the Buffalo Narrows example, where we 

have a Saskatoon company that not only built that building but 

they also now are leasing back to the government. Now what if 

the government would’ve taken the initiative and said, we are 

going to give the first opportunity of building that building and 

leasing that building back to government, for our needs, to the 

Buffalo Narrows Town Council. 

 

And I would say at this point in time that a guaranteed lease is 

worth money in the bank, and today Buffalo Narrows would 

have not only an asset, but extra income, and that perhaps we 

should look at doing that right across the board to assist the 

small rural and certainly the small northern Saskatchewan 

communities. 

 

And the final question I have is also in reference to SPMC’s 

plan. Obviously you’re always looking at ways to  I’m 

assuming  at ways to reduce excess equipment and buildings 

that you don’t need, because there’s no value in having these 

buildings in there if you don’t need them. 

 

And suppose, for example, there was a determination needed 

. . . there was a determination that was made by the Department 

of Health saying that they had an alcohol and drug abuse centre 

that was needed in Pinehouse, for example. And then if 

Pinehouse come up with the idea that they wanted to lease or 

build this building, consistent with what you’re saying this 

evening, and they wanted to rent it back to the government, 

would you then enter into that negotiations as the minister 

responsible, or would that be a totally Health departmental 

matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think that the member raises a number of 

excellent points, of which I want to certainly indicate that as we 

examine the number of properties across the province which 

might be recognized certainly as excess, there’s no question 

that, as I’ve said earlier, those kinds of discussions would be 

front and centre with the municipalities in terms of how we 

would want to include them in that particular disposal of a piece 

of property that we might have. 

 

As you point out, that you might in your community of . . . or in 

the community of Buffalo Narrows, what you have is a property 

that would have a tremendous amount of value today if it had a 

different kind of ownership association to the municipality. And 

I think that what’s important here to recognize, is that the 

current policy under which this administration operates, that 

would be the kind of practice that we would get into where we 

would have that kind of discussion with the local municipality 

and see whether or not we could provide the best benefits for all 

of the parties involved in that process. 

 

If we could turn that clock back a bit, is what you’re suggesting 

we might be able to do, of course that would be a healthier 

experience from the point of view of what you’re suggesting is 

happening in Buffalo Narrows. 

 

  



2358  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

The issue of course is that as properties . . . property leases 

expire in communities, you already have a facility in your 

community that has a unique purpose, and obviously it was 

designed for some particular purpose. The question then 

becomes of who attains ownership of it if it’s not designated as 

surplus. If the requirement for that particular facility is still 

there, then who becomes the legitimized owner of it? 

 

In the case of the health district, would the health district board 

then pursue the purchase of that particular property on behalf of 

the region and then provide the services back to the region as 

the owner of the facility, being the district health board? Or 

does the municipality then get into an arrangement with the 

owner of that particular facility and then say to them that they 

want to be the owner, and then lease that particular property 

back from the Department of Health? 

 

And I think there are a variety of different variables that, 

particularly the departments that provide the programs, would 

be examining. And Saskatchewan Property Management would 

be involved of course in determining what the actual facility 

requirements might be based on the kind of expertise that we 

think we provide in terms of what accommodation needs might 

be. But the specific program needs would really be that of the 

departments that are making the request. 

 

And in the case of the property that you’re talking about and 

health district board, that discussion would be with the health 

district board, of course, and that of the Department of Health. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you for your time and your questions 

and your patience. And I’m certainly encouraged, Mr. Minister, 

that you’re taking the extra effort to look at affording the 

northern municipalities, in particular those small communities, 

the opportunity, in the event that there is a facility needed, that 

they would be the first persons, the first group, that you would 

approach to potentially become the builders and the lessors of 

that particular property. I’m quite pleased to hear that that offer 

to investigate that number being brought forward by yourself. 

 

And I believe the member from Cannington has a few questions 

for you, and I thank you once again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I thank the member from Athabasca for 

the questions as well. And to just reiterate again to the member 

that we’ll continue to practise the current policy that we have, 

and appreciate his support for the practice that we’re currently 

following in terms of property development in the northern part 

of Saskatchewan. I thank the member for the questions. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, 

Mr. Minister, and officials. I note in schedule A of the 

Estimates book that you’ve taken over a number of 

responsibilities from Intergovernmental Affairs. I wonder if you 

could explain the change-over, the transfer from the protocol 

office dealing with the gift bank, and explain what the gift bank 

is, for $15,000. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, to the member from 

Cannington, the transfer of the legislative buildings to 

Saskatchewan Property Management really occurred in the year  

that . . . previous year. And it seemed that because we’re into 

the business of managing properties and buildings across the 

province, that the legislative buildings would be another 

property that Saskatchewan Property Management should have 

under its purview. 

 

And you’re correct in identifying that through the course of 

1995-96 the legislative buildings became part of the 

responsibilities, and all of the functions that are associated with 

the buildings and grounds and work around the building and 

with the building, are associated now with Saskatchewan 

Property Management. 

 

The gift bank that the member speaks of is certainly . . . it’s part 

of the new duties that Saskatchewan Property Management has 

within its purview and the $15,000 that he talks about would be 

the . . . a portion of funds that would make their way through 

the protocol visiting. So if you have delegations or individuals 

or groups who come to  if I might say  the legislature from 

abroad, we would provide these souvenirs to those individuals, 

and that’s what that number really associates itself to. 

 

The actual transfer of the Legislative Building to Saskatchewan 

Property Management really occurred on April 1 of ’96. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When we’re 

talking about gifts to visiting dignitaries  I assume that’s what 

we’re talking about  what sort of criteria is in place to 

determine which visiting delegation receives a gift? What 

criteria is in place to determine how large that gift will be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The Saskatchewan Property Management, 

by and large, in respect to that particular fund that the member 

talks about, would only be responsible, by and large, of 

ensuring what the particular item that protocol office would 

suggest would be appropriate. And so we would go out and 

actually purchase the good that they’re indicating they would 

require and get the best price on what that might be. 

 

The protocol office, of course, would be involved in really 

determining the policy of what a particular gift might be, what 

the value of that particular gift might be, and that responsibility 

would really lie within that of the protocol gift policy, if I might 

call it that. 

 

And SPMC really is providing the inventory management and 

the procurement of what it is that the protocol office would be 

suggesting that we would be . . . they would be requiring. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  For this $15,000, Mr. Minister, how 

many gifts were purchased and in what price ranges were those 

gifts valued at? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well to the member, this is a relatively 

new experience for us in terms of managing this particular fund. 

So because we don’t have that particular number, I could 

venture a guess and my officials are putting their heads together 

and trying to determine what that number might be in terms of 

the number of gifts and what the value of them are. It would be 

a significant number and the value wouldn’t be large. But rather 

than to try to provide that to you at this point in time, I would  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

rather for us to get that detailed information for you and then 

provide it to you directly in writing if that would be satisfactory 

with the member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, if you would 

provide that as quickly as possible though, that information. 

 

I would like move on to another issue. SPMC looks after the 

CVA (Central Vehicle Agency) vehicles, I believe. I wonder if 

you can give me some indication as to how many MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly), cabinet ministers, 

ministerial staff, department officials, would be entitled to CVA 

vehicles. 

 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  If the member is asking about executive 

government, then it would just be cabinet ministers and 

permanent heads that would be the folks that would be assigned 

vehicles. If the member is asking about vehicles that are 

assigned within the program operations, we would have two 

systems, as you may be aware. 

 

Then we would . . . my information tells us that the ministerial 

vehicles, currently we have 20 that would be assigned; 

executive vehicles to DMs (deputy minister), there would be 

14; on Crown corporations there would be 3; and then the 

executive pool would be 13; and that information is as of April 

1 of 1996. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, 50 vehicles all 

told. Now is that the total number that are entitled to vehicles 

depending on their position  ministers, executive heads, or 

Crown corporations  is that the total number that are entitled 

to those vehicles or is that different? Would that number be 

different from the actual number of vehicles that you have 

listed, this 50 vehicles? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Those are the total vehicles that are 

assigned. There are some deputy ministers who have chosen not 

to use a CVA vehicle. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  How many deputy ministers have 

chosen not to take a CVA vehicle, and for what reason have 

they chosen not to take those vehicles? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think that we . . . Mr. Chairman, to the 

member, what we’ll do is we’ll provide the specifics in terms of 

the reason for why it is that we have, and here we’re talking 

only about less than a half a dozen permanent heads, which 

would be deputy ministers or like, that aren’t using CVA 

vehicles. 

 

And I don’t have the response for you tonight in terms of 

knowing why it is that those particular individuals or those 

particular departments aren’t assigned a CVA vehicle to them. 

But can get that information for the member in the very near 

future. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you could indicate what the policy is in regards to who is  

entitled to a CVA vehicle and who that is entitled to a CVA 

vehicle doesn’t have to take a CVA vehicle but is allowed some 

other measure. 

 

And I would assume that those DMs or department heads who 

have not taken a CVA vehicle are then charging mileage for the 

use of a different vehicle. Is that the case, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well the option remains of course, Mr. 

Member, as you’re aware, that there is a car allowance that 

would be paid to an individual who chooses to use their own 

vehicle as opposed to using a CVA vehicle. 

 

And there may be a variety of different reasons, as you had 

indicated earlier or asked earlier, about why it is that some of 

the folks choose not to. They may not, for example, want to tie 

up a CVA vehicle because they don’t use their vehicle very 

much. And so they may choose just to use their own for 

whatever particular reason that they want to do that. 

 

They may have a preference over the vehicle that they want to 

be driving. And the policy currently is  you’d asked  it 

allows for those kinds of determinations to be made really by 

the individual departments. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Would anyone then, within the 

executive branch that is entitled to a CVA vehicle, be allowed 

to make that determination as to whether or not they will take a 

CVA vehicle or whether they will charge mileage for the use of 

some other vehicle? Is that option available to everyone within 

that group that we’ve mentioned mainly within the executive 

branch of government and the DMs and heads of departments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  With respect to the question, Mr. Member, 

for the cabinet ministers there isn’t a choice as to whether or not 

you would use a CVA vehicle or would use your own. That 

policy states that cabinet ministers would use the CVA vehicles. 

 

In terms of permanent heads that option really remains, and we 

simply provide the opportunity for them either to  and are 

there to provide a vehicle for them if they choose to make that 

decision  whether or not they exercise using their own 

vehicle or whether they use a CVA vehicle. That determination, 

by and large I expect, would be made by contractual agreement 

in each of the individual departments under which those people 

take their employ. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. On those DMs 

and heads of departments who have not taken a CVA vehicle, 

how does their mileage expense, travel expense, compare with 

the use of a CVA vehicle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Currently what we know is we know what 

our individual costs are in CVA to operate and service and 

maintain a vehicle for individual members who are using  

whether it’s a deputy minister or a cabinet minister  who are 

using CVA vehicles. 

 

What we don’t have, to do the kind of comparison that you’re 

asking us to do, is that we don’t have what those individual  

  



2360  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

costs are that are currently being incurred by the individual 

departments, I would suggest, for those folks who are using 

their own vehicles at the deputy minister level. We can’t make 

those comparisons for you in the way in which you’re asking. 

 

We know that the actual cost of operating our vehicles under 

the CVA fleet is significantly less than what it would be if you 

were to go out into the market-place and lease a vehicle. And 

part of that of course is the fact that we have such a large fleet 

and can do business, and do business, by volume. 

 

But specifically to the question that you asked in terms of 

making a comparison to that group of vehicles that are currently 

being driven by deputy ministers, in comparison to what the 

costs are and the CVA pool using our vehicles, we can’t 

provide that because we don’t have that specific detail to be 

able to give it to you. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you could provide the list of deputy ministers who do not take 

. . . deputy ministers or heads of departments who do not take 

CVA vehicles. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We can certainly, Mr. Chairman, provide 

that to the member without any difficulty. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the 

average cost then for a deputy minister or head of department’s 

CVA vehicle? So that if we can get the numbers from within 

the other departments as per those DMs or heads of departments 

who are not taking CVA vehicles, that we can use that as a 

comparison basis. What is the average cost to operate the 

vehicle from CVA for those DMs or heads of departments that 

you are supplying vehicles for? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  What’s I think important to recognize is 

that, because we have such an extensive fleet, that you have 

vehicles that are at different ages and vehicles that have 

different value in terms of the kinds of options that they have 

and the quality of the vehicle. So in terms of what that 

particular individual that you’re suggesting, who currently isn’t 

within the CVA . . . using a vehicle out of the CVA fleet that 

. . . the cost per kilometre would vary then. So I don’t have that 

particular number but I think it would be fair to say that the 

average personal rate, mileage rate or the CVA rate, would be 

on sort of a mid-sized vehicle, would be about 22.6 cents per 

kilometre. And that was, as I’ve said to you earlier, would 

include all of the operating costs of that particular vehicle. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you can give us some indication what the mileage rate would be 

paid to those DMs or heads of departments who do not take 

CVA vehicles. I don’t need the total dollars. I just need the 

amount per kilometre, if you can supply that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  That average rate would be around 28 

cents per kilometre. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m surprised 

that it’s so low. I believe that as MLAs we receive something in 

the neighbourhood of 30 cents per kilometre for travel  

allowance. Is our rate higher than the rate that would be paid to 

DMs? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well our rate, Mr. Member, is 28.38 cents. 

The federal rate is 30 cents. So if the current rate that’s being 

paid out to MLAs is, as you’re suggesting, is 30 cents per 

kilometre, then it would be greater then than the current 

personal mileage rate that we’re paying out to our deputy 

ministers. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s my 

understanding that rates that MLAs can charge is the same as 

what the province’s civil servants can charge. And I do believe 

that I saw something recently that was 30 cents, 30.1 or 

something like that. So perhaps the rates have changed, but we 

can check into that. Certainly that’s not a problem. 

 

What I do have a concern about though, Mr. Minister, is the fact 

that we have CVA vehicles going to basically the same type of 

activities, either the use by the minister or the use by the deputy 

minister, and I see no reason why there should be two separate 

sets of rules for both of those groups. I believe that if the deputy 

ministers and the heads of departments have the ability to make 

the decision as to whether or not they want to take a CVA 

vehicle or whether they want to be able to charge personal 

mileage on their own vehicle or a vehicle that they’re leasing 

personally, I think then that the cabinet ministers and other 

MLAs that would be in the same position should have that same 

option. 

 

If in turn the option for ministers, Leader of the Official 

Opposition, is that they have a CVA vehicle assigned to them, 

they will not be paid any further travel expenses over and above 

that incurred to operate that CVA vehicle, then deputy ministers 

and heads of the departments should have the same 

requirement. You have a CVA vehicle assigned to you. If you 

do not wish to drive that vehicle because for some reason you 

don’t like it, you can take your own vehicle, but you’re at your 

own hock. I believe that the treatment should be the same for 

both groups without any special differentiations between the 

two of them. 

 

And that’s why I think it’s important, Mr. Minister, to 

determine what the cost is for those deputy ministers that do not 

wish to take CVA vehicles, to determine whether or not it is 

perhaps less expensive for them to charge mileage, perhaps 

because they do not do a lot of travelling. And that’s why those 

numbers are important. But on the general surface of it, Mr. 

Minister, I believe that the policy should be the same for both. 

 

Because perhaps in some cases a minister may not do a lot of 

travelling and therefore not incur a large amount of expense for 

his CVA vehicle. Perhaps his travelling is done through other 

mechanisms such as air travel, or perhaps he can travel with 

another minister. So I think it’s important that those costs be 

looked at, but in general that both groups be treated in exactly 

the same manner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I think that, to the member, when you take  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2361 

a look at . . . first of all I would think that cabinet ministers, I 

would suggest to you, do a great deal of travelling and would 

use their CVA vehicles a tremendous amount. And as a result of 

that it would be based on the policy that we have established for 

use of CVA vehicles rate, would be certainly cheaper in my 

opinion to be using the CVA pool, by a long way, than to be 

paying individuals for the use of their own private vehicles. 

 

And I think that when we examine those individuals who in fact 

are using their own vehicles and are being remunerated in that 

way, what we’ll find is that likely those individuals are not 

travelling a great deal. And so the decision, by and large I 

expect, was made on the basis that they would not then be tying 

up the CVA vehicle. 

 

And that’s an important issue for us, considering that we have a 

significant number of cars in the fleet and would be looking 

then at suggesting that those people are not using their vehicles 

to a great degree. And that’s probably why we have them on a 

personal rate. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  For those DMs or heads of departments 

that are on a personal mileage rate, is there a maximum then 

that they can charge, after which point the next fiscal year they 

would move to a CVA vehicle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  What we do on a regular basis, of course, 

is that we would track all of the mileage, all the kilometres that 

each of the vehicles that are in the CVA pool and those that are 

under personal contract . . . or under personal mileage, would be 

making. And of course I believe that that number right now is 

somewhere around 25,000 kilometres. 

 

That would sort of be our . . . And that would be our benchmark 

in terms of making a determination as to whether or not 

somebody in fact should be using a CVA vehicle or whether or 

not that particular individual would be paid the personal 

mileage for using their own car. 

 

So we do in fact have that benchmark that we apply across the 

piece in helping us make that kind of determination. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Therefore, Mr. Minister, if one of the 

deputy ministers or heads of departments who are not using a 

CVA vehicle were to exceed that 25,000 kilometre limit, they 

would then be transferred over to a CVA vehicle. Or would 

they still have that option of utilizing their own personal vehicle 

and charging mileage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Certainly what we would do is exactly 

what the member is suggesting here, is that through SPMC we 

would be advising the department that they have a vehicle that 

in fact exceeds the 25,000 kilometre level. What we would be 

then doing is making that recommendation through the 

Treasury Board process, and then that individual department 

then would deal with the assignment as we’ve spoken about 

tonight as to whether or not the department then would be 

issuing a CVA vehicle to that particular individual, or whether 

they would continue to remain on the personal mileage 

agreement that they might have had. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  If a DM or head of department exceeded 

the 25,000 kilometre limit, you said we would recommend that 

they move from personal mileage to CVA vehicle. What 

happens if the DM or the head of department refuses to take a 

CVA vehicle and insists on remaining on the personal mileage? 

Can you force them to take the CVA vehicle? Or can you say, 

we will pay you up to the 25,000 kilometre rate and that’s it, 

you’re done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said earlier to the 

member, that really the decision regarding whether or not a 

particular vehicle . . . or in this case a deputy minister uses his 

own vehicle or whether or not he takes on a CVA vehicle, that 

determination is really made by the individual department for 

which that person is an employee. Saskatchewan Property 

Management has no mechanism really within its purview to 

provide the enforcement, as you’re suggesting, if that were to 

exceed over and above the 25,000 kilometre level for us then to 

automatically make that kind of an adjustment where this 

person would then take on the use of a CVA vehicle. 

 

What we would do however, is that through the budget process, 

on an annual basis we would be providing that information then 

as it respects that particular department, that particular vehicle, 

and as they’re reviewing their process, that particular item then 

would be flagged. I think what’s important to recognize here 

though, is that you may have different levels of activity by an 

individual through a particular term in their employ, where in a 

given year you may have somebody who may be significantly 

. . . uses significantly less than the 25,000 kilometres. Because 

of their particular responsibilities it may not take them outside 

of the central location as often. 

 

And then you may have another instance where you have the 

same individual involved in a broader process in terms of 

delivery of department programs, who may in the second year 

of their contractual agreement be far more busy in their 

responsibilities, if I might use that. 

 

So it would be . . . I think it would be difficult, I think, to make 

that decision one year over another. You might want to look at 

that over a broader period of time. So if you looked at a 

three-year period or four-year period and looked at what 

activity a particular deputy minister might be involved in in 

terms of activity and travel, it may be easier to make that kind 

of determination. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. With the 

information that we have received from you and will receive 

from you, it’ll give us the opportunity to ask the various 

departments as to what’s happening with their own DMs and 

what it’s costing them for mileage, if any of them are on the 

personal mileage option that is available. But I still disagree 

with the basic thrust of it, that there should be two separate 

criteria in place, one for the ministers and one for the DMs. 

 

I’d like to move on to some other areas, Mr. Minister. These are 

related to global questions that we asked you to supply us with 

the answers for. These are the questions for which we failed to 

find the answers within the information that you provided. Now 

the questions that I have relate in general to all of the globals  

  



2362  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

for the departments, so your particular department may have 

answered this question, and if so you can indicate that. 

 

But I wonder if you can give us the information detailing the 

educational leave and professional development programs 

within your department, and state the purpose for each one of 

those. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  To the extent that that information is not 

part of the information package that we submitted to the 

member, we can provide that for him at another occasion 

because we don’t have that with us at this particular point in 

time. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you 

would also please provide the information related to that 

question as to whether or not the department or the individual 

paid for that educational leave or professional development 

program. And if it was paid for by the department, please state 

the cost; and if paid for by the individual please estimate the 

cost to the department of the individual’s absence from work. 

Can you do that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We could provide all of that information 

for the member that he’s asking. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Can you give 

me the total payments to RRSPs (registered retirement savings 

plan) and other contract benefits provided to all employees that 

are outside the benefits provided through the Public Employees 

Benefit Agency. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We don’t believe that we had any, Mr. 

Member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I’m glad that you don’t believe 

you have. I wonder if you could check and let me know if you 

can confirm that you did not have any. Please list and detail the 

cost of club memberships, season tickets, etc., held by the 

department and detail the costs of all other entertainment 

expenses incurred by the department. 

 

(2045) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We can provide that information to the 

member. We don’t have any particular . . . other than 

memberships that we might have to engineering associations or 

architectural associations. We don’t have season tickets to the 

Saskatchewan Roughrider games or anything of that nature, if 

that’s what the member is suggesting. We don’t have any of 

those. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It might even 

be season tickets to the Globe Theatre. I don’t know. That’s 

why we want to know. We’re asking the question. 

 

Can you please detail any leaves or secondments of the 

department employees for charitable or other volunteer events 

and state whether these leaves were paid or unpaid, and if paid, 

estimate the cost to the department for each such leave and give 

the totals, please. 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  The only one that my officials can think 

of, that sort of comes to mind, is one that . . . where we had 

someone go to and do some work for the United Way. But what 

we’ll do is undertake to provide the member with any additional 

ones that we might have. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you would 

also detail the costs associated with that too, please. 

 

This question could be a large one dealing with SPMC because 

I believe you deal with the credit cards for every CVA vehicle. 

Therefore I’m not going to ask the question as it’s written here, 

but can you give us any details on any staff which have access 

to any credit cards for the department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  There would be, Mr. Member, no credit 

cards that would be accessible to any of our staff other than the 

CVA travel cards that we would have. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. For each 

terminated employee, please answer whether or not the 

individual has been relocated to another job within government 

or the Crown sector; and if so, to which position would this be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Could I just ask the member if he would 

provide us over what . . . in what year are you asking us to 

provide that information? Is it ’95-96? ’95-96. 

 

We have no employees in the year ’95-96 that were dismissed, 

that we have any record of, but we have a number of casual 

leaves that I think we provided, certainly to the official 

opposition, and I hope that members of the third party have that 

as well. And so we would be listing that. I think you would 

have that information. I think we provided that. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Were any of 

these temporary employees provided a severance package? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  There weren’t any where severance was 

provided. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you could detail all the equipment used by your office, 

including the CVA vehicles, computers, computer-related 

hardware, facsimile machines, cellular telephone, software. And 

if acquired within the last fiscal year, please provide the details 

of cost, purpose, source of funds such as MLA allowances, 

legislative office allowances, department allowances, source of 

the equipment, and whether or not the purchase was tendered. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We’ll need to, Mr. Chairman, provide that 

information to the member as it relates to cellular phones and 

fax machines and all of those things. I believe that in our 

submission what we did provide is we provided the computer 

hardware, software, that we had purchased, and have done that 

in a fairly detailed fashion. But we don’t have that other 

information attached, so it will require to provide that for the 

member then. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you would 

also provide the source that the funds came from to pay for  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

those. 

 

I wonder if you could also provide any details on all credit 

cards, gas cards, phone cards, or other credit services held by 

the minister’s office? And please state which staff members 

have access to those services and how those charges for those 

services are paid. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We have no general credit cards, as I’ve 

indicated earlier. What we do have of course is a calling card 

and certainly . . . telephone calling card, and we can certainly 

provide that to you. And you’re just asking, I expect, as it 

relates to my office? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Certainly. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Again the 

question dealing with educational leave and professional 

development, but in this time dealing strictly with your staff. I 

wonder if you can provide the same information as for your 

department, that being whether the leave was . . . what the leave 

was for, whether it was paid or unpaid, whether the costs were 

paid for by your office allowance or whether it was paid for by 

the individual. And if paid for by the individual, what cost to 

the department or to your office for having that person absent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We can provide that information for the 

member. I don’t think that there’s any that . . . certainly in the 

six months that I’ve been responsible for the corporation, there 

hasn’t been any. But we can provide that for the member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you can also provide us with the information dealing with any 

terminations within your office staff and whether or not any of 

these individuals have been rehired within government or 

within the Crown sector; and if so, what is the name of the new 

position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We can provide that for the member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you. That will include the name 

of the new position? You’re able to provide that, are you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We can provide that. We can provide that 

for the member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for being so 

cooperative. 

 

I wonder if you can also provide then a list of payments for 

RRSPs or other benefits outside the Public Employees Benefits 

Agency that are extended to the minister’s staff. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  There aren’t any that are paid. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Are there any contract employees within 

the department, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We would have four personal services 

contracts. And what they would be is, they would be executive 

drivers utilized by SPMC. The folks really, their job is to 

transport . . . they’re really an aide-de-camp and so they drive 

the Lieutenant Governor’s vehicle is really what their task is  

here. And there are four folks who we would have on contract. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If one of 

these, or all four of them perhaps, were to cease employment, 

their contracts would run out. What would happen with any 

equipment that had been leased for them, such as cellular 

telephones, or a vehicle perhaps? Any provisions made for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  That equipment would obviously come 

back to Saskatchewan Property Management. It would either be 

reassigned or it would be disposed of in the normal practice that 

Saskatchewan Property Management uses to dispose of its 

assets. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you could provide a list of all charitable or other donations 

given by the department in the last fiscal year, indicating 

whether the funds were given as a straight donation, as a 

sponsorship to an individual participant, as a consideration for 

sponsor-type advertising, as services, prizes, or goods in kind 

provided to the event, or in some other way. Please provide the 

details for such, if you have any. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We don’t provide any charitable 

donations, any money for charitable donations. What we will, 

though, examine is whether or not we have provided any goods 

in kind, and we can provide that for the member. We don’t have 

that with us at this point. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you could provide a list of all communication staff or services 

used by the department, including complete staff of the 

department’s communications, community relations, media 

relations, and/or public relations division, freelance or contract 

writers, speech writers or other public relations or advertising 

consultants, any media monitoring services, and if reasonable, 

give salaries for each position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We provided a fair amount of information 

as it relates to the communication expenditures and advertising 

expenditures at Saskatchewan Property Management in our 

package. The member is asking for a broader package, and 

certainly what we can do is we can provide that information to 

the member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you. Within that package, if you 

would indicate whether or not these communications services 

are provided directly to your office or whether they’re directly 

to the department. 

 

I believe you covered all of the computer purchases within your 

release. 

 

I wonder if you can give us the detail for the minister’s office 

travel during the past year, including dates, destinations, 

purposes, persons accompanying the minister, mode of travel, 

cost of travel accommodations and other expenses, and the 

travel agency used? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We have all that information. We provided 

. . . we believe we provided some of that in the past. Certainly  

  



2364  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

what we can do is we can provide it again for the member. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  I wonder if you could provide a list of 

all the fees and charges your department is authorized to levy; 

in particular, list any new fees added in the past year. For 

existing charges, please detail any increases or decreases, state 

the purpose of each fee, and state if the fee is paid to the 

Consolidated Fund or to some other source. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  We can provide the member with the rate 

adjustments and the fees adjustments as they apply to what 

they’ll be across government in 1996-97, and we can do that in 

some detail. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you could provide a list of all legal actions in which your 

department is involved, either as a plaintiff or as a defendant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Yes, we can provide that as well. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I go 

back to earlier when there was the amount of $44.7 million 

mentioned as far as leasing accommodations was concerned. 

When that was said quickly, it didn’t seem like an awful lot. In 

thinking about it, that is considerable. 

 

My question: in those events, in those cases, when departments 

are considering the closure of offices such as Crop Insurance 

offices, for example, as the most recent example, where there 

have been leases entered into, long-term leases, is there any 

consultation with your office with respect to the impact on 

shutting down those offices with respect to these long-term 

leases and the costs that will be involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  It would be fair to assume, as the member 

has, that when there are rationalizations that are being made 

regarding space across the province, of which the departments 

determine really what the space utilization is, that there is then 

extensive consultation between Saskatchewan Property 

Management and that department, from a couple of points of 

view. 

 

One is to assist in what future utilization of that particular space 

might be. And of course the charge or the cost to the individual 

department, the billing is done through Saskatchewan Property 

Management, so we would be involved in that process, in 

aiding to determine what future utilization that space might be. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Just one as an 

example, and that’s the building . . . and you’d mentioned some 

of the leases go till 1999 and some to the year 2001. The one 

facility I’m thinking of is in Kamsack. The Bricore Building, I 

believe, the lease being $104,000 a year until 2001. What sort 

of measures or what attempts or efforts do you make, if the 

building remains unutilized to, I don’t know, get out of the 

lease, to buy out of the lease, or do something other than pay 

half a million dollars for a vacant building? 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I had indicated to the member from  

Athabasca that we have a number of leases across the province 

that are expiring at different anniversary dates. And certainly all 

of those agreements were entered into prior to our 

administration taking on the responsibility of managing 

government. 

 

So a number of those long-term leases are ones that certainly 

through the term of this administration, we have tried to look at 

in terms of either moving away from or changing some of the 

arrangements that are on them. Some we’ve been successful in 

doing. I think over the last several years we’ve been able to 

reduce the number of leases, those long-term leases that we talk 

about, by about 35. So there has been an extensive amount of 

work that’s gone into reducing some of those leases, and 

hopefully in this case saving the Saskatchewan taxpayer some 

money. 

 

The issue that the member raises, particular around the Bricore 

Building in Kamsack, of course was the New Careers facility. 

And here is an example that the member from Athabasca talked 

about earlier, and that is that it’s an excellent kind of facility but 

it’s really located in the wrong place. A fair bit of investment in 

terms of the asset, and at this point in time Saskatchewan 

Property Management has worked very hard at trying to find 

other opportunities for the facility. We just haven’t been able to 

achieve that kind of success to this particular point in time. Not 

that we haven’t had some interest. We’ve had some interest 

from some of the folks in the area; have had some discussions 

with a couple of groups who’ve expressed some interest in the 

facility. 

 

As you well know, it’s an excellent facility for a particular kind 

of use. The question, of course, is to find the appropriate 

individual who might want to take it on and use it for the kinds 

of needs that they might have, either in the community or 

within the surrounding area. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would like to thank 

you, I would like to thank your officials. I know how tough it is 

on civil servants to ensure that the t’s are crossed and the i’s are 

dotted and the answers are given and supplied in order that the 

people of this province may take comfort in the fact that there 

are people who astutely look after the affairs of governing and 

the monies which we’re very, very short of, and that they’re 

spent wisely. I thank you. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I 

would like to thank the minister and his officials for coming in 

this evening and answering the questions, and I look forward to 

their cooperation in their responses in the near future. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Chairman, I too want to thank the 

members of the opposition for their questions and for certainly 

providing a great deal of work for my officials over the next 

couple of weeks. I know that they have been looking for things 

to do, and by commending them for the excellent work that 

they’ve done, you’ve now added probably another three or four 

weeks of work to their life. 

 

So I want to thank too the officials from Saskatchewan Property  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

Management for all of their effort and work. You’re certainly 

correct that in order to prepare for the session and certainly for 

the legislature and to get all of this information in a format that 

we can all understand, in particular this Assembly, it takes a 

great deal of hard work and commitment. And I too want to join 

with you in thanking my officials. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Vote 53 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

The Chair:  We’ll start by having the minister introduce his 

official. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I 

would like to introduce my deputy, Ray Clayton, Energy and 

Mines. 

 

Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Item 5 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  I wonder if I could ask some questions, 

please, dealing with oil and gas services. Now, Mr. Minister, 

there has been quite a bit of activity within the oil and gas 

sector in this province over the last period of time but that area 

seems to have dropped off a little bit in the past. 

 

I wonder if you could give us some indication as to what has 

been happening within the last fiscal year within the oil and gas 

industry and what you project to be happening in the future. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess I 

would want to say to the member that it has been, for the 

province, some very good years. As the member will know, 

1994-95 produced some of . . . well I guess a record year in this 

province for bonus bids, somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

$200 million. 

 

With respect to drilling, ‘95-96 was a very good year as well in 

that it was about, I guess, the highest that we had over a 10-year 

period in terms of drilling activity. So that was very positive in 

terms of what was happening on the oil side of the oil and gas 

industry. 

 

(2115) 

 

As the member will know, natural gas prices are low. So the 

activity on the natural gas side, as it is market driven the same 

as oil is to some degree, is not as busy as we would like to see it 

but hopefully that will improve. 

 

But I say . . . I think it’s fair to say that overall the oil and gas 

industry has been very healthy in Saskatchewan in the last few 

years. We know that there is confidence from industry at our 

meetings with them. They continue to show interest by land 

purchases and we are expecting, over the long haul, that we will  

have a very healthy oil and gas industry in the province. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The oil and 

gas industry in this province is spread mainly throughout three 

areas of the province: the south-east, the south-west, and the 

west-central. I wonder if you could give a breakdown as to 

where the revenues generated come from and in what 

proportion from each of those three sectors. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  As the member will know, we keep 

fairly detailed records. I can say that it’s not broken down on a 

regional basis. Certainly we break the activity down in terms of 

what the companies are doing. We know what drilling activity 

is there; we will know what they pay in revenues. Some of them 

are working in more than one area of the province. 

 

And I think it’s fair to say that we could, if required, we could 

put together a breakdown in three regions. We haven’t got them 

broken down geographically so we’d have to do that and then 

try and compile all of the information and put it into the three 

areas. And as, you know, if the member insists, we could 

certainly work on that. I would, you know, we would certainly 

ask the officials to do that. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, I think it’s a number 

that is of interest to all areas within the oil production area 

because people look at the costs associated within their area for 

the production and generation of oil, for the drilling, for the 

production and for the transportation, and they see their areas 

bearing certain costs such as the costs for roads, the need to 

continually upgrade them, the deterioration of the highway 

structure. And people look at that; they see the large amount of 

oil industry activity, they see the oil traffic, they hear about the 

oil revenues being generated, and yet they see very little return 

from that oil industry to upkeep that infrastructure that is 

providing the opportunities for the oil industry. 

 

So I think it’s important that people have the opportunity to see 

and understand what kind of revenues are being generated for 

the government within their own geographic area. 

 

I represent the south-east corner. It mainly produces light or 

medium crudes  not a lot of gas, although there is some. So 

people see the oil trucks hauling the rigs which tear up the 

roads, they see the oil tankers hauling the oil from the 

production site to a gathering centre, then they see it hauled 

from that gathering centre to the main shipping points. And they 

see the costs associated with that but they don’t see the 

revenues being returned to them. So I think it’s important, Mr. 

Minister, if you could give some indication at least, as to what 

kind of revenues you are looking at from each of the three basic 

geographic regions in the production of oil and gas for those 

areas. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well we will certainly attempt to 

do that. And I guess I would just like to respond that certainly 

in these regions this activity creates some incremental costs in 

terms of road maintenance and probably a better quality of road 

required because of some of the heavy equipment that travels 

over it. 

 

  



2366  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

But I would want to say to the member as well, that there is an 

awful lot of return to the different regions of this province with 

respect to people who own homes and who work within the 

industry and whose jobs are dependent on the oil and gas sector. 

I would want to say that the companies spend an awful lot of 

money on road maintenance agreements with regional 

governments, with municipal governments. So quite clearly, 

there’s some benefit in that regard. 

 

And I think it’s also fair to say that the assessment in some 

areas, the assessment on the oil and gas sector, amounts for a 

very large percentage of the revenue that goes to the 

municipalities to deliver the kinds of services that they do. 

 

So I think it’s fair to say that it may be helpful to do a 

cost/benefit analysis for some of these regions with respect to 

the amount of revenue that’s generated by local government and 

by local communities at the same time that we look at the 

amount of revenue that’s generated for the provincial 

government. Because I think with respect to the oil and gas 

sector, the activity that goes on there makes both local 

government winners and the province winners. And I think if 

we were to see this industry dry up and wither away, the impact 

on both the province and on the local governments would be 

devastating. 

 

So I think what I will attempt to do is work with Municipal 

Government to put together some numbers in terms of the 

benefits to local government, the benefits to the province, 

because certainly the oil and gas sector plays an awful large part 

in our revenue stream, both at a local and a provincial level. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, the oil 

and gas industry in Saskatchewan is a very, very important 

industry. It provides a lot of employment opportunities within 

the areas. It certainly does raise the asset base of most of the 

municipalities in which it’s present. 

 

The raising of that asset base allows the RMs (rural 

municipality) to then tax that property, with which they 

maintain the municipal roads. And the municipal roads in most 

of the oil producing areas, gas producing areas, are in 

reasonable shape and repair. It’s when we look at the monies 

being collected by the provincial government  in these 

estimates, $53 million in revenues and $362.9 million in oil  

that the questions arise as to what is the Government of 

Saskatchewan returning to the production areas for the 

infrastructure costs that are associated with that. 

 

When we look at a number of highways throughout the 

production area . . . when I look at 47 Highway running north 

from Estevan, when I look at 361 Highway running between the 

Manitoba border and 47 Highway through Lampman, when I 

look at a number of these roads, I see provincial highways that 

are in terrible repair and yet which the oil traffic is using to a 

very, very large extent. There’s a large volume of dollars being 

generated along those corridors, those pathways, and very little 

of that money is being returned to the infrastructure project, 

infrastructure, from the government. And that’s why those 

highways are in such a poor state of repair. 

I would wish that the Minister of Highways would perhaps 

approach yourself and the Minister of Finance with the object to 

returning some of those dollars into those areas to maintain that 

highway infrastructure. But that doesn’t seem to be happening. 

So, Mr. Minister, that’s why I have to ask you: what is 

happening in those areas in relationship to the dollars being 

generated for the provincial government? 

 

Those numbers exclude the money that is being generated in 

income taxes, that excludes the money being generated from 

E&H (education and health) tax. It excludes the property taxes 

collected by the RMs and the municipalities on the properties 

owned by the oil companies or from their employees. It even 

excludes the money being generated as income by those oil 

employees. This is strictly the money collected by the 

provincial government directly from the oil and gas industry, 

and very little of that money is being returned to the areas 

where that production is generated and where the costs of the 

infrastructure are occurring. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, that’s why I believe the people in those areas 

need to know what kind of dollar figures are being generated 

out of their particular areas and their communities. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say to 

the member in terms of where the revenues go that come to the 

provincial government, let me share just a few examples of 

where the money goes. 

 

First of all I want to say that this money is not returned to the 

people in any particular area. It’s the policy of this government, 

as has been the case with previous governments, is that this is a 

provincial resource owned by the people of Saskatchewan, not 

any particular corner or sector of the province. 

 

The money goes into the Consolidated Fund, which is one big 

pot. It’s the same pot that forestry stumpage rates go into. It’s 

the same pot that uranium revenue goes into. It’s the same pot 

that potash revenue that the provincial government generates on 

royalties and taxation goes into. It’s one big pot. 

 

And how does it get back to the communities? Well schools, 

hospitals, transfer payments to municipal governments, social 

services, those kinds of programs. And one expenditure that I 

would want to say to the member I wish we didn’t have to 

expend, is around $850 million in interest which doesn’t 

unfortunately go to the people of Saskatchewan, but in fact goes 

to bankers in Hong Kong and Zürich and other places around 

the world. 

 

We spend about . . . we have a provincial debt of in the 

neighbourhood of $14 billion and that debt needs to be serviced. 

It’s our intention in this term of government to work with the 

people of Saskatchewan to, where we can and when we can, 

decrease that provincial debt so that we’re not paying the kind 

of money in interest payments that we are on an annual basis. 

 

So you ask me what we do with that money. Is it taken from 

those communities? I don’t think it’s taken from those 

communities. I think it’s a resource that’s owned by the people  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

of Saskatchewan, all of us, all million-plus of us. The 

population, as it grows, all of us, will share in the revenues and 

we’re going to use it to build highways, and we’re going to use 

to build schools, and we’re going to use it to build hospitals, 

and we’re going to use it to fund the kinds of programs, 

post-secondary programs, that educate and train our people so 

that they can go into the workforce and compete with people 

around the world. So that’s where that money goes. 

 

And I just say to the member, our policy is that it’s a resource 

owned by all of the people, and all of the people of the province 

share in it. Local governments have assessments on the oil and 

gas sector in their areas. They generate revenue through road 

maintenance agreements with the companies. And I think 

because of the agreements and the flexibility that they have, the 

tax tools they have, they’ve done very well by the revenue 

that’s generated as a result of the activity in the oil and gas 

sector. 

 

It’s our job as a provincial government to ensure that we’ve got 

an environment where these investors will come in and develop 

technology, and use existing technology, to harvest that 

resource so that all the people of Saskatchewan can share in it, 

and that’s the position we take, and that’s how we have set our 

royalty and taxation structure. That’s how we funnel money 

back to the communities, all of the people in the province, 

whether you live in an area where there’s oil and gas or whether 

you don’t. You share in that resource because it’s owned by all 

of us, the people of the province. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The 

people in the area don’t mind sharing the wealth of the 

resources within their area, as the other people living across the 

rest of the province are prepared to share their wealth. 

 

The problem arises though when the creation of that wealth 

incurs some infrastructure costs and those costs are not 

recognized as being borne by the people within that very small 

locale. And that’s where the problem arises, Mr. Minister, and 

while you may not want to recognize that, the people within 

that locale have to live with it every day when they drive up and 

down those roads that need to be repaired, that are being injured 

and broken down because of the very, very heavy traffic being 

generated on those roads by the very resource that generates 

such a large amount of money for this province. 

 

You talk about the income from, say, stumpage in northern 

Saskatchewan. But when a forestry company needs a road to be 

built into an area, the provincial government helps with that. 

They provide some of the resource, some of the money from the 

resource, to build those roads. And yet when that occurs within 

the oil and gas industry, that money either comes from the local 

municipality, it comes from the oil industry itself, and it seems 

that it no longer comes from the provincial department, the 

Consolidated Fund, through the Department of Highways, to 

support the infrastructure that’s in place there. 

 

You talked about foreign debt as taking up a large amount of 

interest. Well, Mr. Minister, I’d like to remind you that a very 

large amount of that foreign debt was incurred by your 

government from 1973-74 to 1982. And now the debt in this  

province, you say, is $14 billion. A significant amount of that 

money is monies that were transferred from the Crown sector 

into the Consolidated Fund to make the Consolidated Fund debt 

look so much larger in 1991. That debt now, the number 14 

billion that you’re counting, if you used the exact same method 

of arriving at that number, according to the Provincial Auditor, 

is now at 21 to $22 billion. I’ll accept your number of 14 billion 

in 1991, but that has grown by about $7 billion since that point 

in time, which when I look back over the history of debt in this 

province, under the previous administration that debt grew by 

about approximately $1 billion a year. Since that point in time it 

has been, since 1991, it has been growing at an even faster rate 

under your government. 

 

(2130) 

 

So, Mr. Minister, we can go back and rehash ancient history on 

dealing with the debt if you want to, and I’m certainly prepared 

to do that. But when it comes to talking about who purchased 

the foreign debt, I think we only have to look at your previous 

administration, in particular things like purchasing of potash 

mines, holes in the ground for $600 million borrowed at 16-plus 

per cent in New York to pay for those, Mr. Minister. 

 

So we can certainly talk about those if you want to. But what I 

would prefer to talk about is why the resource income being 

generated in this province is not being, in small part, returned 

into those areas where it is being generated to maintain the 

infrastructure of this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I wasn’t going 

to get into this and I may not be wise to be getting into this, but 

the member and I will disagree and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan have made quite clear the fact that they disagree 

with the member’s argument. And they’re well aware of where 

the provincial debt came from, they’re well aware of how it 

came. They can point to many examples, as I can this evening, 

but I’m not going to do that, Mr. Chair. 

 

The people have spoken in 1991, they spoke again in 1996, and 

indicated that they wanted no more of what they had in the 

1980s. So there’s a good understanding in this province as to 

where the debt came from. The fact is that we’re spending $850 

million on interest that many of us wish weren’t there. 

 

You know, I recall and I’ve said it in this House before, Mr. 

Chairman, we were putting together the Department of Natural 

Resources budget just shortly after I was sworn in as a member 

of cabinet. And I think, and I can’t recall the exact figure, but I 

think it was somewhere in the neighbourhood of $80 million on 

an annual basis. And I tried to put that in the context of some of 

the taxes that the people of Saskatchewan are paying. And one 

percentage point of provincial sales tax generates about $80 

million worth of revenue. 

 

And then I tried to put it into the context of what we were 

spending on interest payments, roughly. And when I look at this 

year what we’re spending, that year’s Department of Natural 

Resources could have been funded 10 times for what we’re 

spending in interest. So I’m not going to debate with the 

member where the provincial debt came from. That’s a public  

  



2368  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

record. The people have spoken on that. I think we’ll let that 

lay. 

 

But I just want to say to the member that we can rehash some of 

the politics of the past, but I think they are of the past. What we 

as a provincial government are trying to do is deal with the 

circumstances that we face now. The fact is that right now our 

third biggest expenditure is interest on the public debt. 

Unfortunately that is something that won’t go away, which 

precludes expenditures on other items. 

 

Now if we had that money, certainly we might be in a better 

position to spend more money on our transportation system in 

this province. I can tell you that we’re well aware of the fact 

that there is pressure on it from oil and gas and the activity 

that’s out there, that we haven’t seen for an awful lot of time. 

More activity is going to create more pressure, but it also 

creates more opportunities for local governments to generate 

revenue. I would also want to say with respect to no money 

coming back for the road system, there is a little system called 

revenue-sharing grants that is still in place that helps to assist 

with local roads, and the member is well aware of that. 

 

And so I want to say, Mr. Chairman, that in spite of the fiscal 

constraints that this government is under, I think we’ve done an 

admirable job of trying to contain the provincial debt from 

growing but at the same time deliver services. 

 

Now the member may want to play politics with this particular 

issue, but I want to say that I think there are tax tools available 

to local governments. We’re going through a reassessment and 

a process of determining how local governments interact with 

the oil and gas sector in this new assessment, and I think it’s 

fair to say that there will be some tax tools that local 

governments can use. And I think they’re going to be fair, both 

for the oil and gas sector and for local government. 

 

What I don’t believe any of us want to see is a situation where 

the oil and gas sector is taxed out of this province. We’ve been 

attempting to set the provincial royalty rates and the taxation 

structure where we can attract investment to this province. And 

I think it’s fair to say that municipal governments understand 

that that’s the goal, because job opportunities for people in the 

south-west and the south-east and the north-west part of this 

province creates an awful lot of activity. It creates homes being 

bought and it creates people paying local taxes in their 

communities and in their towns. And I think these are all very 

tangible benefits as a result of this industry. 

 

So all I can say to the member, he may not agree with the 

amount of . . . and where we expend our money. You might 

think that there should be maybe less for health and there 

maybe should be less for education and more for the highway 

system. But I say to the member, Mr. Chairman, we’re dealing 

with some very dramatic changes in this province. His federal 

counterparts in the 1980s in Ottawa, the Mulroney 

administration, was working long and hard to get rid of the 

freight subsidy in this province. And that was one of the goals. 

And by golly, with the help of the Liberals, the now federal 

government, they achieved that. 

 

So now you’ve got a whole change in terms of the demand of 

the transportation system in this province and no one can deny 

that. There’s going to be a lot more larger vehicles transporting 

grain, not through the rail system but over our road system. 

That’s going to mean a lot of pressure and it’s going to mean a 

lot of change. The increased activity in the oil and gas sector 

has put a lot of pressure on our roads and we understand that. 

 

But you’ve got to admit that there are some tangible benefits to 

this kind of activity in the oil and gas sector. You’ve also got to 

admit that it’s not the oil and gas sector alone that’s putting 

pressure on the road system. All you’ve got to do is look at the 

semis driving down the road full of grain with pups behind 

them, with tractors, with tankers behind them, and you’ve got to 

know that it’s going to put pressure on the system. 

 

So all I say to the member is that I believe the oil and gas sector 

in this province has been, for the most part, fair in their dealings 

with municipal governments. They sit down and negotiate road 

agreements. I think that they’ve played a fairly major part in 

terms of the assessment in some of the RMs, and I would 

suggest to you that some of the RMs would not have the 

infrastructure if it weren’t for the oil and gas sector. And I say 

to the member that we’re going to continue to work both with 

the industry and with local government to find an agreeable 

arrangement. And I think part of that is going to be done 

through the new assessment in 1997. 

 

So the commitment I have given the member tonight is that we 

will attempt to break the revenue, the provincial revenue, down 

by region, and that we’ll attempt to do. But I also say to the 

member that in order for an understanding of the impact on both 

the provincial government of this industry, and local 

government, I would like to be able to sit down and work with 

Municipal Government. And I’m going to attempt to do that to 

be able to describe some of the benefits for local government in 

terms of having this activity in their areas as well. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You’re 

certainly trying to do a good job of deflecting the particular 

questions that I had for you in as to how they relate to the 

expenditures of the provincial government. Only in your 

statements did we get talking about municipal governments and 

assessments and the use of municipal property tax base to repair 

roads and provide roads within the municipalities. 

 

All of those arguments, Mr. Minister, are valid. The RMs do tax 

a great deal of the oil property, in fact all of it, generate a large 

amount of income for that with which they provide services to 

their electorate within their areas, that is, roads for farmers, 

roads for the oil industry, roads for people who are hauling 

grain through their areas. They tax all of those areas, Mr. 

Minister, but in all that discussion in no place does the monies 

generated by oil and gas revenue within this province, collected 

by the provincial government, is that dealt with. Because I’m 

not talking about the municipal roads; I’m talking about the 

provincial highway structure which you seem to wish to avoid 

dealing with. Because that’s where the problem lies. 

 

The municipalities are doing a very good job at maintaining 

their own roads. Yes, at times there is a few rocks on the road  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

 particularly in a wet spring like this spring and last spring  

frost boils come out and the RMs work very diligently to repair 

those circumstances and to maintain the roads as well as they 

can. Unfortunately it’s difficult to say the same thing about the 

provincial government and their highway structure, and that’s 

where the problem lies, Mr. Minister. 

 

Question for you though in these figures within the Estimates 

book on dealing with the oil and gas revenues. Do those 

revenue numbers include land sales? Do they include drilling 

licences and the sale of leases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes they do. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I 

wonder if you could give us a breakdown then on those figures 

 which are royalties, which are lease sales, and which are 

drilling licences? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I don’t have a lot of 

detail with me tonight but what I can tell the member, the bonus 

bids  out of the aggregate amount of 362.9 million  bonus 

bids would amount to about 45 million. Other fees, licences, are 

19 million. And the balance would be royalties and freehold. So 

I think what you might want me to do and you can comment on 

this, is we’ll send you a breakdown of that in more detail, and 

we’ll send that to members of the opposition as well. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Dealing with 

the supplementary estimates for ‘95-96, I see under Energy and 

Mines we have a subvote for $7.9 million. I wonder if you’d 

mind explaining what that is, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. To the member 

opposite, the special warrant was required for three different 

areas. An out of court settlement with Scurry in the amount of 

7.2 million. Scurry is an oil company. Placid oil company, an 

out of court settlement of 514,000. And the wind-up of SECDA 

(Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Authority) at a cost of $500,000. We absorbed part of that, part 

of the 500,000 internally, or part of that whole group internally, 

and so the amount then was 7.934 million that the special 

warrant was, and the total requirement was 8.214 million. But I 

believe there was 280,000 achieved through internal savings out 

of that whole total amount. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. This court 

settlement, it involved lands originally known as Farmers 

Mutual or Freehold Oil and Gas? 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told by my 

deputy a little history of this. This goes back to the early 1970s, 

so this was not new news, but it was . . . and the member says 

from the 1950s. It may be. And some of the companies that you 

spoke of were in all likelihood involved in this. 

 

And I know when I originally saw the briefing notes there was a 

fairly comprehensive package even if it, in its brief form, 

Scurry was the company that we ended up finally settling with  

 one of the companies that we finally ended up settling with. 

We took the position that this was an outstanding irritant. And 

after legal advice from our people it was agreed that probably 

the best thing in terms of getting this particular issue off of the 

plate, that an out of court settlement in this amount would be 

reasonable. 

 

We have settled. The company is satisfied that we have made 

the right decision. We within the department are comfortable 

that we made the appropriate decision. It has been, as you 

indicate, maybe from the 1950s, I say from the early ’70s, 

maybe before that. But I think it was high time that we put this 

behind us and got on with doing business. And the warrant is a 

result of that decision. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, the 

history of Farmers Mutual, Freehold Oil and Gas and Scurry 

Rainbow carries a very checkered past in the south-east corner 

of the province. And most people who have any association 

with farmland or the oil patch know the history of that. 

 

Mr. Minister, the settlement of this court case, how does that 

deal with perpetuities that may be in place dealing with lands 

that were also held by Scurry Rainbow or previously by 

Farmers Mutual and Freehold Oil and Gas? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  As I’ve indicated, this has been 

around for a long time and its pretty complicated. I guess what 

this settlement pertains to is only producing lands that were 

held by Scurry in 1974. And I guess maybe what I’m asking for 

is clarification in terms of what you’re attempting to understand 

here. 

 

This out of court settlement just pertains to producing land in 

1974 and an action was launched based on the situation at that 

time. We’ve gone to court and had an out of court settlement to 

satisfy the concerns of both parties. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Does this settlement have any impact on 

land owned by Scurry Rainbow from Farmers Mutual, Freehold 

Oil and Gas, that may not have had production on it at the time, 

in 1974 you’re indicating, at that time, or since that point in 

time? 

 

You had brought forward a piece of legislation in the last 

session to deal with perpetuities. How would that Act, had it 

passed, related to this particular type of land, and how does the 

current perpetuities Act deal with these particular types of 

lands? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Okay, Mr. Chairman, and to the 

member opposite, I am told by the official that the trust 

certificates that were in place remain. There is no impact, no 

effect, on those. The agreements that were reached that led to 

the trust certificate, as far as we know, have not been impacted 

on any action that was taken either through this initiative or 

legislation. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

Therefore anybody who signed an agreement originally with 

Farmers Mutual for 99 years is still held to that agreement and  

  



2370  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

this particular court action would have no impact on it. Is that 

the case? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We aren’t aware that this court 

action would have had any impact on that at all. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How much 

land was involved in this settlement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think what would be helpful, 

and I’ve shared this with members of the opposition previously, 

and I don’t know if I neglected to send a copy to you, but I’ll 

send over an information sheet that will give you a little more 

detailed information with respect to Scurry v. the Crown and 

Placid Oil as well. 

 

We don’t have the, I don’t believe . . . Oh maybe we found it 

here. Oh here it is. I shouldn’t say . . . because I’m not sure that 

we’ve got the amount of land here, but we will send that over to 

you. Okay? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, how was the settlement 

determined, the 7.9 million? Was it determined based on the 

volume of land involved? Was it determined based on the 

volume of production involved? What kind of formula was used 

for the determination of the settlement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I can say to the 

member, I am told by the officials that there was no formula set 

based on the amount of land. Basically what our legal people 

did, working with our officials, is determined what the potential 

for loss may be if, in fact, we weren’t successful  if this 

proceeded through the courts. 

 

And the process in out of court settlements is in a matter of 

negotiations, you know, and we would bargain back and forth 

with the officials representing Scurry and representing Placid 

and come up with something that we felt comfortable with. 

Certainly the potential liability was much more than what we 

settled out of court for in both instances. And so I think on both 

sides, we looked at the risks if one party was going to lose, and 

one was going to win, and what we were able to do through 

negotiations was achieve a figure that both parties were 

comfortable with and that’s how we came to these figures. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. With this 

settlement, what change, what impact, did it have on the lands 

in question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I guess I can do this 

one of two ways. I can send over a more comprehensive, 

detailed outline of the claim and the settlement, and I think 

from this you will have a fairly detailed response as to why we 

settled and I certainly have no difficulty in dealing with this on 

the Scurry Rainbow settlement, and I’ll undertake to have the 

officials make a copy and send that over to you. 

 

It’s very complex. I mean this went through years and years in 

the courts, months and months of negotiations outside of court 

that finally and . . . resulted in a settlement and I will undertake 

to send this across to you. 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that a 

number of people within the area, my area, were waiting with 

bated breath for the results of this court case because it 

impacted on some of their own lands and what was going to 

happen with them. So I have received a number of questions as 

to what impact it was going to have on certain producing lands. 

 

Mr. Minister, the previous minister for Energy and Mines stated 

that the oil and gas boom in Saskatchewan was going to make 

Saskatchewan a have province. Well the Minister of Finance 

later refuted that statement and I’d like to assume that you don’t 

share the former minister’s optimism that oil and gas revenues, 

at the current rate within Saskatchewan, are going to make us a 

have province. 

 

I wonder if you could give us a realistic estimate as to the 

duration of the current oil and gas production, and what your 

estimate is that impact will have on the provincial revenues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I guess I’ll attempt 

to answer this in a number of ways because there are so many 

variables. I guess certainly one of the variables in terms of the 

longevity of the resource is the price and what the market 

demand will be. And one has no way of knowing that; one can 

only guess. 

 

We continue to work with industry to create an environment 

where they will work with us to sustain our known resource. 

There’s a lot of this province that is yet unexplored that I think 

will draw a lot of activity in terms of exploration dollars. And 

so I think what we have been successful in doing is maintaining 

our known reserves, even in spite of the fact that we have been 

producing and shipping and using internally oil and natural gas. 

 

So I think what we have been somewhat successful in is 

expanding the known resource. And a lot of that is done 

because of the amount of investment that has happened in our 

province. 

 

With respect to Saskatchewan’s position as to whether we are a 

have or a have-not province, I think that I agree, and I think all 

the ministers on this side will agree that oil and gas is a very 

integral part of developing our economy and making us a 

self-sustaining province. But there are many other elements. 

There’s revenue from other minerals, from potash, from 

uranium. Certainly the agricultural sector that looks so bright 

right now is part and parcel of helping us to position ourselves 

to where we in fact are perhaps at some point in time a 

contributing partner to assisting other provinces in helping with 

their finances. And I don’t think that that’s something that we 

see today, but I think it’s something that we need to work 

towards. Our resources and our agricultural community give us 

an awful lot of potential. 

 

So I think it’s safe to say that there’s a very bright picture for 

this province, and I’m very much pleased to be part of it and 

very much pleased to be part of a portfolio that adds so much to 

the economy of our province. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. We too are 

optimistic as to the performance of this province. We have  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

perhaps some different visions on how that will be achieved. 

 

I look at the revenue side of the Estimates book and it states 

here natural gas, you’re estimating a revenue of 53 million. In 

1995-96 fiscal year, you had estimated 68 million and realized 

approximately 37 million. The oil and gas industry, you 

estimated in ‘95-96, 348 million and realized 417 million. Your 

estimates this year are 362 million. Now that’s better than 67, 

just almost $70 million greater revenues in the oil industry 

whereas a decrease of approximately 30 million in the gas 

industry. 

 

How close do you believe you’re going to come to your 

estimates for the ‘96-97 fiscal year of 53 million for gas, 362 

million for oil? The price of oil has increased in the last little 

while. It had gone up to approximately $24 West Texas crude. 

But now I noticed today on the news that it’s dropped back to 

just slightly over $20. 

 

So in determining these revenues, Mr. Minister, what volumes 

were you estimating and at what price? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I can say to the 

member that . . . and looking at the estimates, and it’s so 

difficult to determine because the markets are, in particular with 

natural gas, have been very much fluctuating. So I would think 

it’s fair to say that we may be underestimating, looking at 

today’s market prices for oil, underestimating that a bit. And it 

may be that at the end of the year we turn out to be 

overestimating natural gas. 

 

I think it’s fair to say that no one expected the decrease in 

natural gas prices nor did anyone expect that they would be 

sustained at that low a level for the length of time that they 

were. 

 

The officials are just looking up the assumption. We’re 

estimating . . . Yes, the West Texas Intermediate price of 

eighteen forty-four for oil, and so that’s what we based the 

assumption on. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. TransGas, a 

subsidiary of SaskEnergy, has undertaken a $114 million 

expansion of its pipeline. Could you update us on the status of 

this project? 

 

What assurances can you give the public that this expansion 

was indeed warranted and needed in view of the critical nature 

of this particular industry? And do you see any danger in the 

near term of gas shipments reducing to the level where this 

expanded capacity will not be necessary? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think, Mr. Chairman, it’s fair to 

say that there was a lot of due diligence done by the officials 

within TransGas before a decision was made to invest that 

magnitude that’s . . .it was a major project that created a lot of 

work in that area of the province. 

 

But aside from the number of jobs that are created and the  

people that worked on that and the two companies, 

Saskatchewan companies that put together that line, we know 

that there’s a major investment, and over the long haul the 

return on investment should satisfy the shareholders, the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think we’re going through, and as you’ve indicated, we’re 

going through a little bit of a slump in terms of the natural gas 

industry. And there’s a lot of shut-in wells that if the price were 

to increase would, I think, be pushing gas along that line. So I 

think we’re going through a little slump but these are things that 

are factored into any investment. And I think over the long haul 

the people of Saskatchewan can be assured that we will be 

receiving a fair return of investment. 

 

I guess part of what we do is, in terms of the transmission 

facilities of TransGas, we’re there to provide a service. We’re 

there to provide a service to our clients. If the pipeline capacity 

isn’t there, the exploration doesn’t happen. If the exploration 

doesn’t happen, the resource isn’t discovered. If the resource 

isn’t discovered, all of this activity, then there are no jobs for 

folks. 

 

So I guess part of what we are there for is to provide a service 

to the customers, the people who are developing that industry in 

the province. And I think over the long haul this will have an 

opportunity to create not only the jobs during the development 

of the pipeline, but the activity that’s going to happen in the 

patch and in the gas fields as a result of this. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We did 

have some concerns over that particular pipeline as we heard 

that it sat unused for a significant period of time after it had 

completed construction. What is the volumes being moved 

through that? What’s the capacity of that particular pipeline and 

what are the volumes being moved through it at the present 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can’t give you those figures, Mr. 

Chairman. Those would be available through estimates or 

Crown corporations with the officials of TransGas who will 

have those numbers. Energy and Mines isn’t responsible for 

compiling those numbers and I’m sorry I don’t have them with 

me tonight. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. 

Interprovincial Pipe Line has recently experienced some 

problems with the transportation of oil through the province and 

onwards to eastern Canada. In particular, it involves companies 

stating that they have a certain amount of oil to move. They 

contract or they make bids for that amount of space on IPL 

(Interprovincial Pipe Line Co.) and what happens is that they 

don’t have the oil available but it allows them, in times of 

roll-backs where there are quotas being applied to the shipments 

of oil, to maximize their own production at the expense of other 

producers. 

 

Is Saskatchewan Energy and Mines involved in regulating this 

at all? After all, some of this involves federally regulated 

pipelines. Some of it involves provincially regulated pipelines. 

What involvement would your department have in this? 

  



2372  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member 

opposite, this has been a matter of some discussion with the oil 

industry. This is primarily a federal responsibility through the 

National Energy Board. But we have been, and I know the NEB 

(National Energy Board) has been, working with CAPP, the 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, to put in place, I 

guess, some regulations that will deal with this issue, with the 

oil barrels issue. But basically the apportionment would be a 

National Energy Board function and that particular issue would 

be dealt with at a federal level. 

 

But we work with the industry and we work with the federal 

ministry to work through some of these problems because it 

does create the circumstance that you described. I think that 

some of the changes that have been made recently have been  

from what we’ve been hearing from industry  somewhat 

helpful, although there still are some difficulties, but certainly 

not to the magnitude of what was there prior to the changes. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The tracking 

of production per well or per unit I believe would be your 

department’s to determine how much volume is being generated 

by each location, therefore what would be allowable for 

shipping? 

 

Does the NEB receive these figures? Do the pipeline companies 

receive these figures? How is your monitoring transferred over 

to the NEB or to the pipeline company so that they can 

determine whether or not the figures being given to them by the 

individual producers is actually the true figure or is it some 

estimate that the producer is giving them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’m told that we are 

not involved in providing that information either to the NEB or 

to the pipeline companies. Their process would be internal to 

them and I guess it would be their responsibility to sort out 

differences where there are some that arise. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, does your department 

track somehow whether a producer is producing at 100 per 

cent? If he’s producing at 50 per cent? How do you track the 

volumes of oil or gas that are produced by an individual 

producer? Obviously you’ll need to track that to be able to 

attach royalties to it, so you must have some form of tracking 

mechanism. What do you have in place to track that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, we keep the records 

in terms of production for regulatory and for royalty purposes. 

But it’s not the responsibility of Energy and Mines to track the 

method of delivery. 

 

For instance, we don’t track a barrel of oil whether it goes 

through a pipeline or whether it’s trucked. That’s not our 

responsibility. Our responsibility is to institute a royalty and 

taxation structure to ensure that companies are complying with 

it, and that is our role. But as far as indicating whether or not 

we could or would put in place production numbers so that the 

problem you refer to with oil barrels could be done away with is 

not something that we do. That would be a matter between the 

pipeline companies and the producers and regulated by the 

NEB. 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How often do 

you track this production? Is it on a daily basis, a monthly basis, 

or an annual basis per producing unit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  That’s done on a monthly basis. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  In your dealings with the NEB then, do 

you have any agreements, any arrangements, by which you 

could or do share information related to the production or 

productivity of any individual unit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We’re not aware that they’ve ever 

asked for that kind of information. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Would that information be available, 

Mr. Minister, if you were to receive a request from either the 

NEB or from a transportation agency? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think it’s fair to say if we were 

requested to assist in alleviating this problem, we would be 

willing to look at that. I think we want to give consideration to 

proprietary information, what would be in fact appropriate. We 

deal with an awful lot of companies and a lot of industry folks 

and we would want to be comfortable that any information that 

we would share would be appropriately shared. But as I’ve said, 

we haven’t had a request but certainly if other entities would 

approach us, we would take a very close look at what we may 

be able to do to assist. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has your 

department taken any decisions in regards to a policy as to the 

possibilities of imposing fines or penalties against producers 

who overestimate their production in times of slow-downs or 

cut-backs within the industry. I know that suggestion has been 

brought forward to the NEB to attempt to alleviate the problem 

of some producers overestimating their production and then 

managing to ship 100 per cent of their production, whereas 

some of the other producers may be down to as low as 30 or 40 

per cent. 

 

(2215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I think that would be the role of 

the NEB working with the industry. That really isn’t our role. 

But as I’ve said earlier, we attempt to work to facilitate some of 

these, I guess, rather unsatisfactory conditions and we will 

continue as a department here in Saskatchewan to work to 

ensure that there is a smooth flow of our resource to the 

markets. But primarily again I say that’s a responsibility of the 

National Energy Board and hopefully they can work out 

solutions to some of the situations that may not be working 

well. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to 

move on to another issue. A new ethanol plant has been opened 

in Chatham, Ontario and I’m wondering how do you see this 

affecting the ethanol industry within Saskatchewan. We have 

two plants currently in production, I believe it is, although the 

one may have shut down. I’m not sure. We have possibilities of 

other plants coming on stream. How will the plant in Chatham, 

Ontario impact on production of ethanol in Saskatchewan and  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

on any plans for expansion of that industry within this 

province? 

 

The Chair:  Order. order. I listened to the question on 

ethanol and I remind the hon. member that what we’re dealing 

with is item 5, petroleum and natural gas. I’ve read what the 

item is about, and I would be interested in the tie between 

ethanol and petroleum and natural gas, and certainly more than 

willing to have the question answered if the member can make 

the tie. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 

Ethanol is a by-product of the natural gas industry, and natural 

gas is used in the creation of ethanol so it impacts directly on 

the production of natural gas in this province. Therefore I 

believe under the oil and gas vote, that is a pertinent question, 

Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I would be more than pleased to 

answer that question if I could, but the Department of Energy 

and Mines isn’t responsible for production. We’re not 

responsible for regulating taxation on ethanol, so the 

department really has nothing to do with the production. And I 

believe it would be more a matter of the department . . . for the 

Department of Agriculture and Food, I believe. That may not be 

accurate but I can tell you what is accurate, that Energy and 

Mines is not involved with ethanol production. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 

you talked earlier about reassessment from SAMA 

(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) and its 

involvement in the oil and gas industry. 

 

I wonder if you could give us an outline of how you see it 

impacting the oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan  whether 

you see the SAMA reassessments increasing the costs to the oil 

and gas sector; do you see a decrease in the costs? And what 

kind of a revenue impact will it have on the municipalities 

within which the oil and gas revenue is being produced? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I think what we are 

attempting to do from within our department is to work with 

Municipal Government, and work with SUMA (Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), in terms of this whole 

reassessment issue. It’s fairly complex, as you will know, and 

not all the details have been worked out. There are discussions 

that are ongoing. 

 

I can only say to you, from my perspective as the Minister of 

Energy and Mines, what we are attempting to do is ensure that 

the oil and gas companies are treated fairly in terms of their 

assessment, in terms of their percentage of value that’s 

assessed, in terms of the mill rate. Certainly the variable mill 

rate is one issue that is of concern to the oil and gas sector. And 

I’ll share with you what they say to us, is that look, we’re not 

wanting to be singled out. We’re people here investing; we’re 

people doing business. We want to pay our fair share and we’re 

willing to do that. 

 

But I would just say, I believe that there will be an end result  

that will be fair to the municipalities and to the oil companies, 

and that’s what we’re attempting to do, to work through with 

them, and discussions right now are ongoing. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure 

whether you gave an indication as to whether you expect the 

assessments on the oil and gas properties to increase or 

decrease. If you did, I missed it, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you 

could elaborate on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think it’s fair to say that all 

assessments are increasing. What is not decided yet, which 

makes it impossible for me to answer definitively your 

question, is the percentage of value has not been set. So I mean 

the assessment can be . . . but until we determine the percentage 

of value, it’s pretty difficult to know where that’s going to end 

up. But it’s still in the formative stages, those decisions, and 

hopefully they will be concluded. 

 

The assessment is set for 1997, as the member will know. And 

we as a department continue to represent the concerns at these 

discussions at our level of industry, understanding that we want 

a fair value and we want a fair assessment. And I think if we 

continue to cooperate with municipal governments, provincial 

government, and industry, that we’ll find a fair rate of taxation. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The estimates 

we’ve received is that the revenues from the oil and gas 

industry to municipalities will decrease in relationship to 

revenue being generated by other properties within the 

municipalities. 

 

A great deal of concern has been raised to me by the 

municipalities with this reduction of the property taxes on the 

oil and . . . potential drop in property taxes on the oil and gas 

industry. One of the concerns expressed to me is that what 

could happen is the revenues to municipalities would decrease. 

They would make up any lost revenues by an overall increase in 

mill rates on all properties which would affect particularly farm 

land properties greater than it would the oil and gas industry 

properties. What would then happen is that the oil and gas 

industry would pay less in taxes locally but that would allow for 

the availability of the provincial government to increase its 

revenues from the oil and gas industry to recapture any of those 

lost tax dollars. 

 

And I see the minister is nodding  perhaps in agreement; I’m 

not sure  that she has that fear . . . the Minister for Municipal 

Government, that she perhaps shares that fear. 

 

So I think, Mr. Minister, there is a concern out there amongst 

the municipalities that any changes to the assessment levels 

within the different industries, oil and gas versus other 

properties within the municipalities, that the provincial 

government may try to recapture any tax savings that the oil and 

gas industry may accrue from the SAMA assessments. 

 

Has the government looked at that possibility? Is there any 

chance of that happening, or can you give the assurances that 

the government will not try to recapture any savings that the oil 

and gas industry has from the property tax base? 

  



2374  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I think I can give 

the member the commitment tonight that that is not the case. 

We have no intentions of increasing provincial revenues as a 

result of the reassessment for the oil and gas sector. 

 

And I just remind the member again that the percentage of 

value has not been struck. The classification under which they 

would be taxed has not been decided. So I guess all I can say 

that what you’re hearing is mere speculation and hopefully 

tonight we can set the record straight. 

 

And I just want to repeat that the provincial government has no 

intentions of generating revenue from this reassessment from 

the oil and gas sector, and I want to make that clear. But that 

secondly, in terms of whether agriculture will increase as a 

result of a decrease to the oil and gas sector, that has not 

certainly been clarified and that’s not, I believe, to be the case, 

because it just hasn’t been determined, first of all, classification 

and percentage of value. 

 

So there’s much discussion out there and there’s lots of 

rumours, and that’s clearly understood. But the discussions are 

ongoing and until some of these things are set, we don’t know 

what the . . . what percentage agriculture will pay in a 

municipality as an example as opposed to oil and gas. We don’t 

know what the business community will pay as opposed to 

agriculture. All of these things are in the developmental stage. I 

think they’re getting closer on some of these issues. 

 

There’s much discussion been happening. Industry has been 

meeting with officials from Municipal Government and our 

department has been represented at some of those meetings. 

And there are meetings ongoing with SARM and with SUMA 

by Municipal Government. But there is still some work to be 

done. So I think to speculate at this point is premature. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Some of 

the municipalities have indicated that under their estimates they 

could suffer a loss of as much as a quarter of a million dollars 

under this reassessment. And that would have a very, very 

major impact on any municipality without regard to their total 

dollar of assessment and the dollars they generate. It’s been 

indicated to us that this may amount to between 90 and $180 

million in lost revenues to the various municipalities. That’s a 

significant amount of money, Mr. Minister. 

 

What does your department do . . . what role is your department 

playing in mitigating any concerns or any problems that are 

arising between the municipalities and the oil and gas industry 

in dealing with the reassessments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I met with the 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, I believe last . . . 

well, last week I believe it was, Wednesday or Thursday. And 

we were discussing the reassessment and what the potential 

impact may be on them and on their industry. And I think that 

they were giving me the thought that they were going to be 

spending some time, and had been spending some time, with 

some municipal governments in which they do business. And I 

think that that’s a fair way to approach this assessment. The 

work that’s being done with the government departments   

with Energy and Mines, Municipal Government  I think can 

and will result in a fair and a reasonable assessment rate. 

 

I think the member indicated that there may be a loss from the 

oil and gas sector somewhere in the neighbourhood of 90 to 

$180 million. I’m told that they don’t pay anywhere near that 

kind of taxation at that level. 

 

But I guess, you know, what you are sharing with me is in your 

area, the area that you come from, where a lot of activity takes 

place, is there is a lot of speculation ongoing. And I think with a 

change of the magnitude of the reassessment that’s about to 

take place, that is probably the case. 

 

But I want to remind the member, and I want to remind the 

people of Saskatchewan, that this assessment is being done for 

municipal government. This is not a provincial reassessment 

initiative. This is a reassessment for municipal governments  

both urban and rural. It’s been an issue that’s been ignored for 

decades in this province and hasn’t been basically and 

fundamentally changed to bring it in tune with today’s reality. 

 

So I guess what I’m saying is that certainly we, as a provincial 

government, want to ensure that the changes are not going to 

have a dramatic impact on industry, not only the oil and gas 

sector, but others. We want to ensure that there’s some fairness 

with respect to the small-business community and the large 

business community as well. We want to protect agriculture so 

that there is no unfairness. The bottom line here is that we want 

to see a fairer assessment and a fairer taxation value. 

 

This is going to demand a lot of change. And I know there is a 

lot of speculation out there but I can only say to the member 

that this is all, at this point, speculation. We are working with 

all of the stakeholders to ensure that when the reassessment 

happens, it’s done fairly and that there aren’t big losers and big 

winners. It needs to be a fair assessment based on all of the 

issues that we talked about earlier. 

 

(2230) 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just a 

couple questions regarding royalties. Does your department set 

royalty fees and royalty structures? And can you give us a 

breakdown of what the royalty fees and structures have been, 

say for ’91, ’92, ’93, up to the present date? Have they 

increased? Have they decreased? 

 

And I noticed by the revenue coming in, the revenue is down 

from last year, up from the . . . well the estimated was a lot 

lower than what you actually got last year, but we’re down 

again; but it varies by sector as well. But I’d like to know what 

royalty fees are structured at the present time and where they’ve 

been going over the last few years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, let me say 

with respect to potash, they really haven’t changed, I don’t 

believe, since this administration took power in 1991. Uranium 

is fundamentally the same. There have been some small 

changes, some, I guess inducements, to attract investment in the 

oil sector, but basically these changes and the fluctuations in  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

royalties are more based on the price of the commodity, what 

the markets are demanding. I guess it’s more market driven than 

it is anything in terms of dramatic changes to the royalties in the 

royalty levels. 

 

And I guess I can say in terms of the kind of investment that’s 

been happening in Saskatchewan, if you look in the northern 

part of the province there are hundreds of millions of dollars 

that are now being planned for investment in uranium industry. 

I think that the activity in the oil patch speaks for itself. The fact 

that these people are here doing business in this province tell us 

that we’ve got an attractive structure that has attracted them to 

this province to invest, to put their investment dollars, so I 

guess we’ve found the balance that works. But the fluctuation is 

mainly market driven. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that little history 

lesson. But I’d like to know what the royalty rates are today in 

the potash sector, in natural gas, in oil, and what they were in 

1991. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We don’t have them with us here 

tonight, but what we will do is undertake to send a comparison 

in terms of what was in place in 1991 and what we have in 

place in 1996 with respect to uranium, potash, oil, gas. Those 

are the ones you are looking for? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Yes. Thank you. I’d appreciate that, Mr. Minister, 

with regards to oil, potash, and natural gas. 

 

And the reason I’m asking them is because you may have 

received a letter in your office. I think all MLAs received a 

letter from an individual who got some information out of the 

Briarpatch and a Howard Leeson, a political scientist, 

University of Regina, suggesting that we’ve lost substantial 

revenues to the province. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what 

your response is. 

 

It seems to me if Mr. Leeson’s right, it certainly would appear 

to be quite different from the view I think your party has taken 

when it’s been in government certainly in the past. And I don’t 

think that the Premier or the Finance minister or your 

government itself is interested in losing resource or revenues 

that would be fair to recuperate in view of where the economic 

climate is in this province and certainly the debt. 

 

And I’m wondering what your views or response is to that. It 

just kind of surprised me. And I guess I don’t have all the 

information; that’s why I’m asking. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I think it would be 

safe to say that members of this government feel that we have 

the appropriate royalty structure in place. Circumstances 

change. What was in place . . . and I’m somewhat familiar with 

Mr. Leeson’s argument, but I think his comparison to the 1970s, 

there are many circumstances that have changed. And I can 

only say to you that we’re very comfortable that we have put in 

place the appropriate structure, we have put in place the 

appropriate amounts, with respect to royalties and taxation. 

 

And I think there’s no secret that we command very high  

royalty taxes in Saskatchewan and we always have, historically. 

That’s been the nature of the Saskatchewan way of dealing with 

development of their resources. With respect to oil and gas, we 

know that that is a finite resource and that people request and 

deserve a fair return for it. And I think that what we have in 

place for the 1990s is very much an appropriate royalty 

structure. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I certainly look 

forward to that information when you send it over. 

 

But the comments by Mr. Leeson kind of caught my attention 

and I thought, boy, for this current Finance minister to be giving 

up that kind of revenue, either you’re not doing your arithmetic 

or else somebody’s missed something. 

 

The other thing I was going to ask, Mr. Minister, regarding 

activity in the province, what have land sales been like in the 

last . . . let’s say the last two or three land sales. I know last year 

you had a substantial land sale. Are we still on a fairly high 

level of land sales? And what’s the potential for development of 

research as far as oil drilling and rigs moving into the province 

or at least continuing research into oil and gas fields that are 

available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think I mentioned to your 

colleague earlier tonight that we certainly don’t expect to 

achieve on a sustained basis what we did in 1994-95 in terms of 

bonus bids. But last year, ‘95-96, was the best year that we had 

in the last 10 years in this province. 

 

We’re, in this fiscal year, around 25 per cent ahead of where we 

were last year, so I think we’re in fairly good shape. You know 

it’s difficult to determine the markets. The markets for 

investment can change and the demand for the product can 

change. I think it’s fair to say though that we’re looking 

forward to a very good year this year as well. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is there a specific line 

where a person would find out what revenues were derived at, 

the numbers or the volume of revenues that would be derived 

from land sales. Is there a specific line in our Estimates for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think we’ve already broken that 

out, but we have also agreed to send over to your colleague a 

detailed breakdown of that revenue. I think the revenues 

suggest that there’d be $362.9 million. Out of that, bonus bids 

are $45 million and so . . . And there’s 19 for other. But we’re 

going to send over more details so you’ll have a better idea of 

just how that breaks down. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Why thank you, Mr. Minister, and certainly, I 

think, Mr. Minister, while some people may view the policies of 

the present government as being certainly different from the 

‘70s and the fact that maybe we should be gouging companies 

rather than setting a fair level of taxation that would encourage 

companies to continue to invest in this province, I must 

commend you and your government for what has been taken 

and done so far. Because I know there was a lot of uncertainty 

prior to the election of 1991. People were thinking back to  

  



2376  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

where they were prior to, and I think there’s a lot of people who 

may feel that you’ve made the wrong move. But I think the 

development, and those who are working in the field, are 

certainly pleased to see that. 

 

I would also like to suggest, while I didn’t get really much of an 

opportunity last session with the former member from Swift 

Current, to commend him for the total privatization of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. My only regret is that the 

original legislation inhibited MLAs from investing in PCS 

(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) shares because of 

just what they’ve done in the last few years. We wouldn’t have 

to worry about a pension if we’d had that ability to purchase 

some of those shares. 

 

But I thank you, Mr. Minister, for your time and certainly 

commend your government  for a Conservative to say that, 

that’s going quite a distance  when it comes to resource 

management in this province, and revenue, and encouraging 

investment in the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I just want to thank 

members of the opposition and the third party for their 

questions. I’m really concerned now when I see members of the 

Conservative Party supporting what we’re doing in the energy 

sector. We may be on the wrong track and have to rethink this 

again. No, I’m . . . to be serious, Mr. Chairman, I do want to 

thank the members for their questions, and I’d like to thank my 

deputy for his support tonight. 

 

Item 5 agreed to. 

 

Item 6 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, this vote deals with resource policy and economics, 

and I believe that part of the resource policy that we need to 

look at in this province deals with the nuclear development in 

this province. Unfortunately it seems that some of the nuclear 

development, once we leave the mining sector, is very lacking 

in this province. We’ve seen AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada 

Ltd.) take a very serious look at some of the jobs that are in this 

province. We’ve seen them consolidate offices, and that 

consolidation seems to be moving away from Saskatchewan, 

not to Saskatchewan. 

 

I note that the Minister for Economic Development is supposed 

to be in Ottawa today to deal with the question of AECL and 

what is going to happen to any potential jobs there, because it 

looks like there is certainly going to be a reduction in office 

staff, in office space, in the province of Saskatchewan when it 

comes to AECL. It also looks like Manitoba will be at least 

retaining, if not all, at least some of the AECL employment and 

the opportunities within that province. 

 

In fact, Mr. Minister, Paul Martin, the financial editor for the 

Star-Phoenix, describes this as a situation where your 

government has simply missed the boat because of your 

foot-dragging on nuclear development. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is your policy within Energy and Mines as it  

relates to the development of the nuclear industry in this 

province? What’s your policy on the processing of uranium in 

this province to further enhance its value before it’s shipped 

outside of the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member 

opposite, I think it’s fair to say that there are going to be some 

major changes to AECL based on the fairly substantial budget 

cuts that are imposed upon them by the federal government. So 

there are going to be some changes, and we recognize that. 

 

With respect to our position, the member I guess reminds me of 

a discussion I had with a former leader of the Conservative 

Party, because he was very good at posing hypothetical 

questions to  well not hypothetical questions, but questions to 

hypothetical scenarios. 

 

With respect to processing, there certainly at this point in time 

is no . . . there’s a great degree of surplus with respect to 

enrichment. And so I guess it’s not an issue that frankly needs 

to be dealt with. But I think the government would take a 

pragmatic approach to looking at areas where we can create job 

opportunities for Saskatchewan people. But it’s not a 

circumstance that sits before us at this present time. And what 

we are doing is focusing on working with the companies to 

develop our ore, to develop, with new mining in the North, to 

develop the resource that we have been given. 

 

So with respect to processing, the member raises a hypothetical 

question and I think if the situation arose, that the government 

 whether it be our government or another administration  

would sit down and look at it based on its merits and make a 

decision at that time. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If the question 

of secondary process enrichment of uranium is a hypothetical 

question, then I have to ask, Mr. Minister, as it relates to 

resource policy, how can you encourage then the development 

of more mining, more production of uranium, when in your 

own words you say that there is an over-abundance of enriched 

uranium in the world and therefore no need for secondary 

processing within this province? 

 

Surely if there is an over-abundance of enriched uranium, there 

must also therefore be an over-abundance of produced uranium. 

The two add up together, Mr. Minister. So what is happening 

then to drive the production of raw uranium if there is no need 

for further enriched uranium? 

 

(2245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  No, I think what I attempted to say 

was the capacity for processing has a surplus. The capacity to 

process is in a surplus position. 

 

With respect to the mining and why we would encourage the 

mining, I think that the markets there look very positive. And 

that’s . . . I think that you will see the price of uranium increase. 

Certainly the people who are investing hundreds of millions of 

dollars in northern Saskatchewan are of the feeling that it makes 

sense to develop the ore bodies. 

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2377 

And we are in a process, working with the federal government 

right now, of ensuring that the environmental concerns are 

being looked at. And I think in terms of economic development 

in the uranium industry, that that is certainly the area that we 

see that makes some sense for us in Saskatchewan at this time. 

 

And we are working with the industry and with the 

environmental groups who have some concerns, to assure, first 

of all, that the development is done in an environmentally 

sensitive fashion. And that process has been ongoing, and I 

certainly think that the markets will encourage bringing more 

production on stream. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That 

statement that there is an overcapacity for enriched uranium 

within the world reminds me of the stories leading up to and the 

building of the Saskatchewan fertilizer company plant. All the 

other producers were saying, well there’s an overcapacity; why 

would you want to put in place another fertilizer plant which 

would make more nitrogen fertilizers within this province . . . or 

not within the province, within North America, more 

anhydrous. Their feeling was that there was an overcapacity 

already in place and yet that plant went ahead, Mr. Minister, 

utilizing Saskatchewan natural gas as the raw resource. That 

plant has been running at about 117 per cent of capacity since it 

was put on stream. It has proven to be, according to the 

Minister of Economic Development, one of the economic 

engines in this province, a great facility, an excellent income 

generator for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The development of an enriched uranium capacity within this 

province, Mr. Minister, also has that potential to be an excellent 

source of revenue for this province, and yet you seem to be 

somewhat reluctant to even look at it. If you simply take the 

word of other uranium enrichers around the world, they are 

certainly going to tell you that there is an overcapacity and there 

is no need for you to be in the market. Why would they want to 

encourage another competitor to enter the market to produce a 

product  and I would suggest a product that could be 

produced less expensively in this province because we are much 

closer to the raw resource than what Ontario is or what some of 

the other enriching facilities are within Canada and North 

America and indeed the world. 

 

I believe we have a natural resource there, Mr. Minister, that we 

need to maximize. We have to stop being the drawers of water 

and the hewers of wood and develop some secondary 

manufacturing, to diversify our economy and to provide the 

added value that generates the largest number of jobs and the 

best economic return for this province. 

 

And I believe, as do a number of other people in this province, 

that simply by avoiding that question, by hiding our heads in 

the sand when it comes to the development of an enriched 

uranium industry in this province, we are forgoing a very large 

economic opportunity within this province, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

may know more than industry knows, but I don’t know that. I 

can only tell him that there has been no expression of interest 

from any company that they would be interested in developing  

that kind of a facility in the province. 

 

We have had independent analysis that tells us that there is no 

need for it, and we’ve also been told by Cameco that it wouldn’t 

make economic sense at this time. But the member may know 

more than we know. But we will certainly continue to watch 

and monitor this situation. And if there is an expression of 

interest, I think it’s fair to say that we would at that point in 

time sit down and take a look at what the proposal would be, 

and if it made some sense for us in this province at that time, 

that we would take the appropriate steps to do due diligence on 

that kind of a project. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you could table then your analysis that you have on this, on 

nuclear industry, that says that the development of a secondary 

manufacturing, the enrichment of uranium, is not feasible at this 

time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I would want to say to the member 

that it’s not original information that we were dealing with. It’s 

an independent study that’s been done by KPMG and we have 

had the opportunity to have a look at it. 

 

And I would also want to say to the member that I’m sure 

Cameco would be willing to share their thoughts with respect to 

secondary processing and whether it would make sense. But, 

you know, I just say to the member, if you’re asking that 

government should initiate investment in such a facility, I mean 

that’s one thing; but if you’re suggesting that we have been 

turning away industry who have indicated interest in this kind 

of a development, I can say to you that no, we haven’t been 

approached by any. On the contrary, we’ve been told that at this 

point in time it doesn’t make any economic sense to proceed 

with one. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Am I to 

take your comments then that you would give serious 

consideration to a proposal, if one was to come forward, to 

develop and enrich uranium facility within this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think if someone was to propose 

processing, a processing plant, that the government would sit 

down and talk with them and determine whether or not it made 

sense for us as a province, and whether it made sense to proceed 

with such a development. But again, we’re into a hypothetical 

scenario and we just haven’t been approached. But I’m 

assuming if we’d be approached by someone who was 

suggesting that they could create a hundred, or 2 or 3 or 4 or 

500 jobs, that we would sit down and see if it made some sense 

for our province. 

 

I guess that would be the approach that we would take, as we 

take in other areas. It’s got to be discussed, I think, by 

government members and discussed by the Saskatchewan 

community, and that would probably be the process that we 

would take. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. Would this 

decision-making process deal with the economic viability of the 

proposal or the political viability of the proposal? 

  



2378  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think if it made no economic 

sense it would make no political sense. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well I have seen, Mr. Minister, 

decisions made by your government in the past, such as the 

CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering Agreement), which 

don’t seem to make any economic sense, whereas you may 

seem to believe that they make some political sense. 

 

I’d like to look at some other areas of resource policy as they 

deal, perhaps at arm’s length, with the question of the 

development of enriched uranium. We’ve seen SaskEnergy and 

some of the other government energy development areas look at 

co-generation. 

 

It seems what’s happened there is, the government has asked 

private enterprise to come forward with projects, with ideas, 

with proposals on developing co-generation. And yet when that 

happens, the government pulls back and says, thank you very 

much, after these companies have paid significant fees to 

present their proposals. And nothing is ever done with it after 

that, and it’s simply been a large expense to the private 

corporations that have made these proposals. Their ideas are 

taken by the government  for what purpose, I don’t know  

but it’s cost the industry a large amount of money. 

 

That relates back to the idea of making a proposal to the 

government as dealing with the enrichment of uranium in this 

province. If a corporation was to go to the expense of putting 

forward a full-fledged proposal which would cost a very large 

amount of money, they have to have some expectation that the 

government is going to give this a very serious consideration. 

And it’s my belief, Mr. Minister, that that serious consideration 

does not seem to be forthcoming from this particular 

government. 

 

And when it comes to the dealing with the processing of 

uranium in this province, or indeed with the recovery of 

uranium that has already been used, the disposal of that in 

Saskatchewan in areas where that uranium may have already 

been mined, those are areas where industry has a great deal of 

concern, Mr. Minister, that this particular government would 

not look favourably on any of these proposals. 

 

Now you may say that you’ll give them due consideration, but 

the industry that would be dealing with this has very little to no 

confidence that you would give them a reasonable hearing, let 

alone even a positive hearing, Mr. Minister. 

 

So when it comes to resource policies and dealing with 

co-generation, Mr. Minister, exactly what is your government’s 

position today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to 

say that the whole utility industry, the whole electrical industry, 

in North America  and Canada and Saskatchewan are 

certainly not exempt  is going through some major and some 

fairly dramatic changes in terms of deregulation, wheeling of 

electrical energy, what needs may be with respect to 

co-generation. The technology to internally generate by some of 

the larger producers, or larger users of electrical energy, is  

developing and advancing at a tremendous rate. And changes in 

terms of economic viability are becoming much more a reality 

for some of the processing, or some of the options with respect 

to co-generation that may be available here in Saskatchewan. 

And I think that certainly we would tend to think that 

co-generation is one of the options that we should be and can be 

and will be looking at with respect to expanding our ability to 

generate electrical energy in this province. 

 

We think that there is a lot of potential. There are a number of 

projects that have been described that I think at some point in 

time can be of benefit to the province. And certainly I think that 

there is a lot of potential there. Co-generation is one of the ways 

in which we can generate electrical energy that were described 

in the Saskatchewan Energy Strategy. 

 

But I think what is important is that we ensure that we don’t 

have stranded investment in this province, because it could end 

up costing the people of Saskatchewan very many dollars. We 

have a lot of coal-fired generation capacity that you will be 

aware of. We have a number of hydro facilities to generate 

electrical energy that have all had some major investment by the 

people of Saskatchewan through their Crown utility, 

SaskPower. 

 

And as the opportunity for competition and electrical energy 

being able to be brought through our transmission lines 

becomes a reality and sold to what are now our clients, I think 

we want to take a very cautionary approach with respect to 

expansion of capacity to generate electrical energy in this 

province. So I think as this process unfolds, as it has been fairly 

rapidly over the past few months, and in particular the last year 

and a half, I think we want to take a very cautious approach. 

 

I know that there are a number of large users of electrical 

energy who are looking at internal generation as an option for 

themselves, and certainly that is there. But I think what we 

would want to do and where we would want to head would be 

to take a very close look at co-generation, if in fact it’s 

determined that incremental energy be required in the province. 

 

We’re looking for new markets. We’re looking for new 

customers. This is probably more a SaskPower issue, but I think 

it’s fair to say that the Department of Energy and Mines works 

very closely in terms of energy options with the utilities in our 

province, and we will continue to do that. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You’ve 

talked about SaskPower looking for new markets and new 

opportunities. What kind of policies is Energy and Mines 

putting in place that will prepare SaskPower and SaskEnergy to 

compete into the market-place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Okay, we have no legislative 

authority in that area but I can only say as the minister in charge 

of both entities that the department doesn’t have direct 

involvement in that. But certainly we worked with SECDA at 

the time to put together the energy option strategy, and I mean 

. . . so there is some, I guess, threat of a tie. But in terms of 

developing new markets, that would be the responsibility of the 

Power Corporation and certainly not Energy and Mines. We  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

have no legislative authority over that entity at all. 

 

(2300) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. While 

you may not have the legislative authority over SaskPower 

through Energy and Mines, you would have the regulatory 

authority though to deal with policies dealing with the 

deregulation of the Saskatchewan market-place to allow other 

energy producers into this province or to market into this 

province, and in turn, SaskEnergy and SaskPower to market 

outside of this province into other jurisdictions. So what 

policies is your department developing to deal with the 

possibilities of other electrical generators, other gas distributors, 

marketing in Saskatchewan and vice versa  Saskatchewan, 

SaskPower, SaskEnergy, marketing outside of this particular 

jurisdiction? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think there certainly are some 

discussions that go on interdepartmentally but this is not a lead 

of Energy and Mines. That would be more by 

Intergovernmental Affairs. Trade is not within the mandate of 

this portfolio and those are basically trade issues. But we work 

cooperatively with other ministries in terms of developing 

frameworks and putting forth a Saskatchewan position. So in 

that regard, we have some involvement. But that’s certainly not 

a lead initiative of Energy and Mines. 

 

Item 6 agreed to. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, I know that you had an opportunity to listen to some 

of the questions that I asked the minister responsible for SPMC 

as dealing with the questions that were not answered under the 

global questions that were supplied to you and that you in turn 

answered. I wonder if I could get your assurance, so that I 

wouldn’t have to go through all these questions, that you will 

provide the answers to these questions that I’m sure you heard 

at least some of the question to, dealing with benefits such as 

RRSPs, education leave for employees, et cetera, for your 

department. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I will ask my 

officials to review Hansard. I don’t know that I was here for all 

of those questions, but I will have Hansard reviewed and we 

will put together the appropriate answers. I can’t commit to 

answering . . . Yes, I can’t commit to answering them all 

because I don’t know what the questions are and I’d like to see 

them first, but we will forward as much information as is 

appropriate. We certainly . . . if it’s questions about RRSPs, 

those kinds of things, number of staff, all of that, contract staff, 

sure. 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

Vote 23 agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  I want to thank the minister. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have 

beside me, to my right, Brian Kaukinen, the president of the 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening, Mr. 

Minister, and your officials. I have a few questions, not a lot, 

for you this evening. I’m just wondering if there was any 

projects for towns or villages involving water and sewer 

projects undertaken lately that were designed by any company 

or individual other than the Sask Water team. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’ll just cite two that 

are on the go right now. The Wakaw water treatment plant has 

been designed by a consultant and I’m told the name is UMA, 

and the pumping station is designed by Associated. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Are any of these larger projects . . . or have 

there been any that have been financed in any other way than 

through Sask Water? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess one example I could give 

you is a small plant that’s working in P.A. (Prince Albert) that 

was designed by private industry working with the Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Administration. That one had no Sask Water 

involvement at all. The design and the project was all put 

together by PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) 

and the city and private business. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Was the length of terms of repayment less than 

10 years then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can’t describe the investment or 

involvement. Sask Water was not involved in it. 

 

But what we attempt to do when we put a financing package 

together, is to find a rate per unit that makes some kind of 

economic sense for the users and then amortize that over a 

period that would keep in mind the life, you know, the limits, of 

that particular project in terms of its life expectancy. Because 

certainly what we wouldn’t want to see is an investment there 

that’s worn out and the pay-back period, you know, would not 

cover that. 

 

What we’re attempting to do with this particular infrastructure 

in Humboldt-Wakaw is that we are putting in place financing. 

They have set up a steering committee that has determined what 

is a reasonable user fee. And when the mortgage is paid off, 

when the capital costs of that project is paid off, it becomes the  

  



2380  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

property of that entity. 

 

So basically we just work to help to facilitate, to help put in 

place financing, and to offer technical expertise when we’re 

asked. But the decisions in terms of whether a project goes, 

whether it doesn’t go, what makes sense for those communities, 

the terms of the mortgage, all of those things are decided by the 

local communities. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand that in 

most of the larger projects, the towns or villages don’t have 

much of an option but to actually do their financing through 

Sask Water. Because part of their terms that they have to deal 

with is not being able to borrow money over a 10-year period, 

or longer than 10 years, through debentures. I guess that’s a 

provincial law. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think that would be under the 

municipal Act. And the member may be accurate on that; I 

don’t know. But you know, we . . . I guess if Sask Water is a 

vehicle that allows that to happen, then that should be a benefit 

to communities both large and small. I’m not as familiar with 

the municipal legislation as others may be. Certainly the 

minister may be able to answer that in her estimates when they 

come up. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess my concern 

is that actually towns and villages may not have any option but 

to do their water projects through Sask Water because they 

can’t get financing longer than 10 years, and most cases, the 

cost of the project is quite cost prohibitive so they really are 

obliged to be under Sask Water for up to 30 years just to pay for 

their project. 

 

And I feel that that in a way is detrimental to them. They end up 

paying a large amount of interest. And if they had a way of 

doing a debenture or bond in some way within their local 

community, they could be keeping the money within their own 

town or community. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  You know, I think I’d like to sort of 

put this in perspective, at least from . . . certainly from my 

position and that of the board of the corporation. 

 

In the period of time that I’ve been the chairman of the Water 

Corporation board, it has been my experience that communities 

have looked in a lot of cases at all of their different options and 

have come to Sask Water as a last resort because they just 

haven’t been able to find anything that works for them. And 

we’ve been able to help to facilitate financing, and as I’ve said, 

help with technical expertise and put together a package that 

works for them. 

 

With respect to some of the larger projects  and let me use the 

Humboldt-Wakaw thing as an example  no communities are 

forced to using Sask Water. We’re there if they choose to use 

us. If they decide . . . a community as an example would have 

decided that they didn’t want to use the technology that the 

steering committee had put together and decided on, then they 

have the option of developing their own system, their own 

community system, which many small communities in  

Saskatchewan have operating for them, independent of any 

other community. Water from . . . ground water from wells, 

local wells; some use dugouts. There’s, you know, a number of 

ways that this can happen. 

 

But I think the point I want to make is that we’re not there to 

force our services or to force the ability that’s been developed 

within that corporation or the ability to put together financing 

on any community. Those are options that are chosen by local 

people. If projects come by their door and if they decide to be 

involved in a larger project, that’s their decision. They can opt 

in; they can opt out. 

 

Local people make the decision in terms of the infrastructure, 

who designs it. We’re there to assist and to help to facilitate 

people who want a project to happen. We’re there to assist if 

they can’t find other sources of financing their projects. If they 

can do it through debentures, fine. If they can do it through a 

loan from the local credit union, that too is fine. We’re there to 

provide a facility when the communities ask us to be part of it. 

And it’s a process that we’ve found that works very well. The 

corporation is there to provide service and we’ve been able to 

serve many communities. 

 

(2315) 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And perhaps I’m not 

being fair if you’re not sure . . . if you’re not aware if towns can 

actually borrow money for longer than 10 years. This is the 

information I’ve been given and I guess I will ask the minister 

in charge of Municipal Affairs to make sure my information is 

correct. 

 

I’m wondering if I can get a list of projects that . . . and it 

doesn’t have to be right now, but if I can be given a list of 

projects that you’re working on . . . that were worked on last 

year  the larger ones, not anything less than $10,000. Just 

give me an idea of some of the work that was done last year. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you tell me if there’s an interest rate 

difference between what you charge communities that are using 

Sask Water when they make their payments to Sask Water and 

what you pay for interest, because you have to borrow the 

money, or Sask Water has to borrow the money? Is there an 

interest rate that remains constant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The agreements . . . we do no 

up-charge on the interest rate. Whatever it is is passed on to the 

clients. And I guess part of our services as consultants would be 

billed as part of that package. But we don’t up-charge any of the 

interest at all. And I guess what I had neglected . . . and 

probably what I should do is give you an example of a 

community that made a decision to go on their own, not to use 

Sask Water, and that’s Shellbrook, just to the west of Prince 

Albert. So there’s all myriad of different ways of putting 

projects together. Shellbrook did it on their own. 

Humboldt-Wakaw made the decision to be included in a larger 

project. We aren’t involved in financing at all in Shellbrook nor 

has, you know . . . so it’s a matter of us attempting to provide 

that service for communities that choose to use our services. 

 

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I understand part of the 

Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline has . . . there will be farmers 

actually have meters in their own yards for the use of the water 

that’s coming from the creek there. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The process would be that any 

water that would be taken off the main line would be metered, 

and that most of the communities, in particular the rural 

communities, have formed associations and they determine 

their own system of billing and how they would do their billing 

to individual farm homes. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Then we are charging for water? Then we are 

charging for water? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Oh, yes. It’s a user-pay system. 

There’s a cost per unit. There’s a capital cost of the entire 

project, and it’s got to pay for itself and it’s got to pay for itself 

through water rates which will be the same as any community, 

whether it be the city of Regina, city of Saskatoon, or 

Assiniboia, Saskatchewan, or Lafleche. They have a system 

whereby they pay for their capital costs, and that’s based on 

user pay. 

 

Ms. Draude:  I guess this is kind of a scary thought, that we 

basically are ending up paying for water. It sounds to me more 

like this is going to be a pipeline of money, basically is what 

it’s going to end up to be over the years if we’re charging, not 

for service, but actually for the water. Over time, Sask Water is 

actually going to be charging people for water, and I guess 

that’s something that bothers me. Maybe you have a comment 

on that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well golly, you know, I’m trying to 

think how many years my wife and I have been married and 

how long it was since we had our first home and when I got my 

first water bill, and I can’t recall; it’s been a little length of time 

for me. 

 

We’ve been charging for water in this province for years. 

There’s been water bills out of every major community, out of 

smaller communities, and it’s been a system where they put a 

capital infrastructure in place and how somehow it’s got to be 

paid back. 

 

I mean if a farmer puts a trenching system from a dugout, first 

of all there’s a cost, a capital cost, to a dugout. So let me draw a 

comparison here. You put a dugout in a farmyard and there’s 

some money for the dugout; it’s going to cost you to do that. Or 

if you drill a well it costs some money. If you’re going to put a 

submersible pump in a well, that’s going to cost some money. 

It’s going to cost money to trench it into your home. 

 

And so all of this adds up to a lump of money. You don’t pay it 

maybe over a period of 5, 10 years, although some people may 

borrow the money and choose to pay it over 5, 10 years; some 

may pay it cash upfront. But the fact of the matter is there’s a 

cost to deliver that water into the home or into the barn. It 

doesn’t happen for nothing. 

 

The same is with the infrastructure that’s being put in place  

where we’re asked to involve ourselves. The clients, the 

customers, basically charge themselves for the cost of what it 

costs to get water to their place, and so I think that that’s 

reasonable. 

 

I’ve often thought that, you know, it’s one commodity, water is 

one commodity that we take for granted here in Saskatchewan, 

and that’s maybe because we have so much of it. But I know if 

you go to other jurisdictions where they don’t have the luxury 

of a water system  a Churchill River system; North 

Saskatchewan, South Saskatchewan River systems  where 

they don’t have those, they recognize quite clearly the value of 

water. 

 

I just want to make the point here that we as the Water 

Corporation are not taking a profit on that infrastructure. We’re 

financing it; we’re helping to set up the financing for the 

association that owns that infrastructure. The association is a 

group of farmers, people who live in small towns. Those are the 

people that ultimately own the system after they’ve got it paid 

for. 

 

But is there a user fee? Certainly there is. It’s got to be paid off 

somehow. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You mentioned, Mr. 

Minister, that you’re not making a profit off of this. And I have 

heard  whether or not this is accurate I don’t know  but I 

have heard that the communities along the Humboldt-Wakaw 

water pipeline in total will be losing up to $160 million over the 

30-year period. So if they are missing out on that money and 

you are not making a profit, where is it going? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I guess I want to say to the 

member, you put the project in place and you’re going to have a 

small return. I mean there are some costs of doing business; 

there are some costs of having an entity. But if you’re asking, 

are we putting in place a massive charge so that there can be 

money flowing into the Water Corporation so that the Water 

Corporation can put into the Crown . . . into the Consolidated 

Fund, profits, have a look at the profit and loss statement of the 

Water Corporation. That’s not what this is about. 

 

And for anyone to infer that that’s what this is about, I want to 

say that you’re wrong. Totally, basically, dead wrong. That’s 

not what this is about. We’re there to help facilitate 

communities who want to use our services. 

 

And all you’ve got to do is look at the annual report of the 

Water Corporation to see that this is not a massive 

money-making corporation. This is not a corporation that’s 

selling electrical energy; it’s not a corporation that’s selling 

natural gas. We’re there to assist in putting water projects 

together. 

 

Are we going to do it at a loss where the corporation is 

subsidizing different projects? Well that’s been done. We’ve 

got, I think, $160 million worth of irrigation projects in this 

province over the last 20 years perhaps, that have cost the 

people of the province an awful lot of money, and served few. 

 

  



2382  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

What we are trying to do is make this corporation work on a 

cost-recovery type basis. Will there be a small rate of return on 

what we put in? The answer is, absolutely. There has to be 

because you’ve got unforeseen expenses; you’ve got overhead 

expenses within the corporation that need to be addressed. 

 

But if you’re making the argument  and I think that’s what 

you’re doing  is making the argument that the Water 

Corporation is ripping the consumers off who are going to be 

taking water from this particular project, you’re wrong. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, just as a 

matter of information for myself and others, I’m wondering 

whether or not we are selling any water out of Saskatchewan 

into the United States, for instance. And I recognize that part 

. . . that other provinces may or may not be doing this, and I’m 

not too sure whether this is under Canadian jurisdiction, but I 

would like you to answer that question if you can, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think maybe the only water that 

might go out of the province that I’m aware of, that’s sold out 

of our jurisdiction, is maybe bottled water from somewhere. I 

just don’t know. 

 

We have agreements with the States in terms of water 

apportionment and what is a natural flow across the border. 

Those are international agreements. And they get a percentage 

of what comes through, and those things are all negotiated. 

 

But are we selling water? No, we’re not. That’s not part of what 

we do. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I guess my hon. colleague would like 

to know if we’re giving any away. 

 

I’d just like to ask, for the water that in fact is going into the 

States where we have an agreement that some of the flow goes 

to them as such, and if it’s coming from Canada, is there any 

trade-off in any way or form? Are we getting anything back for 

that water? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The members of the third party 

might be able to better describe the situation. But we put in 

place water control projects to assist flooding. As an example, 

in the southern part of the province, the Rafferty-Alameda 

system down there is in one respect to help Minot from flood 

damage. They have put some money into the capital cost of this 

project, you know, for payment for that. Some would argue they 

didn’t pay enough, but that’s water over the bridge, so to speak, 

or over the dam. 

 

But anyway, as part of the agreement there’s an apportionment 

whereby a certain percentage of what comes through that 

system has to be let loose and we’re obligated to hold a certain 

amount back. 

 

Ms. Julé:  One last question for you, Mr. Minister. You 

mentioned to my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena that the 

Shellbrook area has their own water system in. Could you 

explain to me what they have done rather than go with Sask 

Water? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  That has a little bit of history as 

well. The Water Corporation had been discussing with the town 

of Shellbrook for a number of months  a year, two years even 

 what we might be able to do to assist them. We put on the 

table what we could do. They wanted some assistance with 

respect to their treatment plant. They use an underground . . . 

they use a well system and they pump their water up. 

 

We talked with them about the possibility of piping water from 

the city of P.A. and we looked at that as an option. The end 

result was they chose to use private consultants. I’m not sure if 

they had the PFRA involved, but they made their choice and 

that’s how that one was put together. So I guess it serves their 

needs and we’re comfortable that they’re satisfied they made 

the right choice. 

 

(2330) 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I have a question that’s unrelated to 

what we have been talking about. If there is an open well within 

any municipality in this province and there’s complaints about 

that well being open, whose responsibility is it in fact to see that 

the well is covered up, if it’s an empty well or in fact if there is 

water seeping into it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think that would probably be a 

combination of the Department of Environment, SERM, and the 

municipality. That, as far as I know, is not a responsibility that 

we carry. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Minister, does Sask Water have any involvement in water 

quality in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We are actively working with 

SERM  the Department of Environment and Resource 

Management  and with the Saskatchewan Research Council 

to attempt to improve in a very proactive way the quality of 

water in the province. I think we’ve made some success in 

terms of some of the work that’s been done at the Saskatchewan 

Research Council but I think we would tend to take a proactive 

approach to improving people’s water quality working with the 

different entities that I indicated. But are we the police, do we 

police the water quality? The answer is no, that’s not one of our 

responsibilities. We tend to . . . and I think we have made some 

small success in terms of working . . . 

 

I recently saw a presentation by the Saskatchewan Research 

Council in terms of some technology that a private entrepreneur 

had been working on and I was very much impressed with what 

can be done to improve the quality of dugout water in the 

province. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The type of 

water quality that I’m concerned about is effluent or discharges 

from lagoons. Down at Estevan approximately every year the 

city wants to discharge excess water from their sewage lagoons. 

SaskPower is involved in a project there of planting bulrushes 

to improve the quality of the water in that area. SaskPower also, 

it’s my belief, has a proposal already in place or an agreement 

in place, that they were to take some of the excess water from  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

this Estevan sewage lagoon and use it for cooling at Shand. 

This has not happened to my knowledge. You can correct me if 

that’s wrong. 

 

But what happens is that they discharge the excess water from 

the Estevan lagoons down the Souris River and every spring I 

get complaints from the ranchers and farmers living along the 

Souris before it crosses the U.S. (United States) border. 

Whenever this discharge is talked about or whenever it 

happens, farmers complain that their cattle will no longer drink 

the water. 

 

What happened this spring, the proposal was made after the 

major run-off had passed through there. Therefore you end up 

with a situation where, if the lagoons are drained, that this 

effluent sits in all the ponds along the river and simply becomes 

a stinking, stagnant mass which none of the livestock, which 

none of the wildlife in the area even, wants to go close to. There 

are a number of the ranchers along the river that live right on 

the shores. Their building sites become almost inhabitable . . . 

uninhabitable because of the smells coming from the river. And 

so my question is: does Sask Water have any involvement in 

this at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think the area that we would have 

involvement is, is ensuring that there would be adequate . . . 

when the lagoon is flushed, that there would be an adequate 

supply of water along with that to ensure the safety of people 

downstream. 

 

I guess one of the unfortunate circumstances that we have, 

living in our area of the world, is we have a number of lagoons, 

many lagoons, throughout the province. And when there’s 

sufficient water to move with it, as the system is flushed, things 

work well. When it’s a minimum standard, it becomes a little 

more difficult and a little more uncomfortable for some living 

downstream. 

 

But the role of the Water Corporation is to monitor the mixture 

of the fresh and the lagoon effluent, and that’s the role we 

would take. We would be monitored by SERM, and if a 

complaint would happen, I would assume that the Department 

of Environment and Resource Management would involve 

themselves. But our role is basically one of ensuring that there 

is an adequate minimum standard of water that would be 

flushed along with it. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What kind of 

flows in the river would be the minimum allowable for a release 

from the lagoons, and what would be the optimum amount of 

flow to allow for the release? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The situation, I guess, really does 

vary. There’s a number of variables. One would be, I guess, the 

size of the lagoon; how often it would have to be released; how 

much inflow there would be to it. I am told that they try and 

flush the lagoons when there’s an optimum and a maximum 

flow of water that can be mixed with it. But that sometimes 

isn’t available, based on the usage of the lagoon and the size. So 

every circumstance is a little different. And I guess a part of it is 

trying to use your best judgement, and hopefully there’s  

enough flow that the circumstance can be as positive as 

possible, if you can call that a positive experience. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, I don’t think any of those 

who’ve lived downstream from the Estevan lagoons find it to be 

a very positive experience any time that it’s released. But 

especially when the flows in the river are at a low point, it 

creates a great deal of difficulty for all those living along the 

river. And I think that that’s a project that should be seriously 

reconsidered and a very serious look be taken at it to ensure that 

a substantial flow of water is available whenever that release is 

allowed because it does create a great deal of hardship 

downstream. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we’ve received a number of calls about a 

proposal, a Sask Water project, through the Qu’Appelle valley. 

And apparently Sask Water is looking at a ditch there because it 

would allow three times the water flow from Diefenbaker to 

Buffalo Pound. And you have consulted with some of the 

municipalities that would be affected by this. I wonder if you 

can give some details of this project. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 

project that you’re referring to, I guess, is a result of 

channelling that was done from up the Qu’Appelle, 

Diefenbaker, Buffalo Pound area. And over the course of time 

and over the course of years, it’s starting to silt in, and so 

there’s going to have to be a major dredging program there at 

some point in time. 

 

I am told that the capital cost of that project would be 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of $10 million. So we’re 

going to have to busy ourselves seeing if we can work with the 

federal government who had in place, in the 1960s and ‘70s, a 

program that would assist in doing this kind of drainage work. 

But the fact is, it’s going to have to be done. The circumstances 

of age are catching up to that particular project, so it will have 

to be something that will have some very close scrutiny in the 

upcoming years. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many 

farmers would be . . . how many farm operations, I should say, 

would be affected by this project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess . . . I don’t know the 

numbers and our officials don’t have the number of farmers, but 

I think it’s fair to say that every farmer that’s adjacent to that 

would be impacted, and I would hope that they would be 

impacted in a positive way. The dredging, the removal of soil 

and the moving of the water, the dikes that would be put up, 

hopefully would have a positive impact on the farmers adjacent 

to this. But I don’t have the number of landowners along that 

chain, but I guess everyone adjacent would be affected, and 

hopefully positively. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, I’m sure they all 

hope that if the project goes ahead that they will be affected 

positively. But I’m sure that some of them at some point in time 

will be affected in a negative sense. 

 

What kind of compensation would be available to them for any  

  



2384  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

negative impact that they would suffer, any loss of income that 

they might suffer? Because surely along such a waterway there 

are some who have cattle operations that will utilize the water. 

Perhaps even some irrigation would be in place along there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think it’s fair to say, you 

know, when there’s natural flooding, whether it be along the 

Qu’Appelle valley or in other areas, there are some costs 

associated with that. Everyone takes some risks. What we 

would attempt to do is work with farmers in terms of 

minimizing, first of all, the impact on their land, as this project 

would be developed. And if something happened that water was 

involved in a project and it was found that we were negligent in 

our duty, if we had not done due diligence or used the right 

technical expertise or made an error in terms of calculations, we 

would then have a liability. But I don’t foresee that. And we’re 

talking I guess a hypothetical scenario at this point, but I think 

the corporation has shown in the past that it has the ability to do 

these kinds of projects and doing it in a very positive way for 

the people whose land is adjacent and affected by flows and 

run-off. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. I think one of 

the areas of negative impact could be if someone’s water supply 

was cut off on a temporary basis for part or all of the summer 

where they were relying on that water for a cattle operation or 

they were relying on that water for some irrigation projects. 

They would be negatively impacted if they were to lose a 

source of water. Would compensation be available to them in 

that sense while the dredging or the construction project was 

ongoing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think, you know, we have to 

keep in mind here that we’re talking a hypothetical scenario 

again. I guess what we would try and do is work with the 

farmers to mitigate the damage. Mitigation is a process that 

goes on with every process. 

 

You try and minimize the impact on those who are affected by 

what you’re doing, and that’s done with consultation and an 

understanding of their individual circumstance. So quite clearly 

we attempt to do what we can in terms of minimizing the 

impact. That’s part of the process, part of the process for putting 

a package together. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, if this hypothetical 

project were to go ahead, would it be tendered under the union 

tendering policy, the CCTA? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Have you given any considerations, Mr. 

Minister, to what the cost of the project would be with CCTA or 

the cost of the project without CCTA? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We haven’t given any 

consideration. As I said, it’s a hypothetical scenario and we’re 

not about to sit down doing a bunch of engineering studies to 

determine a project that is right now not on the books. We gave 

you a rough figure of perhaps $10 million. That might be up or 

down 2, 3 this way or the other. And I just wouldn’t want to  

speculate tonight on what . . . the design and what that would all 

cost. 

 

(2345) 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The 

member from Humboldt asked some questions about some 

water projects in that area. I have a question about the project 

there, the hundred-plus million dollar water pipeline project that 

was approved last year. We’ve had some calls and some 

concerns that perhaps there was an alternative proposal in place 

that would have saved approximately $20 million over 30 years. 

 

I wonder if you can give a brief explanation as to what this 

alternative system was that was proposed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess what I first will do is 

correct you on the capital cost. The Humboldt-Wakaw line is a 

capital cost of about $32 million. There was another company 

by the name of . . . an Alberta company by the name of . . . 

Anyway, they put together a project that had about the same 

capital cost but the end use cost was much higher than the 

package we were able to put together for them. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Sask Water 

announced the opening of a new office in Yorkton last April 

and stated that there were five new employees to be hired and 

five would be relocated to Yorkton. How many of those 

employees relocated to Yorkton and what was the reason for 

opening the Yorkton office when you were downsizing other 

operations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, the Yorkton office 

is about a 10-person office. There were five people moved in 

from within the corporation and another five employees were 

hired. The reason that office was set up was strictly because of 

the conditions on that side of the province and the need for 

closer ties from the corporation with the community, with the 

municipalities, in terms of working through some of the 

conditions on that side of the province. We think that this 

structure and this office in that area will serve the people over 

there well and will serve the corporation very well. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Was the move 

to Yorkton any way related to the proposed Langenburg East 

drainage and irrigation projects? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think, you know, certainly there’s 

been some difficulties on that side of the province. They’re not 

new. They didn’t start yesterday or the year before yesterday. 

They started like 30, 40, 50 years ago. It’s been an area that’s 

been prone to flooding. The corporation has had a large number 

of complaints, comparing it to other areas, and it was felt that 

Yorkton was the area that we would need a higher staff 

complement to better serve the needs of the people in that area. 

So that’s why the reorganization and that’s why Yorkton is the 

place where we positioned those 10 employees. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, there was a 360 metre 

long pipeline project completed at Creighton and the estimated  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

costs on this was $200,000. Did that project get completed and 

was it under budget? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Basically the Creighton situation 

was that we worked with the town to develop a temporary 

situation. In terms of the financing and the construction, that 

was not done by the Water Corporation, that was a 

responsibility of the town. We worked to find something that 

would work in the interim until we could put together a 

long-term solution in that area. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If this project 

was done under the town would it have fallen then under the 

CCTA? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well we didn’t tender it and we just 

didn’t do the contract. So whether they used union work, 

whether they didn’t, who their contractor was, I have no idea. 

But I should say to the member that our experience within the 

Water Corporation has been that work that we have done under 

the CCTA has served us very well; we haven’t seen incremental 

costs from the CCTA. But in terms of the Creighton proposal 

it’s not our initiative. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Your 

comments that projects under the CCTA have served you well, 

that may be, politically. I’m not sure that they have served the 

taxpayers well. I’m thinking particularly of the Melfort 

sprinkler system that was put in place by Sask Water. I’m not 

sure that this was done by Sask Water directly, but there was a 

significant number of concerns and complaints about one 

portion of that particular project. 

 

Mr. Minister, the member from Humboldt asked some 

questions about water going across the border. The Alameda 

and Rafferty projects did save water this year. They prevented 

flooding downstream, so I think they served their purposes in 

that way. 

 

But I do have some concerns about the releases of water, 

particularly from the Alameda dam. Under the agreement with 

the Tetzlaff brothers, does it necessitate that Sask Water release 

water down to the 552 level? Should it be saved or retained 

above that level? Is it a legal requirement or is it a policy 

requirement of Sask Water to release the water down to the 552 

level? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The agreement with the Tetzlaff 

family was that it be down to 552 by June 1, but I’m told that 

we have already achieved the reduction to that level. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Is this a legal requirement in the 

settlement with the Tetzlaff brothers, or is this a policy 

requirement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  It’s a legal requirement. What we 

will be attempting to do is to, up until the expiry of this 

agreement and until we can put together the appropriate people 

to choose the recreational level, we will be living up to the 

agreement that we signed with the Tetzlaffs. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 

you could outline for me the procedures that you have in place 

in cases of flooding downstream from the Alameda dam? 

 

This arose this spring where there was near-flood conditions 

downstream from the Alameda dam while water was still being 

released from the Alameda dam. There was a great deal of 

concern over one weekend as to who to get a hold of if the river 

started to flood. 

 

How do you go about getting the gates closed at the Alameda 

dam to stop the flow? What procedures are in place? Who do 

you contact, Mr. Minister, and what are the chain of command 

in the decision-making process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We have a permanent five-man 

crew that’s stationed at Moose Jaw, in terms of water control. 

There’s the ability to reach the corporation. And quite clearly, 

they monitor this not only on Thursdays or Fridays, but they 

monitor this on an ongoing basis. 

 

And they have, I would suggest, been very, very diligent in 

terms of giving heads up to communities where there’s a 

potential for flooding. They know these reservoirs; they know 

how they act; they know how the water flows. And I think 

they’ve been very diligent. 

 

And if I look at the amount of flooding that we had this spring, 

the heads up that they’ve been able to give to the communities 

and the kind of work that has gone on with emergency measure 

organizations, with municipal government, the communications 

from the corporation to the general public has been very good. 

 

You will hear on the radio on a regular basis, reports from 

different areas by one of the employees of the corporation. So I 

think they’ve been diligent in managing potential dangerous 

situations. 

 

So I think that the communities can be comforted that the staff 

are around. They’re monitoring and watching, and I think have 

been showing a very responsible approach. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you 

saying that the staff that is in place in Moose Jaw over a 

weekend, have the authority then to close the gates on the 

Alameda dam if a flood situation is in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, that’s what I’m saying. If they 

have to, they can. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  What system does Sask Water have in 

place to monitor the flood potentials downstream from the 

Alameda and Rafferty dams. I was contacted . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Yardsticks. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Yardsticks? I was hoping it was a little 

more sophisticated than that, Mr. Minister. I was contacted by a 

person from North Dakota who was monitoring the river on an 

ongoing basis, and the river had reached within inches of 

flooding just across the border and there was a great deal of  

  



2386  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

concern because Alameda dam continued to release 22 cubic 

feet per minute, I believe it was, at that time, while the flood 

was almost into flood stage. The river was almost into flood 

stage. It didn’t happen. Water from elsewhere decreased and the 

floods didn’t occur but there was a great deal of concern that if 

the dam gates could have been closed at Alameda it would have 

prevented any flooding that might have occurred. The situation 

didn’t arise but the people didn’t know who to contact to open 

discussions to get the gates closed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I think the employee that I 

referred to earlier was Alex Banga and I think you’ve heard . . . 

every Saskatchewan resident has heard Alex Banga on the radio 

at one time or another reporting on water. And he would 

certainly be the person to contact within the corporation. 

 

With respect to the flow of levels we do use some sort of a 

yardstick but it’s kind of sophisticated. And I’m no technician 

in this regard, believe me, but they use a hydrometric system 

that beams water levels up through satellite which is reported 

back to the Water Corporation in Moose Jaw. And these are all 

the way along some of these water systems. So they know 

changes hourly. And it’s more than that. If they think that 

they’ve got a difficulty with the reporting mechanism or some 

of the equipment that might be faulty, they just get in the 

half-ton and go out there and have a look at it. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Would it be possible for someone 

outside of the Sask Water system to monitor, through a 

computer connection, the flow in the river and the levels along 

the river? That is happening across the border in North Dakota 

where individuals could tap into their conservation system and 

monitor the flows and the levels in the river so that they could 

know on an ongoing basis what’s happening along the river. 

But the problem was their information stopped at the 

U.S.-Canadian border. If there was some mechanism by which 

they could access some of the information from Sask Water’s 

flow monitors, I think it would have made everybody feel a 

little more comfortable if they could understand what was 

happening upstream from them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think that we wouldn’t have a 

difficulty with sharing the information. I’m just not sure what 

the technology would be in terms of getting it through to them, 

but certainly if they’re willing to contact Mr. Kaukinen we can 

see if there’s something we can do to arrange that kind of 

information flow. 

 

I think a good flow of information is always a good way to put 

people’s minds at rest. In times of spring run-off and flooding 

situations I know how tough it can be on families when you 

don’t know what to expect next. So if you know of any 

circumstance where someone would want that kind of 

information we could certainly ask Mr. Kaukinen to try and 

share how we would go about getting that to happen. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister; that’s the 

questions I have for the present time, other than one comment, 

and this goes back to the question I asked you under Energy and 

Mines with the same information dealing with the global 

questions. If you can supply that information, I’ll provide you a  

copy of the questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I’d be more than 

pleased to accommodate that request. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’d like to 

thank your officials for coming in here at this time of the 

morning. Thank you. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, the last 

time we were in Sask Water estimates I had posed some 

questions to you that in fact you said you had not the answers 

for at the time. I’m wondering whether or not you have been 

able to tabulate those answers, or prepare them for me, and if 

you have, I would appreciate getting them. Do you have any of 

those answers ready? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that as it’s 

understood by us here, that the package is almost complete and 

should be across shortly. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you had 

also mentioned to me that you were going to contact the 

steering committee of the Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline to discuss 

the concerns of the residents of Fish Creek. Have you contacted 

the steering committee yet and spoke with them, and have you 

come to any resolve? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We’ve had some correspondence 

with them so that interaction has taken place. I think there’s 

probably a better understanding at this point than there might 

have been earlier on. I can’t say that we’ve brought this to a 

completion, to a satisfactory completion. Just to let you know 

that that has taken place and the officials are working with the 

association, or with the steering committee, to see if we can 

facilitate some kind of an agreement here. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, are you 

aware whether the steering committee or in fact your officials 

have spoken with the administrator of the RM of Fish Creek or 

the reeve of that municipality about this concern they have? 

 

(2400) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The president informs me that he 

just received the letter from him today, so the information flow 

has been happening. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I would like to 

thank your officials also for being here tonight. They’ve been 

very patient and kind in assisting you in answering these 

questions. And I thank you, Mr. Minister, for the time you’ve 

put in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I’d like to, Mr. Chairman, 

thank members of the opposition for their . . . oh, we’re not 

done yet. I’ll just take my place and allow the member to fire 

away. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I realize the hour is getting 

late and the hon. minister may . . . his vision might be  

  



June 10, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

starting to be impaired a little bit. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, I won’t take a lot of time. A couple of 

questions that have been raised with me. Number one, there’s a 

basin of water, just in the Kipling area  we called it the 

Kipling marsh  and it’s pumped on an annual basis. And I 

understand this year it was being pumped and I believe they 

shut the pumps off. 

 

I’m just wondering, is Water Corp involved? Is there a request 

that comes in out of that project? And as well, is the . . . I don’t 

know if it’s got a specific name. I know it’s a fair body of water 

that over the past number of years they called it a marsh. And it 

collects a lot of water and they pump it. And actually we’ve had 

the province of Manitoba on many occasions has called and 

asked to have the pump shut off, especially if they’re facing a 

problem with flooding as a result of water through the 

Pipestone River system. 

 

And I’m just wondering if Water Corp is involved or has any 

knowledge of this, and basically takes some control to make 

sure that the water isn’t being pumped at a time when 

downstream residents may find it would be a problem for them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  That’s an area of the province that 

we have a little difficulty with. As you will know, the water 

flows into Manitoba. Sometimes there’s too much, sometimes 

there’s too little, and maybe sometimes we just got the right 

amount. But we try and work with them in terms of managing 

that flow. 

 

I should say to the member that we have had some meetings at a 

ministerial and official level with respect to part of that side of 

the province, to the Assiniboia basin. And we’re attempting to 

put together a study to try and deal with what has been a long, 

long-term situation. You know, it stems from the Langenburg 

East area, and all of the associated problems there. 

 

And what we want to do is work with the Government of 

Manitoba and the Government of Canada if we can, to 

determine and assess how we . . . first of all assess what we 

have there for difficulties and then how we put together a 

solution to what has been a long, long-standing problem. 

 

But water flow between Manitoba and Saskatchewan, we just 

continue to try and work away at this and monitor it. We 

understand their problems as well. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I might add that for the 

Kipling marsh area, this year they decided that maybe the 

pumping was going to cost them too much and they just 

lowered the level, which I would say it might be going on 15 

years since we’ve seen water in that basin there. And actually it 

covers a fair bit of territory. I think Ducks Unlimited has 

expressed some interest in it which would certainly enhance the 

area, I think, if they got involved. 

 

The other thing, when it comes to water management, and 

certainly when it was quite dry in the late ‘80s, I know 

communities outside of the dam at Moosomin, there was a lot 

of communities complaining about the Moosominites not  

allowing water through; the feeling that they should be allowing 

it through. And I guess if you’re having discussions with the 

governments of Manitoba and certainly RMs and towns along 

the area, it might be appropriate to suggest that if there’s 

avenues and locations downstream that maybe some smaller 

dams could be set up too. So rather than just relying on one 

dam, where community and wildlife organizations have worked 

so hard to develop a nice recreational area plus a good fishing 

area, and then to be asked to lower their water supply and then 

have the problem like they did this past spring of running into a 

number . . . a large fish kill because of the way the ice, the 

water, froze last year. So I think those are some things that 

might be suggested. 

 

The other area — you did mention it — I’d just like to know 

exactly what’s happening with regards to the Langenburg and 

that . . . I forget what they call it, conservation and development 

authority they have out there. Has that problem been resolved or 

is it an ongoing thing that we still haven’t been able to get all 

the parties together to come to an agreement on? I’m just 

wondering where it’s sitting and whether there was an impact as 

far as Manitoba residents and the Manitoba government with 

regards to water moving out of that into the Assiniboine River 

system. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think I did allude to it and I don’t 

know if I can give you an awful lot of detail because we’re just 

formulating right now a game plan that hopefully will create a 

solution to that whole area. It’s probably a three-year project so 

it’s not going to happen overnight but it’s not a problem that 

was developed over a day or over three years either. 

 

So we’re certainly hoping that the people in that area will have 

a little patience with us. We’re working with another 

jurisdiction, which always slows the process down, and you will 

understand that. But I think we’ve had reasonably good 

cooperation from the province of Manitoba. 

 

I think the federal government is now involved and hopefully 

we can put together a package that’s going to give some 

long-term solutions to what’s been there for a long, long time. 

It’s not a good situation that’s there, and we have neighbour 

against neighbour and community against community. And I 

think that’s not a situation that we want to see over the long 

haul. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess I would 

just add that, for those who would argue that we should not 

hamper with or even enhance the flow of water off of a land 

base, I think maybe they should take a trip to west of Regina 

here and see what . . . west and south and see what some 

residents in this area, some farmers, who have almost two-thirds 

of their land under water and no place for it to go . . . And then I 

look in Manitoba, in that Portage area where it was totally a 

flood situation the middle of April and by May 1 they were out. 

And we’re still struggling trying to get around in the mud. So I 

think as well, people need to realize that the managed areas of 

water flow can certainly enhance and benefit everyone. 

 

I had one other question, Mr. Minister, and I noticed in the 

Estimates that the total for irrigation is almost in half, and I’m  

  



2388  Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 1996 

wondering exactly why that figure has decreased so much and 

what that is used for. The money that’s being spent, was it an 

enhancement project or just some experimentation that you’re 

talking about spending money on, or is this actual irrigation 

money used to move water through the irrigation system for 

producers to irrigate their land? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We have been working with 

irrigators for the last four years, and the money that the 

provincial government has been committing to irrigation has 

been steadily decreasing over the last four years. 

 

What we are attempting to do is, whether it be capital 

construction or whether it be maintenance or whether it be 

operations, we’re trying to move towards a user-pay type of a 

system. And I think we’ve been somewhat successful in gaining 

some degree of understanding by those irrigators in the different 

districts in terms of our desire to move towards self-sufficiency. 

The government and the province just simply can’t afford to be 

investing the kind of money we were in irrigation over the 

years. I wish that wasn’t the case, but it is, so we deal with it. 

 

And I think what we’d like to be able to do is work to, not only 

user-pay, but user have a major benefit in terms of finding some 

growing arrangements where there can be some very much . . . 

some value added crops grown in the areas that we’re irrigating. 

It’s an expensive process. It’s awfully expensive just to grow 

wheat, I think, on irrigated land. 

 

And we think that there are some opportunities that can create 

some economic development jobs in secondary manufacturing. 

Our people have been working on potato production as being 

one of the options. But the reason  to get back to your 

original question; I guess I was moving off rail a bit  but the 

reason that that budget allocation is going down is because 

we’re asking the users to pay an increasing cost so that it 

becomes a zero cost item for government over the long haul. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Well I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I thank your 

official as well for the time you have given to us tonight, and I 

look forward to further discussions. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Vote 50 agreed to. 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Loans, Advances and Investments 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 140 

 

Vote 140 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I have a motion, by leave: 

 

That notwithstanding an order of the Assembly dated June  

7, 1996, that on Tuesday, June 11, we sit for government 

business from 10 a.m. to 12:30, when it do recess until 

1:30 p.m.; that upon reconvening, it do observe routine 

proceedings and orders of the day. 

 

I think members understand, this is so that we don’t do private 

members’ business first thing in the morning. 

 

I would ask for leave for that. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours for Government Business 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Seconded by the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton, that, by leave: 

 

Notwithstanding an order of the Assembly dated June 7, 

1996, extended sitting hours, that on Tuesday, June 11, sit 

for government business from 10 a.m. until 12:30 p.m., 

when it do recess until 1:30 p.m.; that upon reconvening, it 

do observe routine proceedings and orders of the day. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:16 a.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

EVENING SITTING 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation Vote 53 
  Serby ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2351 

  Osika .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2351, 2364 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2351 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2358 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Energy and Mines  Vote 23 
  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2365 

  D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................. 2365, 2376 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2374 

 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Budgetary Expense 

 Energy and Mines  Vote 23 ................................................................................................................................................... 2379 
 General Revenue Fund 

 Saskatchewan Water Corporation  Vote 50 
  Lautermilch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2379 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2379 

  Julé ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2381, 2386 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2382 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2386 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Loans, Advances and Investments 

 Saskatchewan Water Corporation  Vote 140 ...................................................................................................................... 2388 
MOTIONS 

 Extended Hours for Government Business 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................ 2388 

 

 


