
















































March 13, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 247 

 March 13, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 

respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre who plead: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people who have signed this petition are 

from Herbert, Saskatchewan; Morse; all throughout the 

south-western part of Saskatchewan; and many people from 

Regina as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan in regard to 

the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. The petition 

reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) rescind the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement and especially its 

mandatory union hiring hall formula; (2) prohibit the 

expansion of this Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement or other like agreements to other Saskatchewan 

Crown corporations or to other government departments 

and construction projects; and (3) prohibit the expansion 

of this agreement or any other like agreements to other 

government-funded construction projects with local health 

districts, school boards, municipal councils, or other joint 

venture partners with the Saskatchewan government. 

 

This petition is presented from people in the, primarily in the 

Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

today from people all throughout southern Saskatchewan 

regarding trying to save one of the important hospitals of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. The prayer is as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 

today are, most of them are, from the Moose Jaw area, Mr. 

Speaker; many from Regina, in fact many from the 

constituencies of Regina Albert South and Regina Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

of hundreds of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina; they are from Humboldt; they are from Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker. They are from all throughout Saskatchewan, and it 

would give me great pleasure to present this petition today. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to 

present of numerous people that have signed from the Plains. 

I’ll read the . . . 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And they come from numerous centres throughout southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 

names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Preeceville, Herbert, Moose Jaw and 

Regina and throughout the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to also 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily 

from Fort Qu’Appelle, but also Regina, Edenwold, Southey, 

Fort Qu’Appelle, and others. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in regard to 

the saving of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

This petition is signed by people primarily from Regina, but all 

through the southern part of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

names of people throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

mostly from Regina but also from Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Moose Jaw, Mortlach, Caronport, Riverhurst, Herbert, to 

mention a few. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by people from Radisson, 

Grenfell, Wolseley, Langbank, Whitewood, Kennedy, all across 

southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 

petitions to present today on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Marshall, Radville areas of the 

province, Mr. Speaker, down through the South. I present them 

today. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

present a petition on behalf of the issue of SaskPower and I 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these come from the communities of Hague and from 

Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon we 

have 10 pages of names of people from Saskatchewan who 

would like me to read the following prayer to the Assembly: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these people come from all over the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

halt the closure of the Cypress Lodge kitchen services; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

immediately repeal the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Friday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Health: (1) why were dead-

on-arrival statistics regarding how many people died en 

route to a hospital, as well as those who were pronounced 

dead when ambulances arrived, not available when 

requested last year; (2) what is the reason the minister 

claims DOA (dead on arrival) statistics are not available 

prior to the closing of 52 rural hospitals and instead only 

since 1993; (3) what is the explanation for individuals 

pronounced DOA increasing between ’93 and ’94 by 

almost 200; and (4) please provide DOA statistics 

regarding the number of individuals who died en route to 

hospitals and those pronounced dead on arrival on the 

scene for ’92 and ’91. 

 



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

And I have another question to the Premier. I give notice that I 

shall on Friday next ask the government the following question: 

 

To the Premier, regarding the provincial regulation that 

any personal property left behind by a residential tenant 

must be stored for up to six years after the tenant vacates 

the rental property: (1) does the Premier intend to comply 

with this regulation with regard to the furniture and 

garbage delivered to his constituency office this morning? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

Regarding the Department of Finance’s $105,012 1994-95 

payment to Phoenix Advertising of Regina: firstly, what 

was the nature of the work performed by Phoenix for the 

Department of Finance; secondly, how did this work 

benefit the taxpayer; thirdly, how was this work awarded; 

and fourth, what means was used to determine the amount 

awarded? 

 

Thank you. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to present to you and 

through you, members in your gallery from the rural 

municipality of Bayne. We have with us the reeve and some 

councillors. And they are in town for the SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) convention sincerely 

hoping to hear some good things about what’s going to happen 

in the near future for our municipalities. 

 

And I would like to have the Assembly welcome them warmly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me 

to introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 

legislature, three special friends seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They are Roger and Sophie Nelson, residents of Regina, who 

are here visiting the building and going on a tour later. And 

Sophie is the mother and Roger the step-father of Donna From, 

who is my very good friend and also my constituency assistant. 

And we all know how important constituency assistants are to 

our work as MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 

 

So I will ask all members to welcome them here, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a couple of 

guests from my constituency. We have two gentlemen up in 

your Speaker’s gallery; I did ask them to sit in the opposition 

gallery but they chose to sit there. 

 

So I’d like to welcome, first of all, Maurice Onyskevitch, the 

manager of northern affairs for COGEMA resources, and also  

Mr. Mike Dailey, who’s a village councillor for the Buffalo 

Narrows council. And I would ask the Assembly to welcome 

these two gentlemen here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 

your gallery this afternoon, I’d like to recognize and introduce 

to the House two individuals: Mr. Karl Austman, who’s a 

fireman with the city of Yorkton and works for the 

Saskatchewan burn unit; and seated beside him is Ms. Maryann 

Federko, who is an employee with SaskTel and is also involved 

with the Saskatchewan Labour Council here in Regina this 

afternoon, doing some work for both of those organizations, 

and ask the House to join me in welcoming them to the 

question period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to, through you and to the Assembly, join the member for 

Humboldt in welcoming the RM (rural municipality) council 

from Bayne and the administrator. We’re meeting with them 

after question period to discuss some of the issues, and I just 

want to say welcome and have a good meeting. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Humboldt Charity Fund-raisers 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take this 

opportunity to recognize two organizations from my 

constituency, specifically from the town of Humboldt. First I 

would like to commend the Humboldt Big Brothers and Sisters 

on the success of their recent fund-raising event, Bowl for 

Millions. Approximately 55 bowling teams pledged their 

support and raised over $11,000. This money will be used to 

continue their work in fostering and maintaining matches 

between big and little brothers and big and little sisters. 

 

Second, I wish to commend the Humboldt Kinettes for their 

efforts in raising money for Telemiracle through a skate-a-thon. 

Skate with the Broncos raised $4,100. 

 

Congratulations to the Big Brothers and Big Sisters of 

Humboldt and the Humboldt Kinettes for their fund-raising 

efforts and for showing their concern for other people. A huge 

pat on the back for the people of Humboldt and area and a 

thank-you for generous contributions in helping those less 

fortunate than you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Green Lake Saw Mill Agreement 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

village of Green Lake is an easy stone’s throw away from my 

constituency, but today I would like to throw out 

congratulations to Mayor Fred McCallum, the people of Green  



250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

Lake, and the 50 or so workers associated with the Green Lake 

saw mill. Thanks to them, to NorSask, to Mistik, and to the 

ministers of the Crown, we have another fine example of 

partnership in action. 

 

Last Friday, Mayor McCallum signed an agreement with the 

Government of Saskatchewan which will guarantee a long-term 

wood supply for the saw mill. This means of course, in addition 

to the jobs, a long-term boost to the local economy, Mr. 

Speaker. This agreement has been a long time in the making, 

and I believe as well special mention should be made of the 

ministers of Environment and the Minister of Northern Affairs, 

village councillor, Kevin Roy, and others who have brought 

these negotiations to completion. 

 

Under this agreement, the Green Lake saw mill will be 

allocated 30,000 cubic metres for the next 20 years. Renewable 

every five years, the supply will come from the NorSask and 

Weyerhaeuser forest management licensing agreements and 

other Crown lands. My congratulations to all involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to commend the 

community of Green Lake on signing the long-term wood 

supply agreement with the province. Saskatchewan’s 

Environment and Resource Management is guaranteeing a 

wood allocation of 30,000 cubic metres every year for the next 

20 years. It is renewable every five years. The people of Green 

Lake have been working hard towards such a deal for a long, 

long time. The saw mill operations in Green Lake are vital to 

the local economy. 

 

Green Lake has a population of 700 people, and the saw mill 

operations employ 50 people. While this is a very positive step 

for the community, it is now up to the provincial government to 

honour the terms of this deal. The government has assured the 

people of Green Lake it will monitor the operations of 

companies to ensure they comply with the new agreement’s 

provision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that this new, long-term wood supply 

agreement will open a door to further negotiations with the 

government on other projects because the Green Lake area has 

lots of potential for economic development. 

 

I congratulate the Green Lake Village Council and the Green 

Lake Metis Wood Products Limited on their efforts on behalf of 

their community. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Keystone Bulk Transport in Moose Jaw 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

note some very good news for the city of Moose Jaw and the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Keystone Bulk 

Transport from Brandon, Manitoba, has announced they will be 

setting up shop in Moose Jaw and hiring 33 people to fill their  

mechanical and truck-driving positions. 

 

They have signed a five-year contract with Moose Jaw Asphalt. 

They also do work for Kalium, Saskferco and Simplot. Mr. 

Speaker, Keystone will be constructing a large maintenance 

shop in Moose Jaw and hopes to be in full operation by April 

15. 

 

This is, Mr. Speaker, one more example of an out-of-province 

company who has the confidence to invest in Saskatchewan and 

who now has the opportunity to expand their business interests 

in the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

This represents a very good deal for Keystone, for Moose Jaw 

Asphalt, for the people of Moose Jaw, and the province of 

Saskatchewan, plus 33 new jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that you and all members would want to 

welcome Keystone to our province and wish them every success 

in the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Royal Bank Cup Junior A Hockey in Melfort 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The city of 

Melfort will host the Royal Bank Cup May 4 to 12. This is the 

Canadian junior A hockey championship. I commend the host 

committee, the volunteers, and fans for the wonderful job that 

has taken place thus far with the agenda for the week. 

 

To the co-chairs, Randy Sorensen and Dale Frier, it’s going to 

be an event that definitely makes history in the Melfort-Tisdale 

constituency and for the province of Saskatchewan. This is an 

opportunity for showing the famous hospitality of rural 

Saskatchewan. I bring this to the attention of this Assembly at 

this time because I believe there’s still a few tickets available to 

watch some of the best hockey in Canada. 

 

Please join me in congratulating the Melfort host committee for 

hosting this great Canadian event. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Prince Albert Regional Enterprise Centre Opens 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Regional 

Economic Development Authority recently announced the 

establishment of the Prince Albert Regional Enterprise Centre. 

The centre was formed by a partnership of several interest 

groups to facilitate economic development in the Prince Albert 

region and to encourage entrepreneurship as a viable career 

option. 

 

This enterprise centre creates a single-window site for services 

supporting the development of new and existing businesses and 

provides interaction between established professionals, 

businesses, students, and community ventures. Services 

provided by the centre include educational training programs, 

counselling and consulting assistance, financial assistance, as 

well as research and a resource centre. 



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

The partners involved in forming this worthwhile service 

include Woodland Institute, the city of Prince Albert, Prince 

Albert Grand Council, the chamber of commerce, the Metis 

employment centre, Saskatchewan Economic Development, as 

well as the Prince Albert REDA (regional economic 

development authority). It is through partnerships of this kind 

that new opportunities are being created in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in congratulating Prince Albert 

REDA and the chairman, Mark Hislop, on this partnership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Congress on Rural Education 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As a 

resident and an educator from rural Saskatchewan, it is with 

great pleasure I inform that starting today the first ever national 

congress on rural education is being hosted by our wonderful 

province in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

This three-day event is a visionary approach to examining the 

unique aspects of rural education and will greatly expand the 

opportunities for our youth in rural Saskatchewan. There will be 

Canada-wide participation. Every province will have 

representation made up of local rural communities, parents, 

students, educators, and elected officials. 

 

Issues that will be addressed will include governance, 

curriculum, program options, delivery of special needs 

programs, viability of small schools, technology, and 

transportation. 

 

Historically, many rural Saskatchewan residents have gone on 

to contribute to Canada and the world in many aspects of life. 

That this congress is being held in Saskatchewan is a testament 

to the quality of Saskatchewan’s rural education system. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayment 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Agriculture and his staff have taken an important first step in 

the current GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

controversy. Whether it was the minister, or member acting on 

his behalf, who is merely an extension of the minister, they 

have done the right thing by ensuring that a Saskatchewan 

farmer’s GRIP wind-up bill was reviewed by Crop Insurance 

and treated fairly. 

 

However, there are thousands of other Saskatchewan farmers 

who now deserve the same courtesy, Mr. Speaker. Will the 

minister do what is appropriate and commit to the review of 

each bill on a case-by-case basis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

guess I’ll try this one more time. Mr. Member, the program has 

been established; the letters went out in December . . . or 

September of ’94 and January, 1995 explaining the program. 

 

What you did yesterday, Mr. Member, was disgusting, and it 

was not the truth. The letter that you put forward yesterday and 

tabled, accused . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I’m going to call the 

minister to order. He knows fully well that he can’t do 

indirectly what he’s not allowed to do directly. I listened 

carefully to his reference to the hon. member telling what is not 

the truth and I’ll ask him to simply withdraw that remark and 

continue in his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’ll withdraw that unparliamentary 

remark, Mr. Speaker. Anyway, my point is made because today 

. . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Now the minister knows as well 

that it is out of order to comment regarding the Speaker’s 

ruling, and I’ll ask him to simply proceed with his answer 

directly now, or I’ll go to the next question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the member was proven wrong yesterday. In the paper today, I 

quote, “Baraniski confirmed in an interview that he never spoke 

with Upshall.” 

 

So the credibility of that member has gone down the tubes. But 

what I will say . . . if he ever had any. What I will say is that the 

process remains the same. Farmers have their bills. If they have 

problems paying their bills, they should contact the corporation, 

work out a repayment plan, work out their options with the 

corporation. And that’s what we have done in the past and will 

continue to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would hope that 

the comments and calls that are made by the minister’s office 

are reflective of the minister, and I hope that he has some 

control over that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will again, Mr. Speaker, ask the minister and say to the 

minister that what he did was right. I don’t know what his 

problem is. What he did was right. That’s what the farmers 

were asking for, was some help. We and the farmers of 

Saskatchewan are calling on him to continue doing what is 

right. 

 

I would now like to send over to the minister two more bills and 

ask that he follow the same process as he did with the previous 

case. And will he make the commitment today that he will do 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, another example of 

Tory grandstanding on the backs of people who may have  



252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

serious problems paying their bills back . . . or Liberals; I can’t 

tell the difference. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you, and tell the member through 

you, offer again. When I first came into this portfolio I invited 

the critic, Liberal critic of Agriculture, to my office to go over 

the issues of the day, and he refused to do that. Then I made 

another offer. I said if there’s any problems that you have, any 

case work, please just bring them to my office. That’s the way 

the system works. No, he hasn’t done that. 

 

He was going to give me all the GRIP bills. Well we haven’t 

seen any yet. And I think we know why  because farmers are 

more responsible than the Liberal agricultural critic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  And, Mr. Speaker, the member 

continues to try to indirectly tell people that I interfered through 

my office so I’ll do some more. He’s too naïve and maybe not 

smart enough to figure out the answer. People call my office all 

the time; we direct those questions to the proper place and 

they’re dealt with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Economic Development 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, my question today is to the 

Minister of Economic Development. I have in my hand a memo 

from him addressed to the Premier, cabinet ministers, MLAs, 

and deputy ministers. The intent of this memo is to assist them 

in handling questions from the press and constituents regarding 

economic development in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

When I read it, I was greatly offended. This member stated, and 

I quote . . . the memo stated: “There was, and still is, no 

intention of providing a grand strategy for rural Saskatchewan.” 

End of quote. 

 

I would like now to table this memo, Mr. Speaker. And will the 

minister stand up and explain to the Assembly and the people of 

rural Saskatchewan why we are not part of the strategy to 

develop our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, if the member was at the 

SARM convention this morning  I don’t know if she was or 

wasn’t  she would have heard me delivering an address to the 

SARM delegates outlining the essential elements of a 

job-creation strategy and an economic strategy, a key 

component of which was the question of rural Saskatchewan. 

References to the Partnership for Growth, the references to the 

Ag 2000 paper, and then I went on to talk about the social 

policies and the reconstruction of local governments in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Those are all documented. They’re all public knowledge. The 

strategies are set out there. The member knows that’s the case. 

And I think that they speak for themselves. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, in the minister’s Partnership for 

Growth plan he did focus on a couple of things  jobs and 

increased tourism. Right after he introduced this plan, the 

Minister of Environment was quoted in the Leader-Post on 

February 23 as saying: 

 

“If we are to maintain the parks as we know them today, 

we will have to make some very significant changes and 

tradeoffs between fees and (levels of service) . . . ” 

 

Mr. Speaker, our parks attract 2.4 million visitors each year. 

How does the Minister of Economic Development expect to 

increase tourism when the Minister of Environment is planning 

on gutting our parks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again the hon. member I 

think should await the budget and should await the unfolding of 

the legislative agenda of the government before she makes an 

assumption behind the question that she talks about. The Tories, 

who interject from their seats about this matter, say, waiting for 

four years. Of course that position has netted the Tories exactly 

five seats in the legislature and third party status because they 

had their heads in the sands then and they have their heads in 

the sands now. 

 

There is a policy with respect to tourism and it’s a policy which 

is more than simply economic development, Partnership for 

Growth. You have to read the second document. It’s Ag 2000 

as well which is complementary to the economic development 

paper. And I think if you see the two of them, you see here a 

record of steady growth for jobs and improving economic 

circumstance and improving fiscal situation. I’m not saying 

we’ve reached our targets. I’m not saying that we can’t do 

better. In fact we haven’t reached our targets and in fact we can 

and must do better. 

 

But the game plan is there. It’s a game plan for the future. It’s 

preparing Saskatchewan for the 21st century. It’s a game plan 

of growth and prosperity and hope. And the opposition parties 

unfortunately are on the game plan of looking backwards and 

not forwards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, this government has repeatedly 

neglected rural Saskatchewan. Last year they spent only $1.6 

million on our parks and now they’re threatening to increase the 

fees and cut services. Mr. Speaker, this is going to kill jobs in 

rural Saskatchewan, and it’s shameful. 

 

At the same time the Minister of Economic Development 

authorized multimillion-dollar overruns in the construction of 

casinos. I suggest to the minister that he needs to re-evaluate his 

priorities. Our parks, Mr. Speaker, are one of the few 

family-orientated activities left in this province and one of the 

few reasons people have to visit rural Saskatchewan. 

 



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

Will the minister confirm that the casinos in this province are 

more important to his government than parks, and it is the 

legacy his government prefers to leave to our children? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I say with the greatest of 

respect to the member, and I say this quite sincerely, who is 

after all a freshman member, fresh person member of the 

legislature, the question is extremely confusing., And I would 

like to think that a lot of it is occasioned by the fact that she, 

like all the other freshman members of the Liberal caucus and 

the Tory caucus, are feeling their way through. 

 

But I want to say that it is confusing in more than simply, in 

more than simply . . . It’s confusing, Mr. Speaker, in more than 

simply phraseology. It’s confusing. However it seems to me 

typically Liberal, who campaigned on the last election, June, 

1995, that we had too much government; we should cut back. 

 

It is confusing because the Liberals would have us cut back on 

government services, reduce taxes and balance the budget all 

the same while, and not telling the people of Saskatchewan how 

in the slightest they can achieve that. 

 

And finally I close, Mr. Speaker, by saying, in the interest of 

time, is the hon. member saying, because I think again she 

should tell this to all the members of the caucus, that the 

arrangement which we have made with Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations for the sharing of the casino 

proceeds, for example, and are working on with other 

aboriginal peoples, is unacceptable to the Liberal caucus today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

McDowell Report 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my questions this afternoon are for 

the Premier. 

 

Mr. Premier, in March, 1994, the McDowell commission was 

appointed to review the issue of MLA compensation. This 

independent process was supposed to improve the public’s 

confidence in the legislature and the people who serve here. 

However, because of your government’s handling of this issue, 

it has had exactly the opposite effect. 

 

The public is more cynical than ever because the MLAs are now 

going to get a pay increase, instead of a decrease recommended 

by McDowell. And both your government, and both your 

government and the Liberal opposition seem more than happy 

to go along with it. And since the Board of Internal Economy 

meeting, you’ve done nothing to address this, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Premier, what steps are you taking or are prepared to take 

to address this problem? What steps are you taking to roll back 

this unintended increase for MLAs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member talks 

about confusion and cynicism, and he tries to cast the 

government and other members of this House in the role of 

villain in this regard. But the truth of the matter is that the 

person who casts the biggest confusion and doubt on this issue 

is the member himself there who voted for these proposals 

when they appeared before the Board of Internal Economy  

and you know that you did. 

 

And the answer for the position of the member is obviously 

very clear. The Leader-Post  I’m not very often wont to quote 

it in support, but I think they got for one time their facts right in 

this case  they say: 

 

Tory leader Bill Boyd claimed they delayed it in order to 

wring more money from the taxpayers. He forgets that the 

difference in pay schedules is relatively small and that the 

delay was recommended by the Clerk of the Legislative 

Assembly, whose integrity is above reproach. The new pay 

scheme should come into effect as soon as the Clerk’s 

staff have the necessary systems in place to support it. 

 

And I think that’s a position that is a logical position and it’s a 

factual position. And the hon. member knows it. 

 

Now the member says, what are we going to do about it? I’m 

going to ask the member, what are you going to do about it? 

You don’t want to do it, have every one of your . . . You tell us. 

Every one of your members can turn it back if you want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, your 

government had no problem finding a way to claw back VLT 

(video lottery terminal) revenues from hundreds of 

communities. Your government had no problem finding a way 

to claw back GRIP overpayments from 12,000 farmers. Surely 

it shouldn’t be too hard to claw back overpayments from 58 

MLAs. That is a problem that I think you need to address, sir. 

 

Mr. Premier, your government and the Liberal opposition may 

be prepared to sit back and accept this increase, but we are not. 

We have a solution to this problem and we will be introducing 

immediately after question period, we will be moving, a motion 

to adopt the McDowell report retroactive to January 1 as 

originally intended and recommended. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you support our motion and roll back the 

MLA pay increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I note how the flip-flop 

of the Conservatives and the Liberals continues and persists. 

 

I have here in front of me the March 5, 1996 Board of Internal 

Economy minutes, verbatim transcript, March 5, 1996. Here it 

is, Mr. Boyd, on page no. 8. I’m quoting from page 9, and here 

are the exact words if Hansard is to be believed  and I 

believe it. Mr. Boyd says: 

 

. . .  we continue to accept the recommendations  and 

we reluctantly, I guess, would be prepared to go along  



254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

with the July 1 implementation date, but very clearly we 

want to be on record as being in favour of the 

substantial . . . the implementation of it could have and 

should have been done substantially earlier than it was. 

 

That is exactly what he said. That is what the record said and he 

voted for it. Then he gets a favourable column in one or two of 

their journals of the newspaper, and gets up and grandstands. 

You’ve got a solution; I’ve got a solution. 

 

I challenge each and every one of your PC (Progressive 

Conservative) MLAs to turn back every part of what you think 

is unfavourable about this recommendation that you supported 

and voted for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I’ll ask all members of 

the Assembly to come to order. Order, order. Order. I’ll ask all 

members of the Assembly to come to order. 

 

Proposed Service Districts 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 

of Municipal Government. Madam Minister, we are now 

starting to see further details of your plans for municipal 

government. According to a letter you sent to mayors and 

reeves around the province, you plan to establish yet another 

level of government. Quoting from that letter: 

 

A service district will be managed by a board of directors 

composed of representatives of the councils of member 

municipalities. It will offer a flexible menu of services 

under various financing arrangements including fees for 

services and charges back to municipalities. 

 

So in addition to existing municipalities we will now have a 

bunch of new service districts councils, with the power to 

provide services, charge fees, and tax. This is a whole new level 

of government, Madam Minister. How does this square with 

your goal of reducing the amount of local government in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  The hon. member again either 

deliberately or perhaps unconsciously is not familiar with the 

provisions of the services district Act and the concept behind it. 

The concept behind it is very clear. We want to seek 

efficiencies. This is what the purpose of this whole exercise is 

all about. 

 

The Municipal Government department, for example, advises 

me that in Saskatchewan we have an average population per 

municipality of 1,200 in Saskatchewan. That’s the largest level 

of governance. And by the way, individual municipalities’ 

governments total 847, even more than Ontario at 831. 

 

For communities of under 100, the percentage of total spending 

on overhead is 46 per cent. For communities of 100 to 250 the 

percentage of total spending on overhead is 42 per cent. 

 

Now the hon. member would say that maybe nothing should be  

done about this. I’m talking about the entire issue of 

governance. We don’t agree. We think the 21st century is that 

the taxpayers and the ratepayers who support the very good 

folks at RMs and urbans and us, they want it to be as efficient 

as possible. And the service districts Act is a voluntary 

approach to set guidelines as a way to move toward the 21st 

century. Please join us; we’re not back in the 1950s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Madam Minister, quoting from your letter 

again with reference to what’s supposed to happen in the 21st 

century: 

 

A service district will cover the cost of its operation from 

a combination of revenue sources, including user fees and 

an annual levy from participating municipalities. The latter 

may be raised either from general municipal revenues or 

through a levy on the property and business tax base. 

 

One more level of government, one more level of taxation for 

the next century. Madam Minister, municipalities have been 

finding ways to cooperate with one another without the 

province establishing a whole new level of government. Why is 

this necessary, and how much is this going to cost the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer in the next century? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has got 

it all wrong. He says, in his question, one more level of 

government. So by implication he is arguing that what he wants 

to support is 860 different forms of government in 

Saskatchewan, larger than Ontario. That is what he says is the 

case. 

 

The services district Act, and way the Bill is tabled, is as I say a 

voluntary effort for the people of Saskatchewan who will do 

this. I know, not withstanding misrepresentation of the 

Conservatives opposite, they will build for their sons and 

daughter of tomorrow. They will build an infrastructure which 

is sustainable and supportable. They will have the public 

services for the 21st century that we can afford and that best 

reflect the values of the people of this province  no matter 

how many times and how he misrepresents the letter that is 

there. 

 

That is the fact and we’re going to work our way through this 

the way we always have in Saskatchewan — through a 

cooperative spirit of tackling the future proudly and boldly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Government Administrative Costs 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 

Premier. And, Mr. Premier, I was at SARM convention this 

morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in front of about 1,500 SARM delegates today, the 

Premier indicated that municipal governments spend as much as 

46 per cent of their funding on administration. However 

SARM’s own figures clearly show that 90 per cent of  



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

RM funding is directed to maintaining rural roads. And the vast 

majority of municipal governments in this province, including 

those which I’ve served on, run on a bare-bones budget. 

 

Does the Premier actually believe that our municipal leaders are 

directing almost half of their funding for administrative 

purposes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, this negligent 

misrepresentation of the facts and the statement of course just 

undermines the hon. member’s credibility. He knows full well 

what I said; I repeated it several times in the written text and 

I’ve shown the journalists. I said — I don’t have the text in 

front of me — the effect of it is that in some urban communities 

in the setting that we’re talking about  they’re urban 

technically under SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) but they are in a rural setting  just as the figure I 

gave a moment ago, the percentage which is dedicated to 

overhead is 46 per cent. For communities of 100 or less the 

average is 46 per cent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Name 

two. I’ll name . . . for between 100 and 250 the overhead 

percentage is 42 per cent. And the hon. members are saying to 

me: name two, name three. What kind of an argument is this? 

Are you in favour of standing for a position where 42 to 46 per 

cent of the communities of 250 population or less goes to 

overhead when it should be going to services of the local 

governments? That’s what I said. 

 

This is not an RM versus urban issue. This is a local 

governance issue, both rural and urban. We’re all Saskatchewan 

people. We’re all in the same boat together, and we had better 

come to grips with providing the best public infrastructure our 

province can provide for our people, or you, sir, and all the 

politicians, will pay a big price for it if we don’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, if I misread what the 

Premier’s comments were this morning, I had about 1,499 other 

people that joined in with that misconception. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s statement this 

morning is a clear indication to all municipal leaders in this 

province how clearly out of touch he is with local governments. 

This provincial government could clearly take a lesson from our 

municipal leaders. Had the Premier actually spoken with the 

reeves and councillors instead of speaking to them today, he 

would have known better. 

 

Will the Premier admit that funds are not being wasted by our 

municipal governments, urban or rural, and that there are no 

great savings to be made through amalgamation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  What I find absolutely mind-boggling, 

to be very blunt about this, Mr. Speaker, is that  

that hon. member would say that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, with a record number of 831 municipalities and 

governments, more than  sorry, 847  more than Ontario, 

that this is a system that he would argue is the system which 

will save rural Saskatchewan and the infrastructure of 

Saskatchewan for the 21st century. That is what he is saying. 

Even the people at SARM and SUMA don’t buy into that, not 

for the moment, not for the moment. 

 

We have no solutions that we want to impose upon them. All 

we want to say to them, as we say to you, is to join us in 

building for the future. You can’t look at a situation which was 

started in 1900 and 1905 and virtually remains unchanged in 

1996 and say, no change at all. Where in the world do you 

people come from? What planet do you come from? What 

world do you live in? What year do you live in? 

 

The whole world is under change and you’re going to have to 

do it either under the values of Saskatchewan or by standing 

still. You’re going to allow every province to bypass this 

province, and we for this side are not going to allow ourselves 

to do that. I guarantee that to be the case. 

 

And I might also say, if the Leader of the Opposition would just 

sit down while I finish, it is about time that the Liberal . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Time has expired. Next 

question. 

 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenues 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just to clarify that 

there are credible people on this side of the House as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Once again this week, Mr. Speaker, we have seen this 

government blatantly break a promise it made before and during 

the election campaign. The $10 million promised to 

municipalities has been withdrawn. There’s no question about 

that. 

 

My question to the Minister of Finance is: on Monday we heard 

the Municipal Affairs minister state that this VLT money that 

has been taken from the municipalities will be used to fund 

health and education in our province. We also heard her state 

that a small portion of this $10 million will be used to fund a 

province-wide 9-1-1 system. 

 

Will the minister commit today, that in subsequent years the 

municipalities’ portion of VLT revenues will be earmarked 

specifically for the education of our children or for health care, 

or does she maintain the municipalities’ money will be dumped 

into the General Revenue Fund where it can be used to pay for 

anything from a bloated cabinet to more political staff for the 

members opposite? Can she assure the people of Saskatchewan, 

who must pay the price for that government’s broken promises, 

measures will be taken to ensure this money will in fact be used 

for health and education in our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the member knows, and 

the member would know if he had any experience in local 

government, that it is impossible to budget with dedicated 

taxes. You couldn’t run a municipality by saying, we’re going 

to use half a mill for gravel, three-quarters of a mill for culverts, 

you know, a mill for roads, two mills for regional, you know. 

And if we have to put these all in dedicated funds and we can’t 

use it for anything else. The way municipalities mill rate . . . set 

their mill rate is to establish the total needs, their overall 

budget, and then they set their mill rate based on that. And then 

they have the flexibility to switch from one area of spending to 

another as priorities emerge. 

 

Governments are exactly the same. We don’t collect one tax 

and say this is for roads; this is for health; this is for education. 

We have a budget which reflects the priorities of the people of 

Saskatchewan, being health, education, and our social services. 

And that is where we have promised that we will maintain, 

sustain, the level of service, and that is how the money is 

allocated. No government can function on conditional financing 

and dedicated funds. And the members, if they had any 

experience in government, would know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 18  An Act to enable direct reduction of the 

Provincial Debt 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting 

measures to enable the direct reduction of the Provincial Debt 

be introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker:  Yesterday the member for Saskatoon 

Southeast raised a point of order concerning whether the 

member for Melfort-Tisdale could table documents during the 

private members’ statements period. At the time I advised the 

Assembly that I would consider the point before ruling, and I 

am now prepared to rule on that matter. 

 

Contrary to the custom or standing orders of many other 

parliaments, members of the Legislative Assembly are 

permitted by practice to table documents in the course of 

debate. This is pointed out very early in the legislative history 

of this Assembly in a ruling of the Speaker made in 1924. In 

that ruling, the Speaker stated that while the tabling of 

documents was in order to permit reference to be made to it 

during debate, it should not appear as a sessional paper. 

 

Consequently for the last 72 years it has continued to be the 

practice of the Assembly to accept documents at the Table 

which have no official or statutory requirement to be tabled. 

Such documents, however, are not minuted nor do they enjoy  

any official status. Subsequently the practice evolved to include 

not only documents tabled in debate but documents tabled in 

the course of other proceedings, such as question period. The 

tabling of documents during the private members’ statement 

period falls within contemporary practice. Therefore I find the 

member’s point of order not well taken. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Before orders of the day, I have a rule 46 that I 

would like to move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  I’ll ask the Leader of the Third Party to briefly 

explain to the House the reason why it should be considered as 

a priority item, and the motion that he proposes to present. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 

 

McDowell Committee 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, I stand pursuant to rule 46, and I 

truly believe we must debate an issue of great importance to the 

Saskatchewan people and to the reputation of all elected 

members here today. 

 

One year ago, approximately, all three parties agreed to appoint 

an independent committee to review and make 

recommendations regarding the salaries, per diems, and other 

rules which MLAs must follow. 

 

We all did this in order to become more accountable to the 

people of this province and we all agreed to accept the 

recommendations, whatever they may be, that the McDowell 

commission would bring forward. Mr. Speaker, the committee 

recommended several changes and stated these changes should 

come into effect January 1 of ’96. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this hasn’t happened. And as a 

result, I believe that the integrity of MLAs is at stake. We are all 

under fire, Mr. Speaker, because some members don’t want to 

recommend . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. The member is outlining a background 

and I understand that, but I will ask him to very succinctly — 

order — I will ask the member to very succinctly proceed 

immediately now to describe why he feels it should be 

considered as a priority item, and then advise specifically the 

motion that he wishes to have considered by the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Anything less than this 

is an affront to the Saskatchewan taxpayers, Saskatchewan 

families, and the reputations of this institution. 

 

Therefore, I move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government, as previously 

agreed by all parties in the Legislative Assembly, to accept 

all of the recommendations brought forward by the 

independent McDowell commission, and further that the 

recommendations be implemented retroactively to January  



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

1 ’96, as recommended at the outset by the McDowell 

commission. 

 

And I ask leave to start this debate. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Convert. 

 

The Speaker:  I convert to motions for return (debatable). 

Order, order. Order, order. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Cuts to Federal Transfer Payments 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to 

enter this debate and to discuss the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you said to Canadians today, what makes us 

distinctive, what makes us different than Americans, what is so 

essential to our very high quality of life in Canada, the answer 

would be that we have a universal health care system across this 

country, that we have a social safety net that prevails in every 

province, and that our children can have access to education no 

matter what their financial circumstances. 

 

And in maintaining this very fundamental part of our sense of 

Canadian identity, the federal government has historically 

played a key role. It’s played a role first of all in providing 

money for these programs. It is the federal government that 

collects the majority of taxes in Canada, and therefore it’s 

appropriate that the federal government funnel money back 

through the provinces to fund these absolutely essential 

programs. 

 

The other key role the federal government has played is in 

setting national standards, in ensuring that across this vast land, 

no matter what the politics of a particular provincial 

government, there are rules; there are minimum standards that 

apply when it comes to welfare or when it comes to health care. 

 

All of this, Mr. Speaker, is threatened and is being jeopardized 

by some of the decisions taken recently by the federal 

government. 

 

First of all, I want to make it clear that this province, this 

government, is not concerned about the federal government 

reducing its deficit. Quite the contrary. We applaud the federal 

government for reducing its deficit  we actually wish that 

they would balance their books  and we applaud them for 

reducing spending. 

 

Our concerns are different concerns. First of all, our concern 

that they have no plan. They have absolutely no vision as to 

what health care or welfare or post-secondary education is 

going to look like in Canada in the next century. 

Now I must admit they started down the road of suggesting they 

might have a plan. They announced that there would be social 

security reform to look at ways to restructure our social security 

system under Minister Axworthy They very quickly though 

dropped that idea, retreated from that sense of plan and vision, 

and went back to an approach of merely cutting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would do is I would contrast what’s 

happening at the federal level  cut, hack, slash and in the end 

some day we’ll find out what we’ve got left  to what we did 

in this province. Mr. Speaker, in 1991 when we became the 

government and we looked at our health care system and we 

said, you know, this health care system the way it’s structured is 

not affordable, it’s not sustainable into the next century, we 

didn’t just start hacking and slashing at it and hope some day 

something would fall out of the system that would be 

acceptable. We put before the people of Saskatchewan a vision, 

a plan of a new health care system that would be affordable, 

effective and sustainable into the next century. 

 

So our first concern is, the federal government is cutting and 

cutting deeply with absolutely no plan or vision as to what these 

fundamental programs are going to look like in the next 

century. 

 

Our second concern is that they’ve retreated entirely from the 

role of setting national standards. In the area of social programs 

there is only one standard with respect to welfare; that is, you 

can’t deny welfare to somebody from another province. There 

are simply no other standards that exist. 

 

In the area of health care, they’re trying to have it both ways. 

They’re trying to say to people, we’re still interested in 

maintaining national standards even though our funding, which 

used to be about 50 per cent of the cost of health care, has 

dropped dramatically. So our second concern then has to do 

with the fact that they have abandoned the idea of having 

national standards that apply across Canada. 

 

Our final, and probably our most fundamental concern, is what 

the federal government is doing to funding for health, 

education, and social programs. 

 

(1430) 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, Paul Martin, the Minister of Finance 

in Ottawa, once said, Finance ministers are the most rational 

people in all governments. I don’t know if I agree with that, but 

what I do agree with is it’s very hard to get Finance ministers 

irate. I can tell you, the federal Minister of Finance has Finance 

ministers irate from one part of Canada to another part of 

Canada for what we call fiddling with figures. Let me read you 

a quote from the western Finance ministers’ report, November 

1995. This is a report endorsed by all the governments in 

western Canada and the two northern governments. And we say 

quite directly: the federal government is making misleading 

statements about the magnitude of the social program transfer 

cuts contained in the 1995 federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for ministers who are very reluctant to be that 

blunt, this is pretty hard language. They’re saying the federal  



258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

government is fiddling with figures, trying to say if you’d only 

take these cuts and look at them through this angle, you’d find 

they weren’t really as dramatic as what you think. And the 

ministers go on to say: the cuts to health, education, social 

programs are dramatic, even devastating. 

 

Let me just give you some idea of what I’m talking about, Mr. 

Speaker. Between 1994 and the end of this century, when the 

cuts actually do stop, the federal government is cutting its own 

overall government spending by less than 11 per cent. Yet in 

that same time period, they’re cutting spending or financing for 

health, education, and social programs by more than 35 per 

cent. So cut your overall government by 11 per cent, but cut the 

programs Canadians care about the most  their health 

programs, their social programs, their post-secondary education 

 cut that by 35 per cent. 

 

There is a number that is worse than this, and it is, as my 

colleague says, a number that is appropriate to say “shame” 

when you hear it. 

 

In the 1996-97 federal budget, a full 73 per cent of all the cuts 

in that budget are cuts to health, education, social programs. So, 

Mr. Speaker, what the federal government has said  because 

budgets reflect values  the federal government has said in 

1996-97 we have to reduce spending. The area that we want to 

reduce spending in most dramatically  because it’s 73 per 

cent of all of our cuts  is funding for health, education, and 

social programs, funding that matters most to Canadians. 

 

What would happen, Mr. Speaker, if a province like 

Saskatchewan said well, as the members opposite said to us, 

you now know the picture; get on with it? What would happen 

if we just passed through to the health boards, to the people in 

education, to the people who receive social programs, all of the 

federal cuts? We’d just say, they’re federal cuts. They’re aimed 

at your program. Here they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve done enough work on our budget that I can 

tell you exactly what would happen, not just in Saskatchewan 

but all across Canada, if these cuts were passed through in their 

entirety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would have to slash our welfare rates and 

entitlements to such an extent that we would have homeless 

people across this province and we would go very quickly 

toward an American-style society with a massive underclass of 

people. Mr. Speaker, if we pass through the health care cuts in 

their entirety, it would mean the end — the end — of the 

medicare system as we have known it. Mr. Speaker, the 

Government of Saskatchewan has spoken out many times about 

what these cuts would mean to the average person, but so have 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must say I was shocked to hear the provincial 

Liberals welcome the 1996-97 federal budget as a fair and 

compassionate budget  a budget in which 73 per cent of all 

the cuts are cuts to health, education, and social programs. I was 

particularly distressed that they weren’t even listening to what 

their own constituents were saying to them. 

 

And I quote now from some letters. These are letters written to 

Paul Martin, as Minister of Finance, saying please, please 

understand what these cuts are going to mean to our programs. 

And they were copied to me and they were copied to the 

members opposite. And I have contacted the people involved 

and they have given me permission to read some of their 

comments in the legislature. 

 

The first comment comes from the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek 

District Health Board  the health board in the riding of the 

Liberal opposition critic. And they write to the federal Minister 

of Finance: 

 

We are concerned that the magnitude of the anticipated 

reductions in federal transfer payments to the province of 

Saskatchewan will erode the nature and intent of the 

Canada Health Act. 

 

What they’re saying is these cuts will mean that we as a health 

board can no longer maintain a universally accessible health 

care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Living Sky Health District wrote and said: 

 

As a district health board, we are appealing to you, the 

federal minister, to reconsider the impact and 

consequences of further reductions in transfer payments to 

the province of Saskatchewan which will result in very 

negative implications on our health care system. 

 

The Saskatoon District Health Board talked about the cuts to 

health care imposed by the federal government as significant 

and potentially devastating to their health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, politics is about making choices. When 

governments make choices, they reveal their true colours. They 

tell people what their true values are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we now know is that Liberals, whether they 

are Liberals in Ottawa or Liberals in the opposition in this 

House, find it acceptable when they are short of money to take 

the biggest grab of money from health, education, and social 

programs  programs that Canadians hold dearly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will conclude by saying this. The federal Finance 

minister has tried to discredit our numbers. He is trying to do 

this because he is trying to ensure that we do not continue 

speaking out about what they’re doing to health, education, and 

social programing. I will say this to him and to the members 

opposite. The government and the people of Saskatchewan will 

continue to speak out when we have governments that take the 

biggest cuts out of health, education, and social programs. 

 

This government, the people of this province, have a far 

different vision of Canada than the members opposite or the 

federal Finance minister. Our vision of Canada is a vision 

where everyone can have access to the core of health care 

services without needing a credit card. Our vision is of a 

Canada where students can go to get post-secondary education 

whether they come from rich families or poor families. Our 

vision is a vision of a Canada where there is a social safety net  



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

in place when any of us fall on troubled times. This is the kind 

of Canada we believe in. This is the kind of Canada we will 

continue to fight for; and this is the kind of Canada that has 

made this country the best place in the whole world in which to 

live. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  The minister may want to formally move the 

motion so that the debate can proceed. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Legislative Assembly shares the government’s 

concern that 73 per cent of the cuts in the 1996-97 federal 

budget are cuts in cash transfers to provinces for health, 

education, and social programs; furthermore, reductions in 

federal funding for health, education and social programs 

continue into the next century; therefore, we call on the 

federal government to consider a national plan that ends 

these cuts and protects national standards and basic 

services. 

 

The Speaker:  Is there a seconder? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Seconded by the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to rise and support this very important 

motion, and I urge the members opposite to join with us and 

remind them through you that it is their responsibility to stand 

up for Saskatchewan people. That’s our primary responsibility 

here, not to apologize for Ottawa for the kind of cut-back that 

has been outlined by the Minister of Finance, which are the true 

figures; because if there’s any dispute in that, Mr. Speaker, I do 

have a copy from The Globe and Mail of the projected cuts for 

Saskatchewan until the year 2003. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that all members would recognize and 

are well aware that it took about 40, 50, 60 years to develop the 

social safety net in this country. And that was developed over 

time by successive federal and provincial governments  of all 

political stripes, quite honestly  progressing towards a safety 

net and an arrangement of sort of financial supports for those 

who were vulnerable and needed that kind of support. And 

these are complex arrangements because they involve different 

jurisdictional responsibilities and so on. But it took 40, 50 years 

to develop these very important programs and all parties have 

contributed. 

 

I might say that a lot of the emphasis for some of the programs, 

which is well recognized in Canada, did come from people like 

Woodsworth and Stanley Knowles and Tommy Douglas and 

Grace McInnis and so on. So I think that our party certainly has 

a proud tradition of contributing to Canada’s safety net and to 

national standards. 

 

And certainly Saskatchewan as a province  which is a credit  

to all the people  Saskatchewan as a province is recognized 

for having of course been the pioneers in medicare; but not only 

medicare, in educational reform under Lloyd, and even before 

Lloyd, and the social income security programs where we’ve 

been a social policy innovator. That’s been recognized. So I 

think Saskatchewan people have substantially contributed. 

 

My point, Mr. Speaker, being though that over time Canada has 

developed a positive international image. It is our social 

programs that have defined us, that are the essence of Canada, 

as the Minister of Finance said, that distinguishes us from our 

friends to the south where 47 million Americans have no health 

care, for example. Now that’s not the kind of society that we 

want. 

 

But we have a good reputation as a caring nation, as being 

socially progressive. And this is our identity. And this is 

defined recently by the United Nations. And the reason being 

that we . . . up until recently, the number of low income people, 

poor people, living in Canada was less than anywhere else. And 

of course the worry that we have is that the accelerated rate of 

poverty in Canada is increasing, which is a concern of groups 

across the country and, quite frankly, is a concern of some 

communities in the United Nations as well because they had 

seen Canada as a model in the past. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what is at stake here is not only our 

international reputation . . . by the magnitude of the federal cuts 

and the fact that there is no national plan. So we see already a 

patchwork quilt developing. We know it’s happening in 

Alberta. We know that B.C. (British Columbia) brought in 

residential requirements. We know that, I think today or 

yesterday it was announced, that Manitoba is cutting welfare 

rates by 10 per cent. I will support that. 

 

We’re the only province in the last three or four years that 

hasn’t cut money from the poorest of the poor. And we’re very 

proud of that. But it’s getting very, very difficult to continue to 

maintain those programs in the face of these massive offloads. 

But that’s what we predicted would happen when the federal 

government announced their process, which hasn’t really been a 

process of involving Canadian people, is that when you take 

away national standards or allow those to erode, provinces are 

going to do what they have to do, and there’s different 

philosophical views and so on. But in Manitoba’s defence and 

to B.C. defence, they’re having to make those kinds of choices 

because of the massive offloading I would say over the last two 

or three years to western Canada and what’s being proposed for 

the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this deterioration of federal responsibility started out of 

the Mulroney government. Well first of all we understand that 

because there’s not a philosophical commitment by Tories to 

looking after their neighbours. There isn’t a commitment to do 

that. They also accelerated this process by deregulation and 

unilateral offloads in terms of their responsibilities by 

constitution to treaty Indians and the first round of the UIC 

(Unemployment Insurance Commission) cuts and so on. 

 

And so the Tories started the process because they’re not 

committed to social programs anyway, as Grant Schmidt wasn’t  



260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

committed to meaningful, compassionate, responsible welfare 

reform in the mid-80s here. He wasn’t committed to that. As 

late as 1980, Beattie Martin, the former minister of the families 

said that poverty wasn’t a problem in Saskatchewan or Canada. 

So they don’t understand that. But, Mr. Speaker, the troubling 

aspect here is that not only did the federal Liberals continue 

with the Mulroney policies of dismantling the safety net, 

they’ve actually accelerated it. 

 

(1445) 

 

They accelerated it with unilateral treaty offloads again, 

shirking their responsibilities with respect to first nations. 

They’ve now had two rounds of UIC cuts. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the members opposite and the Liberal benches wouldn’t know, 

except the House Leader would, and the speaker . . . the leader 

that was evicted by the current caucus, they wouldn’t know, but 

we tried to get the Liberal caucus to join us some time ago over 

the last three or four years to object to these cuts and they 

wouldn’t do it. Because they weren’t standing up for 

Saskatchewan people; they were apologizing for Ottawa. And 

that’s exactly what we’re seeing here by this current opposition 

Liberal group. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember the very first meeting. I was very 

excited when I went to the first ministers’ meeting of Social 

Services ministers with Mr. Axworthy, about two years ago 

now, because he was talking about a process that was going to 

unfold involving ministers from across the country, social 

groups, all the stakeholders, all the people that had some 

interest in income security reform. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that process just simply hasn’t unfolded. 

Why? Because Ottawa has chosen to say that the provinces 

can’t get their act together and that they’re not united. Mr. 

Speaker, the three conferences that I went to, we had joint 

communiqués at every one where there was an incredible 

amount of unanimity among the provinces. But the federal 

government was not committed to meaningful income security 

reform in the first place, so chose to pick one province off one 

at a time, and that’s exactly the way the process is unfolding. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is not national leadership. That is not 

even befitting the Reform Party’s approach, which is to sort of 

. . . they have no interest at all in national unity. But the Reform 

Party couldn’t have done any worse in terms of accelerating the 

rate to dismantle the country in the social policy area. But 

there’s no process and they’ve continued to make unilateral 

decisions. The one that concerns me . . . well, they all concern 

me  the cuts to health care; a $31 million cut to training 

spaces in education this year. How on earth are we going to 

have a competitive workforce if the federal government isn’t 

even part of that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the one that concerns me from my background is 

the phasing out, the elimination of the Canada Assistance Plan, 

for at least people had five basic rights by citizenship no matter 

where they lived in Canada. Now that is gone. That has gone, 

and it’s been replaced with nothing, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a 

tragedy. That is an absolute tragedy. And we’re going to see 

provinces with more punitive governments continue to make  

the kind of choices that are not consistent with our image 

historically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like to say that there is a lot of 

rhetoric in the federal budget. There was a lot of rhetoric there 

about helping people, helping poor people. But the reality is, 

Mr. Speaker, that the federal deficit fighting has been on the 

backs of poor people  $2.5 billion already just on UIC, Mr. 

Speaker, and another $7 billion in social programs. 

 

Now why on earth would a government make those kinds of 

massive cuts to programs that affect young people, seniors, 

many women who live in poverty? Where their child care 

promise is, nobody knows. It appears to me that it’s gone. A 

$750 million red book promise on child care appears to be 

gone. Now that is going to have incredible implications for 

single parent moms and others who are trying to get out of the 

poverty trap. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is foolish to cut by 35 per cent in these areas. 

We will pay big time. We will pay big time on health care costs, 

on poverty, on more institutions filled with . . . jails filled with 

young offenders and persons in prison. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

is an incredible waste in human potential. 

 

And I think that the federal Liberal government has missed a 

golden opportunity to reform the income security system 

because all provinces were ready. Canadians were ready. They 

were looking for some leadership in a process outlined by the 

federal government. 

 

And I know that the Liberals opposite would have to admit that 

there is no process; there has been no process to address the 

issue of income security review. There has only been unilateral 

cuts. They have not kept their promises on maintaining the 

integrity of health, education, and social service programs. And 

they have not kept their promise on day care. They have not 

kept their promise on a process, a meaningful process, that 

would involve Canadians. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I join with the Minister of Finance in saying 

that we don’t want the American style in Canada. They are 

great neighbours, but we’re different. And that’s recognized 

across the country. We don’t want to be the Alabama of the 

North. That is not what we stand for. 

 

So we can’t support that, Mr. Speaker. And therefore I would 

urge all members to get up and join us and send a united 

message from Saskatchewan to Ottawa. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand and respond to the motion presented by the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a couple of months since I met with the 

minister. I want to thank her for that opportunity to discuss 

things like the transfer payment issue that is before us today. I 

would like to remind the minister that if she has any questions 

of me, she can make an appointment with me any time. 



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

In the motion before this House, Mr. Speaker, the minister once 

again blames the federal government for this government’s 

problems. The minister says that 73 per cent of the cuts in the 

recent federal budget were made to transfer payments. She also 

says that there is no plan to stop the decline of these transfers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have yet another Oscar whining 

performance from the minister. The minister might be the Meryl 

Streep of this House, but her colleagues are no underachievers 

either. If they’re lucky, the rest of the members opposite might 

just be up for the best theme for the chorus of whining and 

blaming they’ve put up with in recent months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the basic problem with the 

Minister of Finance’s motion is that it continues to blame 

someone else, Finance’s motion continues to blame someone 

else, and it’s always easier for this government to blame 

someone else  blame them for their problems — instead of 

taking responsibility and just getting down to solving the 

problems that face this province. 

 

It’s time, Mr. Speaker, that the minister quit blaming and just 

get on the job and do it for the people of Saskatchewan. I’m 

sure that the members of the third party are pleased to see that 

they are no longer the scapegoats for everything that the 

government thinks is wrong with the province. Mr. Speaker, I 

sincerely hope this government shows the third party the 

courtesy of thanking them for playing that role for the last four 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government complains, whines, and blames 

the federal government for its problems. If the members 

opposite would take a look at some of the budget documents 

provided by the federal government, they would soon discover 

that the federal budget was quite fair to Saskatchewan. 

 

If they would look at page 58 of the budget briefing book, Mr. 

Speaker, it shows that the total entitlement, or all the money 

given to Saskatchewan, will drop by $62 million between 

1995-96 and ‘96-97. 

 

In the following year, the total amount of transfer monies we 

will receive from the federal government will drop by another 

$60 million. It’s much less than the figures that have been 

thrown around by the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these total entitlements include all the money 

transferred to Saskatchewan by way of equalization, tax room 

vacated for the provinces, as well as cash transfers. Now when I 

met with the Minister of Finance, she said that these 

equalization payments and tax points shouldn’t count. As a 

result of this position, Mr. Speaker, she doesn’t use them in her 

numbers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if equalization and tax points aren’t 

important, then I challenge the minister to turn the money they 

produce over to the universities, technical institutes, school 

boards, health districts, and municipalities whose budgets she is 

threatening to cut. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  If she feels so strongly that these transfers 

don’t count, give the money they provide to someone who 

knows they count. 

 

In terms of sheer size of government spending, the cuts to 

federal transfers are certainly manageable. These cuts should 

not have the massive impact that the minister is saying they will 

have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly given that the government program 

spending is about $5 billion, they can handle such a small cut. 

If one looks in terms of overall spending by this government, 

including Crown corporations which page 27 of the Provincial 

Auditor’s fall report reveals is about 8.6 billion, a cut of 62 

million is quite small. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers used by the minister, however, are 

not really the issue. The issue here is about blaming. It just has 

to stop. The official opposition sincerely hopes that the blaming 

we see here today will not be repeated when this government 

brings down its budget on the 28th of this month. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  The real issue here, Mr. Speaker, is this 

government’s inability to create economic development and 

jobs. With economic development and jobs, this province can 

deal with the problems in this province in the Saskatchewan 

way. We’ll solve our problems instead of whining about them. 

 

If members opposite would take a little bit of time off from 

blaming and take a close look at the fiscal arrangements 

between the federal government, they will soon learn that the 

province would benefit in two ways from getting down to 

solving the real problems facing Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, if 

we had more jobs in this province, we would not only have 

fewer people on assistance but it would directly benefit the 

funding of health, education, and social services. 

 

As I said earlier, part of the overall transfer to the province 

includes tax room. As our economy grows, so will the money 

produced from these tax points vacated to us by the federal 

government. 

 

More jobs and more economic activity means more revenue 

directly for health care, education, and social assistance. 

According to page 56 of the budget briefing book, the federal 

government estimates that the tax room, or tax points to the 

province, will continue to produce more revenue. Even with 

this government’s sorry job-creation record, the federal 

government estimates that economic growth in this province 

will help bring in more money for health, education, and social 

services through these tax points. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1998-99 estimates, this tax room will be worth 

some $418 million to Saskatchewan. By 2002-2003, they 

expect this to grow to be worth $487 million. Imagine, Mr. 

Speaker, the amount of money that Saskatchewan has available 

for health, education, and social services, can grow if our  



262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

economy grows and produces more jobs. 

 

Instead of pursuing this aggressively, the government spends all 

their time, wasting all of their time, blaming others. That 

behaviour, Mr. Speaker, won’t do anything to put anyone to 

work and it won’t do anything to preserve our treasured social 

programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister told the people of 

Saskatchewan back in 1994 that if we had too much activity we 

would lose out on equalization payments. We would get less 

overall transfers. Well this sort of attitude is certainly not the 

Saskatchewan way of doing things. It’s not the work ethic, the 

sense of independence, and sacrifice that built this province. 

 

(1500) 

 

Her remarks are also interesting in that on one occasion she 

tells us that these equalization payments are not relevant; and 

she goes around saying that they are so relevant she’d prefer to 

have them before seeing the unemployed get work and start 

paying more taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have 4,000 fewer jobs in this province than at 

this time a year ago. This government can say the situation is 

not that bad by pointing back in time, but it fails to remove 

some real human suffering. It also fails to put this province 

back on the right direction of trying to create more jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once in a while this government seems to start 

thinking that creating jobs is the way to get real financial 

freedom. A couple of weeks ago they introduced another 

economic development strategy paper. A strategy might work, 

however, if only the government would stick to it and have a 

coherent plan. Unfortunately one hand doesn’t know what the 

other is doing.  

 

We have a government going out and telling everyone they 

want jobs, but their Crown corporations and other departments 

are off doing something else. They want jobs, but they go and 

create laws that make it difficult for business to survive. They 

jack up indirect taxes through utilities. Last year they hiked a 

number of nuisance fees on business, and they let the Workers’ 

Compensation attempt to impose debt charges and annual 

increases that were beyond what was expected. They increased 

the sales tax by 2 per cent, even though they condemned these 

very same tax measures by the previous government. 

 

Despite complaining about the 2 per cent flat tax imposed by 

the Tories, they came up with a new tax of their own. They 

introduced the deficit reduction surtax of 10 per cent and later 

renamed it the debt reduction surtax, just to add to the 

hypocrisy. All these efforts, Mr. Speaker, make it more difficult 

for people here to stay in this province or to create jobs. 

Without jobs there will be no financial freedom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite might also care to argue 

that they provided some petty tax breaks that will help small 

business. They might also try and remind us that last year they 

offered another petty tax break to the rest of us on the debt 

reduction surtax. Despite these things, Mr. Speaker, we still pay  

far too much in taxes, and it’s killing jobs in this province. The 

Premier once said, taxes are the silent killer of jobs. And I think 

this is sound advice. 

 

If you look to page 92 of last year’s budget, as well as page 25 

of the auditor’s fall report, Mr. Speaker, it shows something 

quite scary about this government. Between 1990-91 and 

1995-96, the amount of revenue this government takes from us 

in taxes has grown by 33 per cent. In dollar terms it’s gone from 

1.988 billion to 2.671 billion. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if many 

families around this province can say that their incomes have 

grown by 33 per cent over the last five years. 

 

What this all shows, Mr. Speaker, is that after some shiny new 

strategies and a lot of talk on behalf of this government, the 

fewer people who are working are just paying more taxes. Mr. 

Speaker, these high taxes are hurting our ability to create jobs 

that will help secure the social programs that the minister refers 

to in her motion. 

 

It is also quite ironic that they would be so intent on blaming 

the federal government about their revenue problems for a small 

cut when their overall take from tax revenue has grown by 33 

per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance is so upset about a small 

but fair cut to transfers from the federal government when her 

tax revenues have grown so much, what does this say? It tells us 

taxpayers that we should expect that she’ll break her promise to 

provide a further extension of the debt reduction tax break that 

she promised in last year’s budget. If all promises are on hold, 

then this one must also be on the table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Recently an economist from the University of Saskatchewan, a 

Professor Eric Howe, suggested that our economy should be 

going full out with high grain and resource prices. But yet we 

are only producing modest growth and even fewer jobs. He 

suggests our economy would be doing much better if it weren’t 

for the overtaxation and overregulation coming from this 

government. Mr. Speaker, not only are high taxes standing in 

the way of us getting the growth and jobs we need to secure our 

social programs for ourselves; the economic strategy of this 

government is not helping improve anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government condemned the previous 

government for wasting money on trade trips around the world. 

Their slogan was, the ministers get the trips; the taxpayers get 

the bill. Well the only thing that’s changed is that the cab taking 

the minister to the airport pulls up in front of the Condie castle 

instead of in front of a humble bungalow. The trips are just as 

wasteful as they ever were and are doing precious little to create 

jobs and help us secure our social programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last summer for example the minister travelled to 

South America, just in time to catch the end of the ski season in 

Santiago. Mr. Speaker, the minister took the president of 

SaskEnergy with him on this trip. Curiously enough, this civil 

servant had to go all the way to Chile to meet officials from 

Alberta-based NOVA Corp. This seems like a huge waste. 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, the president of SaskEnergy felt it was 

safer to travel all the way to Chile than risk driving to Alberta  



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

on the highways that this government has let fall apart over the 

last four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  The minister also had to arrange a meeting 

with Gearbulk Shipping in Rio De Janeiro. Here’s a company 

that has brokers in an office in Vancouver that one can just 

phone, but I suspect it’s just a lot more exciting to go to Rio. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more waste. If this government spent less 

time blaming and rid itself of this waste, there would not be a 

problem with transfer payments. On that same trip, Mr. 

Speaker, the schedule was set up so that there would be two 

weekend layovers, the last of which was in Santiago, Chile. 

Instead of working on the weekend, the minister scheduled a 

whole weekend for travel and just a couple of meetings. The 

minister’s flight to Chile from Argentina took just two hours on 

any of four airlines. Why did he need to waste this weekend 

holidaying rather than working? This holiday plan the 

government has disguised as an economic strategy will do 

precious little for economic growth in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before this government wastes any more effort 

whining about federal transfers, it should clean up its own 

waste. This government promised the people of Saskatchewan 

that it would reduce administrative waste in the government by 

$40 million over four years. Even though this promise is all too 

modest, this government can’t seem to even accomplish this. It 

seems like they are more likely to cut front line staff that deliver 

services to the public before they cut their own waste. 

 

Since getting back in office, they’ve expanded the size of 

cabinet, added political staff, added a department and another 

deputy minister. Mr. Speaker, they spent over $600,000 on a 

utility rate review when they already knew that they were going 

to let Jack Messer raise our power rates anyhow. They spent 

another $50,000 having SaskEnergy go out and hold public 

meetings to ask if they could lower the power rates. They 

topped this off with a $30,000 TV address to the people of 

Saskatchewan and $100,000 pre-budget consultation when they 

already knew what they were going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while they complain about federal transfers, 

there’s even more waste to report. We now hear that the closure 

of the Plains hospital could result in even more expense to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Needed renovations, which were the 

basis of the province’s decision to force the board to close the 

facility, will likely be done anyhow so the government can put 

the building to some new use. In the last year with its cost 

overruns, this government blew another 37 million on a casino. 

If that wasn’t bad enough, they are now giving $80 to bus tour 

gamblers coming to the casino. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we shouldn’t be surprised by this sort of give 

away however. It’s coming from a government that’s willing to 

give more and more tax breaks to the 141st largest corporation 

in Canada in Husky Oil. We shouldn’t be surprised when they 

give breaks to one of the largest banks in the country to build a 

call centre. Mr. Speaker, it appears to the average person in this 

province that a bank with a billion dollar plus in profits  

shouldn’t need any breaks from us. If this province had a good 

environment for economic growth, these give-aways wouldn’t 

be necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the latter point the members opposite are doing 

the exact opposite of the federal government. While they give 

breaks to huge, profitable banks, the federal government is 

taking the advice of average working people and continuing to 

slap an additional tax on the banks in the upcoming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has become quite clear that the motion put 

forward by the Minister of Finance is quite flawed in its logic. It 

exposes much of the hypocrisy of this government. In recent 

weeks, this sort of hypocrisy has been taken to new heights. The 

government says its number 1 priority is job creation, yet all we 

have heard is that they are planning on cutting hard at SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

and our universities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, taking away education will remove the tools 

people need to get jobs. To secure our social programs, we need 

jobs, and Saskatchewan people are not going to get them this 

way. They’re not going to get jobs if this government keeps 

gutting rural Saskatchewan. They’re not going to get jobs if this 

government keeps overtaxing the mom and pop operations that 

employ most of the people in this province. They’re not going 

to get jobs if this government keeps wasting our tax dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s quite clear that this government needs to quit 

blaming other people for its problems. The problem is not the 

transfer payments referred to in the motion. It’s our slow 

moving economy. 

 

In the latter part of her motion, the Minister of Finance suggests 

that there needs to be a plan with regard to federal transfer 

payments. Well, Mr. Speaker, the federal government gave out 

a plan in last year’s budget. In 1994 they assured the people in 

have-not provinces that equalization transfers would not be 

subject to deficit reduction cuts like other programs. This was a 

great benefit to provinces like ours. Lastly, in this year’s budget 

they had laid out a plan to provide stable funding and a cash 

floor on health, education, and social assistance transfers until 

the year 2002-2003. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s compare this briefly with the actions of the 

members opposite. On page 30 of their election platform, Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite promised that under their plan, 

and I quote: They will provide a stable, multi-year, provincial 

funding environment for key public services like health, 

education, and municipal government. 

 

(1515) 

 

Less than a year later, every promise that has ever been made 

has been thrown out the window. Mr. Speaker, this government 

threw promises like this out the window because they said they 

didn’t know what would be in the federal budget. This 

government knew what was in store for them for transfers in 

‘95-96 at least a year ago. When the budget came down, there 

were no surprises. 

 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Bond Rating Service said that these 

cuts were expected and that they should not have a serious 

impact on the fiscal outlook. This government hung its hat on 

the Dominion Bond Rating Service report a year ago, and they 

went on to say since, that it’s no longer relevant. A few short 

weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, the minister changed her tune again 

and finally admitted that the federal government had given her 

ample notice of cuts to transfer payments. The minister was 

quoted in the paper about these cuts, saying: let me say 

something positive about the federal government for a change. 

At least we’ve had a number of months; we can respond. How 

quickly the positives were forgotten and the blaming resumed, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you compare the record of the federal 

government to the record of the hastily breaking funding 

promises by this government, the members opposite do not 

stack up very well. I think members opposite would agree that 

it’s downright silly for them to criticize another level of 

government that’s honouring its funding promises and meeting 

its targets when this government can’t keep its own. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  If anything, now that the members opposite 

know what they will be getting in federal transfers until the year 

2002-2003, they should come up with a plan outlining the level 

of transfers they intend to make to the universities, SIAST, the 

school boards, health districts, and municipalities for the same 

period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a final point, in her motion the minister alludes 

to the fact that cuts to transfers were larger in comparison to 

cuts in other parts of federal spending. Mr. Speaker, in saying 

this the minister and her colleagues are missing some simple 

facts. There is only one taxpayer. That taxpayer still has to deal 

with a federal deficit and debt. Unfortunately for all, the federal 

government must spend about $47 billion every year just to pay 

interest on our massive debt. That’s almost one-third of their 

overall spending, and it gives them little room to manoeuvre. 

 

While the federal government had little room to manoeuvre, I 

am sure all members of this House can be thankful that, despite 

deep defence cuts, we still have a military base in 

Saskatchewan. That base, Mr. Speaker, employs over 1,155 

people in this province. 

 

I am sure that all the members of this House are also pleased 

that the federal government is doing its best to secure those jobs 

for years to come by promoting the 15 Wing Moose Jaw as a 

possible site for basic and advanced flight training for other 

NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) member countries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Before this government blames the federal 

government, that had little room to manoeuvre, it should look at 

its own massive debt carrying costs. According to page 27 of 

the auditor’s fall report, the interest expenses to Saskatchewan 

for all government activity are $1.667 billion dollars. This is 

more than we spend on health care. 

If this government would take steps to improve Crown 

corporation accountability and deal with our growing pension 

liabilities, these could be reduced. Reducing the amount of 

money this government throws away on interest costs would 

make it easier to reduce taxes, create jobs, and would make the 

small cut in overall transfers, as we are discussing here today, 

all the more manageable. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion put 

forward by the Minister of Finance. I believe this motion should 

be rephrased. In that light, I move that the motion be amended 

such: 

 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

urge this government to refrain from blaming the federal 

budget and direct its efforts towards creating jobs and 

encouraging the economic growth needed to secure the 

social programs treasured by all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly oppose 

the attempts of the opposition to take the federal government 

off the hook on this matter. 

 

The hon. member from Thunder Creek’s speech was as 

unfocused as the federal budget. And I might add that it 

contained everything except the kitchen sink. But it also 

revealed an absence of any notion of the change and the 

magnitude of change that we’re involved in in this province and 

across this country. 

 

I might refer back to a Tribune article of Tuesday, February 13, 

an editorial comment: why does the member from Thunder 

Creek want to defend the federal Liberals? The long and short 

is that Chrétien and his Liberals have slashed and burned social 

programs and agricultural support programs at a rate that makes 

Mulroney look like a spendthrift. Post-secondary education and 

health are a federal matter, and the feds have to take full 

responsibility for the mess those two programs are in. 

 

I’ll remind the members opposite that the alternative to change 

is no change, and to do nothing is to go back to the deficit and 

debt treadmill that we were on. And so it might be useful to 

direct one’s efforts to thinking about change rather than 

producing grocery lists of topics in the place of debate on 

substantive issues. 

 

There was a profound lack of understanding illustrated in the 

member’s comments about the real Saskatchewan situation, and 

as old research officer I think I might like to acquaint you with 

some of the basics regarding our condition in this province. 

 

We do have in Saskatchewan a varied population, one that 

we’re proud of and one that we enjoy the diversity of, but it 

does create some particular challenges for us as a province. We 

have the most seniors of any province in Canada in proportion  



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

to our population and the most children. So we have the most 

people that are at some of the highest levels of need in terms of 

expenditure that comes from the social envelope. Although we 

have 3 per cent of the population in Canada, we have 14 per 

cent of the aboriginal population in Canada which again is both 

a cultural benefit, a social benefit, but creates some special 

challenges for our us. 

 

In rural Saskatchewan 60 per cent of the agricultural land in 

western Canada is in Saskatchewan, so federal decisions like 

the change in the Western Grain Transportation Act affects 

Saskatchewan more than it does other provinces. What I’d ask 

the opposition is why you aren’t standing up for Saskatchewan, 

and why you aren’t defending the values that make 

Saskatchewan and Canada what it is. 

 

When we went out in our new century consultations, the public 

told us they wanted less taxation, less government, better 

services, a balanced budget. These are all laudable goals. But in 

order to achieve them in such a way that you don’t create 

damage to your basic social and economic fabric, they have to 

be carefully thought through in the context of the real people 

who live in Saskatchewan: the seniors, the aboriginals, rural, 

and all of the rest of us who make up the population of this 

province. 

 

These are many masters to serve, and I think our government 

has worked hard to balance these various needs in 

Saskatchewan. In our first phase of government, we dealt with a 

financial plan to get rid of the debt and start living without 

deficit budgets. We worked on health reform because the 

exponential growth of costs in the health area weren’t 

sustainable. We developed REDAs so that rural communities 

could use their resources to pull together and create strong 

economic and job base in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now in our second term of government, we’ll be moving on to 

new areas of challenge while continuing the work started in the 

other areas, in social services and education. 

 

We have a lot of challenges facing us. There’s fewer trading 

centres. There’s international trading rules that are changing, 

and federal and provincial governments have less resources to 

work with. This results in an uneven system that can create 

considerable inequity and upheaval unless it’s very carefully 

thought through. The challenge for both the federal and 

provincial governments is to work in partnership on these 

challenges. But there’s no doubt that the contemplated changes 

to the health, social transfer are going to affect Saskatchewan in 

some very significant ways. 

 

I attended several of the Preparing for the New Century 

consultations and there was . . . two of the strongest messages 

that came across from people, is to fight Ottawa harder on the 

choices they’ve made regarding their budget and the Canadian 

health, social transfer choices. And also to fight harder for fair 

taxation. 

 

I know that some of the members of the opposition attended 

these consultations and I would hope that they heard these 

messages as well as we did. 

I’m going to explain today why I think people feel this way 

about the federal choices. Our government acknowledges that 

the federal government has a problem with debt and deficit. 

What we don’t acknowledge is the choices that they’ve made; 

73 per cent of their cuts  and I’ll repeat it again, 73 per cent 

of their cuts  are from the social development envelope of 

health, education, and social services. 

 

They didn’t choose to re-examine the unfair tax system. They 

didn’t choose to look at other areas of government spending. 

They went to the big pots of money where the getting is easy 

and they chose to take 73 per cent of these cuts from the social 

development envelope. 

 

They have a GST (goods and services tax) that still costs 50 per 

cent of the revenue it generates to administer. They have 

allowed a taxation system to stay in place that was greatly 

aggravated when it went to three income tax bands, which 

created more serious inequity in an already unfair tax system, as 

well as the many loopholes that exist for those who can easily 

afford to pay on the basis of their real income and profits. 

 

So in order to truly evaluate the federal decisions we have to 

measure them against our Saskatchewan and Canadian values. 

So I’m going to try again to articulate these values. I often think 

about what they are and what they mean to us and how we can 

protect them. 

 

Our values are to build a Canada that includes everyone and 

that cares for all of its citizens. And that’s about as simple as I 

can say it, Mr. Speaker. I’ve tried many times to capture that 

one and that’s about as good as I can get on it. But we want to 

create a system of universal access to the services that meet the 

basic needs of Canadians for health, education, and security. 

 

Due to their unwillingness to look seriously at all their areas of 

budgetary expenditure, the federal government has created, I 

think, a lot of unnecessary insecurity and great potential damage 

to our safety net across Canada. 

 

I think that the choices that they have made are causing men 

and women across Canada to organize to voice their opposition 

to these changes. The CHST (Canada Health and Social 

Transfer) changes are further aggravated by changes to UIC, 

training, the western grain transportation  as I’ve mentioned 

before  and the federal policy on inherent right which shifts 

much of their financial responsibility to the province. 

 

And I certainly am hearing on coffee row a lot of concerns 

about the pension changes that were announced. People in 

Saskatchewan and Canada who fought for a compassionate 

Canada will not sit idly by and watch the undermining of 

Canadian values, and I think our challenge both federally and 

provincially is to be partners in governance. 

 

Where is this country headed? We know where Saskatchewan is 

headed. We have long committed our self to cooperation, 

caring, to compassion, and to a partnership approach to the 

changes. 

 

A couple of weeks ago, February 24, on Double Exposure, they  



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

had a little skit that was apparently built on a speech by Lucien 

Bouchard — and I’m sure they took a lot of creative leeway in 

this — and this speech reminded me of why we live in Canada, 

why we care about Canada, and what we want to defend. So 

with the tolerance of the House, I’m just going to go through a 

little bit about this speech, called “Canada is Not a Real 

Country.” 

 

(1530) 

 

I must in all honesty tell that I couldn’t live in Canada 

because it’s not a real country. They don’t play real 

football in Canada. They have three downs and extra 

points and very high scores. They should have four downs 

and lots of time-outs and low scores. That’s what a real 

country would have. 

 

They don’t play real hockey in Canada. You have to look 

so hard just to see the tiny black puck. They should have a 

puck with a blue glow and a red streak following it. That’s 

what a real country would have. 

 

They don’t have real television in Canada. They have Anne 

of Green Gables and North of 60 and Man Alive. They 

should have Geraldo and Rush Limbaugh, and Bay Watch. 

That’s what a real country would have. 

 

They don’t have real radio in Canada. They have 

Morningside and As It Happens, and even Double 

Exposure. They should have Howard Stern and Gordon 

Liddy and heavy metal. That’s what a real country would 

have. 

 

They don’t even have real radio in . . . they don’t have real 

uses for nuclear power in Canada  they use it for lighting 

people’s houses. They should be out there testing it in the 

Pacific Ocean to see how big an explosion it can make. 

That’s what a real country would do. 

 

They don’t have real guns in Canada. A few people have 

some rifles, maybe a few shotguns. Every citizen should be 

allowed to stock up with 45’s, 357’s, and 22’s. That’s what 

a real country would do. 

 

They don’t have real soldiers in Canada. They spend their 

whole time acting like friendly policemen. They never fire 

at anybody. They should order them to attack small 

countries all the time, get rid of dictators and foreign 

leaders. That’s what a real country would do. 

 

It’s crazy to provide equal health care for every citizen in 

the country. People should be made to pay for their health 

care. That’s what a real country would do. 

 

How silly can you get to ask a leader of a country to stand 

up every day and answer questions about what he’s been 

doing. Instead they should be left alone to hold meetings 

and to make all their decisions without being questioned. 

That’s what a real country would do. 

 

And listen to this: no matter how bad the crime, Canadians  

don’t kill people. Instead all criminals should be hanged or 

shot or put to sleep. That’s what a real country would do. 

 

So you see, my friends, I want to live in a real country  

not a country where the winters are always cold, not a 

country where the airports are filled with thousands of 

people who want to move here, not a country where they 

force you to pay people at least minimum wage, not a 

country where natives are going to get their land back, not 

a country where English and French are accepted 

everywhere, and not a country where people of all ethnic 

backgrounds are respected, not a country where the poor 

places are helped out by the rich places. These things don’t 

happen in a real country; they only happen in Canada, and 

I find that very sad. 

 

So I’d like to thank Double Exposure for that little bit because 

it made me very proud of Canada when I reflected on it in that 

context. 

 

And I’d just like to urge all members of the House to support 

the Saskatchewan and Canada that we care about and to join us 

and the Minister of Finance in supporting our Saskatchewan 

and Canadian values. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena for this courtesy. 

 

Seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a constituent and 

good friend of mine, Roger Linka from Lumsden. Roger is a 

long-time worker and supporter of this government and also a 

distinguished lawyer. I will ask all members to join me in 

welcoming him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Cuts to Federal Transfer Payments 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I want to support the amendment 

offered by the member from Thunder Creek. As a business 

person, I know what it’s like to be efficient in this changing 

world. We often are asked to make cuts, both large and small, 

and still project growth in our companies. 

 

The federal government cuts to transfer payments was less than 

2 per cent of the whole Saskatchewan budget. This government 

knew there was going to be cuts, and there were no surprises in 

them. And yet they made no attempt to get their own spending 

under control. They introduced Crown tendering, which would  



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

have more than made up for any of the cut-backs from the 

federal government. The union tendering policy was passed on 

to appease a small group of people that are probably out of 

touch with the real world. 

 

This government wasn’t very worried about cut-backs when 

they increased their own cabinet by four ministers. In fact we 

now have two ministers where we used to have one, and I take 

kind of an insult in that because I always thought wherever 

there was a woman working, we didn’t need a man. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Spending money on Crown Life is something 

else that I really object to because if I talk to the seniors in my 

area where they have problems with having no hospital any 

more, and I asked them if they preferred to own shares in a 

company or if they wanted a hospital, and I don’t think I have 

to tell you what their answer was. 

 

We spent a lot of money on public consultations that, although I 

agree the public has to be consulted about spending every one 

of their tax dollars, we have to wonder about them if we already 

know the answers before the question is asked. 

 

The Premier’s address again cost us a lot of money and I don’t 

know that the people of this province benefited from it, but 

again it was a waste of taxpayers’ dollars. I wonder if the 

minister remembers her very astute move when they sold the 

Cameco shares and it saved our province over $50 million in 

interest payments, and we thank her for that. 

 

I wonder if selling off some more of the Crown corporations 

with money going to pay down the debt directly wouldn’t save 

this province lots of dollars, millions of dollars, in interest 

payments. 

 

I’m asking this government, through the minister, to stop 

whining about cuts and to start . . . and change her mind about 

her welfare mentality. I’m also asking her to have enough faith 

in the people of this province to allow them to get this economy 

on its feet. We won’t need our huge Social Services budget if 

the atmosphere in this province allowed businesses to grow and 

hire people. My comment to this government is stop 

complaining and go to work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

enter into the debate this afternoon and to speak against and 

reject the amendment that’s been presented by the members 

opposite, and support the original motion and the intent of the 

motion as presented by our Hon. Minister of Finance. And 

perhaps the members opposite are really hearing the whine of 

their colleagues across the Chamber as apologists, whining 

apologists, for the federal Liberal government, rather than any 

noises that might be coming on behalf of Saskatchewan people 

to support health care, education, and social services in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s interesting to me that as the Leader of the Third Party, the  

member of Greystone, in the last Assembly was speaking 

against some of the measures that were happening because they 

were unjust from the Liberal government in Ottawa. We now 

have not members of a Liberal Party of Saskatchewan but 

whining apologists for the federal Liberals in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anywhere I go in Saskatchewan I pick up and hear 

the concern of people in Saskatchewan that the federal 

government is not listening to them, and it refuses to understand 

where they feel the priority should be placed. And they refuse to 

hear and understand that people in Saskatchewan feel their 

priorities are wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most recently the Shaunavon Standard talked 

about “vital services are cut while pig trough brimming with tax 

dollars.” And I quote: 

 

When it comes time for spending cuts, the federal 

government immediately goes for the jugular. 

 

Health, education, and social services are always first on 

(their) chopping block. 

 

We have been brainwashed into believing these three areas 

of spending are chiefly responsible for our government’s 

debt  expected to be $6.16 billion by the end of 1996-97. 

 

Yet, while these services, which are vital to maintaining 

Canada’s standard of living, are repeatedly sacrificed, truly 

wasteful uses of tax money and blatant patronage pig 

troughs continued to get a steady stream of government 

dollars. 

 

They go on to list a number of those from The National 

Citizens’ Coalition, some of them which include some 

ludicrous spending such as $500,000 for a canoe hall of fame in 

the Prime Minister’s own riding. 

 

They go on to talk about the many areas that their spending . . . 

that add additional costs to the spending in Canada for the MPs’ 

(Member of Parliament) offices and for Senators in the country, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t know. I haven’t heard many people in Saskatchewan 

understand or know about tax points, but I do know that the 

Star-Phoenix caught the point that the member opposite was 

trying to make. And I would quote, in response to what he’s 

saying, from the Star-Phoenix which was dated February 2: 

 

It’s one thing for the federal government, which is feeling 

the heat from (the) irate taxpayers to get its spending under 

control, to cut back on grants to the provinces. In this case, 

it has decided to cut spending on health, education and 

welfare  (that’s) a political decision. 

 

It’s another for Ottawa to conjure up numbers to make it 

appear as if the cut is not a cut. After all, those “tax-point 

dollars” have been a part of provincial income for almost 

two decades and have been spent on things like health, 

education and welfare. It’s not “new money” that makes up 

for a whopping cut to the CHST. 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

No matter how the feds explain it, Saskatchewan will get 

less money in total from Ottawa in 1996-97, with the 

province still expected to make up the shortfall in 

providing (these) services. 

 

Again, it’s passing strange to me why the members opposite 

want to stand up and be apologists for the federal priorities 

which people in Saskatchewan are saying are wrong priorities 

indeed. 

 

People of Saskatchewan say they’ve been judged by the United 

Nations as living in the best country in the world, and by the 

standards applied in Canada, the best province in the world. 

And they don’t take the criteria that were used lightly — the 

criteria that include universal health care, access to education, 

and how we take care of those most vulnerable in our 

communities. These areas keep us strong as a nation and they 

keep us strong in our determination to provide a good quality of 

life to all people, not only for this generation but for subsequent 

generations to come. 

 

In doing that, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t looked to the Liberal 

solutions from Ottawa that tell us, oh well, we’ll just sell off 

Saskatchewan assets and we’ll put those into general spending 

and we’ll somehow back-fill for the misplaced priorities in 

cutting that is coming to us from Ottawa. 

 

The federal government, the Ottawa Liberals  I’m saying the 

kissing cousins to the members opposite  are looking more 

Tory every day. They’ve given us three years of deep cuts. 

 

The hon. member from Regina Lake Centre has also pointed out 

the article in the Thunder Creek paper that asks, why are 

Liberals in Saskatchewan wanting to defend the slashing and 

burning of social programs by the federal Liberals? 

 

Is it denial? I wonder. Or is it desire to push more and more for 

the American system and the American style of real country that 

we’ve heard from the member previously. 

 

In wondering whether it’s a desire to push for an American 

system, I talked with a person who was worried and said, you 

know, if they’re talking about American system of health care, 

I’d like to tell you about my father and mother and their 

experience. For in 1976 they lived in Florida, and after a brief 

illness and three days in hospital his father passed away. 

 

Now this couple in Florida carried the best medical coverage 

they could in 1976 and it was a brief, three-day stay in hospital 

for a dying individual. At the end his mother received the bill 

for her portion of the costs that were incurred on their behalf. 

After having the best medical coverage available at that time  

$1,800  that’s in 1976. What will a Liberal’s 2000 look like 

in this country if they’re going to continue their process of 

denial or their desire to turn our health care in to an 

American-style health care system? 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province and our government was bracing 

itself for two years of savage cuts to health, education, and 

social programs. Ottawa Liberals have given us three years of 

deep cuts. And as is outlined in The Globe and Mail, if  

anyone’s trying to get back into their mode of denial across the 

House, to us it looks like, in The Globe and Mail, the cash 

transfers to the provinces, and circling the ones to 

Saskatchewan, in the year 1996, $624 million. When we hit that 

floor  maybe the walls of the House won’t be standing  but 

when we hit the floor that’s left, we’re looking at transfers in 

the year 2001 of $371 million. My math, Mr. Speaker, says it’s 

$253 million less to the province of Saskatchewan. Now you 

remember though that this is also on top of cuts that have 

already been incurred over the last several years, and I’ll outline 

some of those later in my speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1545) 

 

The face of social programs in Canada will be changed for ever 

with the change in funding from Ottawa. Less than 8 per cent of 

federal revenue will go towards social programs, and 

organizations like the United Nations have concluded that 

social spending in the range of 20 to 25 per cent is reasonable. 

The very programs that have made Canada number one in the 

world are programs that the Liberals in Ottawa have decided are 

not important. 

 

So what did the federal government promise, Mr. Speaker? We 

heard the federal government promise tax reform  fair 

taxation. They were going to plug some of those loopholes. 

There was going to be an end to the GST. The member opposite 

says, little room to manoeuvre for the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker. I question that statement. 

 

What we got was not tax fairness, which would be room to 

manoeuvre. What we have got  $300 million worth of tax 

breaks to the banks to improve their automated teller systems. 

What we have got  some of the wealthiest corporations who 

receive tax bills have enough loopholes to not have to pay those 

tax bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

No mention in the federal budget of reform, no mention of the 

GST . . . and their own member, Mr. Nunziata, standing up and 

saying he’s going to vote against his own government because 

his principle is on the line. He campaigned on tax reform. He 

said he went door to door. 

 

He is going to leave the Deputy Prime Minister to make up her 

own mind on what she’ll do on this issue for, as a Liberal 

candidate in 1993, the member, Sheila Copps, the Liberal 

candidate at that time said: I’ve already said personally and very 

directly that if the GST is not abolished, I’ll resign. I don’t 

know how clear you can get. I think you’ve got to be 

accountable on things that you have to say and that you’re 

going to do, and you have to deliver on it. She was just echoing 

what the Prime Minister said as a candidate in 1993, when he 

said we will scrap the GST . . . No tax reform, no room to 

manoeuvre for the federal government. 

 

Well the issue of corporation tax is a different story. Taxes for 

individuals have been sky-rocketing in the last 20 years. 

Corporate taxes have been dropping. Currently corporations in 

Canada, including Paul Martin’s own steamship line, don’t 

even pay as much tax as their counterparts in the United States. 

 



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

And what’s the result of this policy of hosing the individual and 

giving big corporations a free ride? Well look around. Look 

opposite, to the statements made by the members opposite. We 

have a government with an astronomical debt and a deficit, 

record profits for the banks and other big businesses coupled 

with record unemployment and child poverty for the rest of us. 

Meanwhile the government keeps telling us our social programs 

are too rich. They can’t afford health care, post-secondary 

education, training, social assistance, and pension plans. And 

the members opposite continue the litany for their federal 

cousins. 

 

Mr. Martin in his budget did not stand up and tell us anything 

about their number 1 priority: jobs and job creation. They gave 

hope to young people in Saskatchewan. They gave hope to 

young people across Canada. And what do we see that hasn’t 

been announced with pride in the last budget? Cuts in 

unemployment insurance training dollars that will add up to 

about $31 million over the next three years, cuts in education 

that will surely mean increases in tuition and increases in 

student loans and financial clocks that are ticking with interest 

payments for students who now face loans in the order of 20 to 

$30,000 by the time they graduate. 

 

There was no mention of economic development and jobs. So 

we wonder, where is the federal companion piece to the 

Partnership for Growth? We might even ask, where is the 

Saskatchewan Liberals’ plan for economic growth in this 

province? 

 

So the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the federal Liberals in their 

1996-97 budget, in their figures that we look at that will be 

going well into the next century, fly in the face of Canadian 

people and Canadian priorities. We know that our New 

Democrat government in Saskatchewan is working hard 

through our reforms in health care; in social services; in 

education; in governance, to protect people. What we’ve seen 

from the federal government in Ottawa is protection of 

privilege. 

 

We don’t stand up and say we’re opposing everything that 

Ottawa is doing. We don’t oppose them battling deficits. We’ve 

done that. But it’s not been at the expense or on the backs of 

those greatest in need in our communities. 

 

We don’t oppose having reform in health care but not without 

basic standards in place, without accessibility to basic health 

care services. We welcome reform. We want that reform in our 

country to keep the principle of medicare strong. 

 

We’re not opposed to redesign of social assistance, but not a 

system that has been outlined where it says the only thing in 

place to protect people on social assistance is to say that no 

province is going to deny them social assistance. What that does 

do is pit people against people and province against province. 

What it does do is bash at the victims, and it condones a system 

that says our form of welfare or our form of social assistance 

and our form of looking after those most vulnerable in our 

provinces is a one-way bus ticket to somewhere else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder that social democrats stand in a 

firm message that we want to send to the federal Liberals in 

Ottawa. We call on those Ottawa Liberals to consider a national 

plan that puts an end to these cuts and protects national 

standards and basic services. It would only be a surprise  and 

I think a surprise to all people in Saskatchewan  if the 

Liberals and Tories don’t join us in our call to respond to our 

people and to have those priorities changed. 

 

How they’ve chosen to tackle their debt  73 per cent of the 

cuts in cash transfers to health, education and social programs. 

On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we shout, no. And we 

would ask all members in the Assembly to reject the 

amendment that’s in place before us and to support the motion 

moved by the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

with a great deal of enthusiasm that I rise here today, Mr. 

Speaker, to give support to the motion put by the Minister of 

Finance. the motion which speaks directly to an issue that, I 

believe, affects every one of us and will affect the future of the 

country if it is not addressed and not debated at length. And that 

is the issue which speaks to the amounts and the principle of the 

governments at all levels to contribute to the social fabric of 

this country. 

 

The motion that was put by the Hon. Minister of Finance was: 

 

That this Legislative Assembly shares the government’s 

concern that 73 per cent of the cuts in the 1996-97 federal 

budget are cuts in cash transfer (payments) to provinces for 

health, education, and social programs; furthermore, 

reductions in federal funding for health, education, and 

social programs continue into the next century; therefore 

we call on the federal government to consider (the) . . . 

national plan that ends these cuts and protects national 

standards and basic services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the trend that is being set by the federal 

government now is to opt out of funding for post-secondary 

education, to put a greater and greater burden on the province 

and local governments to fund all of education and health. This 

really does undermine the fabric of Canada as we know it. 

 

It was only three or four months ago that we learned that the 

United Nations named Canada as the best place in which to live 

and Saskatchewan was subsequently named as the province the 

best in which . . . of the best of the group of 10 in Canada on 

the same criteria. What was this criteria, Mr. Speaker? The 

criteria was based on three things. It was based on the education 

levels of the population. It was based on the longevity of the 

people in the country or in the province, and it was based on the 

cost of living or the purchasing power of the people in the 

province. Now these cuts undermine two of those very basic, 

basic social programs. That is the one of health services and 

education that’s being provided to the country. 

 

The reason that Canada came out the best and that 

Saskatchewan came out the best is because it’s been a practice  



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

over many years to develop these programs and to continually 

evaluate them and to make them better by looking for 

improvements. And what has happened is we found to this date 

that they have evolved to the stage where they are being well 

accepted and adopted at all levels by all levels of government. 

And people expect all levels of government to support them. 

 

That’s why I was rather dismayed, Mr. Speaker, when the 

federal Minister of Finance announced in his budget that in all 

of his cut-backs, his attempts to work towards a balanced 

budget at the federal level  and he should be working towards 

a balanced budget  that 73 per cent of the cuts should go to 

those programs which are valued most in this country. And I 

was very dismayed by that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It gave me a different feeling than I had originally about the 

federal Liberals. I thought that when the federal Liberals took 

over that they would have recognized what the people of 

Canada were saying to the Tories before them and what the 

people of Saskatchewan said to the Tories before they kicked 

them unceremoniously out of office here. 

 

And the Liberals opposite who are supporting this motion here 

today ought to take note of that because what the people of 

Canada said in both of those elections was that they were tired 

of the shift in power towards those that have and towards those 

who take without taking the corresponding responsibility for 

funding those programs which are most valued by the people of 

Canada and by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we should never allow our children or our 

grandchildren to forget how the spending spree was developed 

by the Conservatives opposite and how it was developed in 

Ottawa by the Conservatives who set up the debt which is now 

forcing these cuts. And we should also remind the people of 

Canada and the people of Saskatchewan that the Liberals at the 

federal level seem to be following exactly the same course and 

are being supported right now at this very time by the Liberals 

right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, several years ago I had the pleasure of hosting a 

visitor from West Africa to my home town of Prince Albert. 

And he was interested in seeing our schools and our hospitals 

and our prisons. And as we visited one or two places, he asked 

me about how we were funding these places because he thought 

they were . . . he was quite impressed with how they were 

furnished, with the equipment we had in them, with the 

buildings themselves, and was very interested in the funding 

process. 

 

So I explained to him that we had a system of taxation where 

people at the local level, through their property taxes, supported 

both the schools, the road systems, and the hospitals to some 

extent at that time and how we collected taxes at the provincial 

level, through the income tax largely and the sales tax. And we 

at the provincial level set up a system to provide an equal 

opportunity for every child that went to school so that children 

at Prince Albert, no matter what part of the city they were in, 

had the same amount of money spent on them by the school 

system as did say the children in Saskatoon or Regina or any 

other part of the province. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, you can go right across the continent. And 

because of the system of sharing that we have, you’ll find that 

the children in Saskatchewan just have equal educational 

opportunities in terms of amount of money spent on them as do 

say the children of Nova Scotia or any other part of the country. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now after explaining this to my guest he just stopped me and he 

took me by the arm and he says, you just don’t understand . . . 

I’m putting this wrong. He says, do you understand what a 

wonderful thing you have done in this country, that you have 

developed ways of sharing, sharing your bounty amongst 

everybody in the country for these very important things such as 

health and education? And we were concentrating on education. 

And his statement impressed me to such an extent that I keep 

repeating it because it’s something that identifies us as a 

country. And I as a New Democrat identify with those because 

of the principles and policies we have fought for through the 

years. 

 

And when I see a shift away from that, when I see a shift away 

from the federal government involving itself in funding of 

post-secondary education and health, I see that whole system of 

ours going into a bit of an imbalance. And I think it is time to 

raise the alarm bells on it. 

 

What has happened, Mr. Speaker, in the past few years is that 

through the passing of the trade agreements, the Free Trade 

Agreement and NAFTA (North American Free Trade 

Agreement) and with the deregulation that has followed, there 

has been an increasing burden of taxation on individual human 

being taxpayers and a decreasing responsibility for the tax load 

being paid now from the corporations. There’s been a rather 

dramatic shift. It used to be that the corporations in general paid 

about 20 per cent of the tax load. Now I believe it to be around 

8 per cent of the total tax load in our nation, so there’s been a 

dramatic shift there. 

 

And yet at the same time, when that shift has occurred, there 

has not been a corresponding shift in bearing the response . . . 

in the ability . . . Let me say this again, Mr. Speaker, so I can get 

my train of thought across. What has happened is there has been 

a shift in who pays the taxes, but there’s . . . in the favour of the 

individual taxpayer. But while that has happened, more and 

more of the laws and the tax laws and the power to make those 

laws has shifted in the direction of the corporations. So the 

corporations, while they’re enjoying greater power in their 

ability to make profit and to travel internationally with the 

profits and their money, are not bearing the same amount of 

responsibility for the social programs. And at the same time the 

general public is demanding that the programs remain. 

 

About three years ago, perhaps four, when President Clinton in 

the States was first elected, he set out on a very, very ambitious 

program. One of his programs was to reform education in a 

direction of equity as he saw happening in Canada. Another of 

his programs was in the direction of Medicare. He wanted to set 

up a system where we had a user-pay. He wanted to set up a 

system, Mr. Speaker, where his federal level of government 

would mirror what was being done in Canada for our social  



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

programs, where we had a sharing arrangement between all 

levels. 

 

Well we saw what happened to Mr. Clinton in that, Mr. 

Speaker. We saw the power of advertising by the insurance 

companies, and we saw that Mr. Clinton failed in his objective. 

He failed in his objective to get equity in education, and as a 

result in the States you still get, even within one system, you 

might get one student having about $2,000 per year spent on per 

capita basis, compared to some place else where there may be 

$6,000 spent on a per capita basis. 

 

I was rather disappointed when that happened, Mr. Speaker; 

that is, I was disappointed to see Mr. Clinton fail in that. I 

wanted him to succeed because I thought if he succeeded, then 

they would be in a position where they would be adopting some 

of the programs that we so valued here in Canada. But what we 

saw happening there is corporate power and individual . . . the 

individual power of corporations was so great that they won the 

day there, and now we’re seeing the same influence on our 

federal government. 

 

And I was very disappointed that the federal Liberals did not 

see that happening and did not work out a strategy where they 

would ask the corporations who make a great profit and who 

should make a profit. It’s only right that they make a profit but 

that they also share in the responsibilities of paying for the 

social programs in Canada. If the federal government can no 

longer do it through taxing individuals, then they ought to be 

approaching the corporations who make their money here. And 

God bless them; they should make some money, but that they 

should also share in that responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this entire motion I believe deserves support. And 

while I will be voting for the motion, I wanted to flag at the 

same time that it was symptomatic of a trend which we have to 

address and that is a trend about growing imbalances between 

those that have means and those without means  a growing 

imbalance between Canada’s and Canadians’ desire to have 

well-developed social programs and Canadians’ ability to pay 

for them. 

 

We need to really rethink our entire social structure so that we 

can work out that balance between individual rights and 

individual responsibilities. Corporations in Canada enjoy the 

same rights as do individuals. A corporation can buy things, can 

sell things. An individual can do that, but corporations have 

been taking less and less of a responsibility in terms of funding 

our social programs. 

 

I suppose the balance between rights and responsibilities of 

corporations at that level could be rethought in a manner similar 

to the balance that we are rethinking right now about the rights 

of an individual to drive and drink, and the responsibility of a 

driver who has taken a drink. Society has decreased its 

tolerance for people or towards people who insist on putting 

others in jeopardy through drinking and are saying, hey, if 

you’re going to do that we will take away your right to drive . . . 

and are asking governments to put those kind of laws into 

place. And they’re asking us to look at the balance between the 

right to drive and the responsibility of a driver. 

In a very similar way, I think that people in Saskatchewan and 

Canada are asking us to rethink the rights that we give 

corporations and how much we’re expecting of them so that we 

do not get ourselves into a situation where federal governments 

will be ending up cutting payments, as this federal government 

is doing, to the provinces to support these programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will close by making one or two remarks about 

the member’s statement from . . . the member from Thunder 

Creek. In his rambling remarks he did make one thing that kind 

of stuck out that I wanted to comment on. He talked very briefly 

about Saskatchewan increasing its revenue in order to balance 

the budget, which is true. We did increase the taxation in order 

to balance the budget. We cut some programs, Mr. Speaker, and 

we did increase some taxes, but the whole objective was to 

balance the budget. But we did it in a way where we did not put 

our programs into jeopardy. 

 

What I couldn’t understand was what the member was saying 

when he said that we put the taxes up. Was he saying that if we 

didn’t put the taxes up, that we should not have balanced the 

budget? Or was he saying that we should have cut into health, 

education, and social services more? I suspect it was the latter 

because that’s a position he’s taking now in supporting the 

federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the amendment. I will be 

supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It should come as no 

surprise to my colleagues or indeed to the members opposite 

that I intend to support the main motion, and I will be voting 

against the amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this debate very clearly is a watershed debate. It’s 

a debate about choices, and it clearly shows us the difference 

between the kinds of choices that social democrats make and 

the choices that a tattered Liberal Party makes. This choice that 

we have to make today is whether or not we stand silent in the 

face of the federal government plundering our very valuable 

social programs and cutting funding by 73 per cent. It is about 

choosing who you will listen to and what is your priority. 

 

Clearly the members opposite have demonstrated that they will 

listen to the tiny, tiny capsule, timed-release, bitter pill of Paul 

Martin and pretend that all is still wonderful in this land and 

that there will be no major changes to our social programs. 

Clearly they have chosen to listen to Paul Martin who prefers to 

plunder our social programs rather than ratcheting back his 

other program spending which he clearly should do if he’s 

going to be fiscally responsible. 

 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the 

House have chosen by philosophy, by ideology, by inclination 

to listen to the people of this country. We know that what the 

people of this country  not solely in Saskatchewan but all 

across this country  we know that what they are saying is that 

our health, education and social programs are what makes us 

Canadian, what makes us proud to be Canadian, and what  



272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

makes this a country that anyone would be proud to live in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the last year this country has been plunged into 

a very, very grave debate, a debate that threatens the very 

existence of this country as we know it. It is very sad, Mr. 

Speaker, that in the desire for certain people to have more of a 

say in their destiny that they have felt that they had to go to the 

point of actually talking about and wanting separation because 

really the debate, if you step back and examine what is 

happening and what happened with the referendum in October, 

the debate is really not about how to carve up this precious little 

pie and how to get rid of one part of the country or another part 

of the country. The debate really is how can all Canadians  

regardless of their original language, regardless of the country 

from which they originally came  how can all Canadians 

continue to be proud and continue to live in this country, strong 

and free. 

 

The debate should not be about how to separate in this country; 

the debate should be about how to keep the country together. 

We all, I believe, know and affirm in our hearts that Canada is 

the very best place in the world to live. 

 

(1615) 

 

Now because we’re modest by nature, because we apologize if 

somebody bumps into us, we tend not to say, hey, neighbours to 

the south, we are the best country in the world to live, and you 

should learn from our example. Instead we kind of hide our 

light under a bushel barrel and hope that eventually somehow 

everybody in the world will recognize how wonderful Canada 

is. Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that Canada is a wonderful 

place. And just as proof of that, I would say that in the ‘60s it 

was curious that the people who wished not to serve in an 

immoral war in Vietnam came north. They didn’t go south. 

They came to Canada because they knew it’s a great country. 

 

But that sort of begs the question: what is so great about 

Canada? 

 

Because despite the fact that we are seeing our first spring thaw, 

we can’t necessarily say that it is the weather that is wonderful 

about Canada. There was an RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police) officer in the late 1800s who made a witticism that I 

think we should all probably remember when we’re talking 

about Canada and its weather from coast to coast to coast. He 

said that in Canada we have five seasons: we’ve got the 

horsefly season; we’ve got the blackfly season; we’ve got the 

deer fly season; we’ve got the mosquito season; and we’ve got 

winter. Clearly, the weather is not something that makes 

Canada a wonderful country in which to live. 

 

Nor indeed is it the great vast distances that we have to cope 

with. Mr. Speaker, I live in Saskatoon. I work in Regina. My 

mother, who is ill, lives in Moose Jaw. If I want to go and visit 

my mother, even for a half-hour visit, that is going to take me a 

minimum of seven hours to go to visit my mother because I 

have to drive from Saskatoon to Moose Jaw. I have to drive 

very slowly through the great city of Moose Jaw because the 

police there are absolutely wonderful in terms of making sure 

that nobody exceeds the speeding limit. I then go to the nursing  

home where she resides. I have a half-hour or an hour visit with 

her, depending on the state of her health, and then I get in the 

car and I drive back to Saskatoon. Seven hours to visit my 

mother  that’s not a simple thing to do, to follow through on 

your filial responsibilities, but we do it all over this country. We 

keep in touch with our families despite the great distances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I look and think about what’s great about 

Canada, it becomes apparent to me that besides the great people 

that live in this country, what is truly great and wondrous about 

this country is the social programs that we have. They are the 

things that caused the United Nations to recognize this country 

as the best in the world in which to live. They are the things that 

distinguish us, that set us apart, from people in other parts of 

the world. 

 

Other countries have tried to develop similar programs but no 

other country, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, has been so 

successful in having such a complete package that is sensitive 

and is capable of evolving to meet the needs of the citizenry of 

the day. The most obvious example of a country that has tried to 

do this, but certainly hasn’t got it right, is the United States of 

America. They spend more as a percentage of their GDP (gross 

domestic product) on health care than Canada does. And yet 

quite clearly, as other members have talked about, they haven’t 

got it right. 

 

Quite clearly, there are droves of homeless people in the United 

States. There are many people who are terrorized by the thought 

that they might develop some major illness, and either because 

they (a) lack basic medical insurance; or (b) there are some nice 

fine points, some loopholes, in their insurance; or (c) they’ve 

lost their job and so therefore they don’t have that health care 

insurance. These people can go bankrupt, and they can bankrupt 

their children and their grandchildren trying to pay for their 

medical bills. 

 

Last Christmas I decided to order a book as a gift for a friend of 

mine. And I looked around and the only place I could find a 

copy of that book was in the state of New Jersey. So I phoned 

down to the book seller to order the book. Since it was out of 

print, I had to go to an antique book seller. As we were talking, 

he said, well what’s it like in Canada now? And I said, well it’s 

cold. I mean, what do you expect, this is Canada after all. And 

he said, but you know, you shouldn’t complain. And I said, why 

not? He said, you all have medicare, and that’s really great. I 

said, oh yeah, well what’s so wonderful? I mean give me some 

examples; what’s happening for you? 

 

He said that he had been in an accident  he had whiplash  

and he was going to a chiropractor. He had insurance. He was 

getting proper treatment. It was an accident that was not his 

fault. But he was still having to pay $200 per visit to his 

chiropractor over and above what was covered by his insurance. 

 

I also recently talked to some friends who decided to go down 

to the States for a holiday this January. While they were in the 

States, their daughter became ill and they weren’t certain 

whether or not they should take her to a doctor or not, but out 

of a sense of abundant caution, they phoned the hospital to 

describe the symptoms. 



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

The hospital’s response, Mr. Speaker? They said bring her in 

but bring your Visa card with you. Now that isn’t the kind of 

medical coverage that we want in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government is belatedly learning fiscal 

prudence. I pride myself in some small measure that perhaps 

they’re looking at the kinds of things that we’ve done in 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan, after all, did lead the way in 

1991-92 with a great commitment to fiscal prudence, to thrift, 

and to getting our financial affairs in order. 

 

We led the way. We were the first province in all of Canada to 

balance our budget in over 10 years. And now the federal 

government  belatedly, as I say  has seen the light. They 

too are also trying to balance their books. I cannot fault them 

for that, Mr. Speaker. Indeed I applaud them. But I do have to 

question the priorities and the way they are going about doing 

it. 

 

In Saskatchewan we developed a plan. It was, we feel, a 

thoughtful approach. It was an approach that insisted that all 

people in all corners of this province had to share in the 

financial responsibility of getting our house back in order again. 

It was a plan though, Mr. Speaker, that protected the poorest 

and most vulnerable in this province. It was a compassionate 

plan and it worked. 

 

On the other hand, what we have with the federal government is 

a government that has reneged responsibility. They’ve looked 

around and said, how can we do some flimflam Houdini 

politics and make sure that none of the brown stuff sticks to us. 

 

So what they’ve done is they’ve gone after programs that are 

transfer programs  either transfer in terms of dollars or tax 

points  so that they can then say: hey, it wasn’t us, we didn’t 

do it. We are not responsible, say the federal government, for 

the fact that a young man can no longer go to a training 

program in a mechanics apprentice program at Kelsey Institute 

or something like that  it’s not us. They’re finding somebody 

else to blame. 

 

Or the other thing that they are doing, which I consider even 

more reprehensible, is they’ve simply handed it over  the 

decision making  over to their senior public servants, senior 

civil servants, who sit comfortably in their plush offices in 

Ottawa and make decisions about budget cuts that keep them as 

far away from those senior civil servants as possible. That is not 

responsible financial planning in my opinion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize  and I think the members 

opposite know this  Saskatchewan has never challenged 

federal standards. We have never said, let’s follow the Alberta 

model, let’s de-skill, let’s shed things, let’s make things worse. 

We have never said that. Saskatchewan, and people on all sides 

of the House, I would suggest, are proud to be Canadians, are 

proud of the fact that Saskatchewan has stood up for the 

federation that we have in this country. 

 

We need to maintain national standards. We need to strengthen 

them, Mr. Speaker. For instance in the area of health care, what 

is wrong with us getting together, with having our ministers of  

Health get together, and take a look at the patchwork that has 

developed across this country and saying, excuse me, we do not 

agree with conflict of interest and we will not allow joint 

business ventures where we have vertical integration of health 

care services. We will stop the situation where a general 

physician can have an ownership position in an X-ray clinic, in 

a lab clinic, and in a physiotherapy clinic. We will stop that so 

that people will be seen as individuals, as patients, by the 

physician but that he or she does not have a financial incentive 

to refer them on for additional services. That’s one national 

standard I’d like to see strengthened. 

 

In terms of education, it seems to me we have to get serious 

about the fact that many people want to go to one university or 

another, one secondary education institution or another; and 

that there are no real portability of credits between those 

institutions, whether we’re talking about an institution like 

SIAST or its equivalent in Calgary, or whether we’re talking 

about a university. We don’t have those kinds of standards for 

our young people. It is time we got serious about it and started 

to develop these things so that we can have better training for 

youth. 

 

It is also time that nationally we developed and implemented 

really strong industrial training protocols. 

 

With respect to social services, Mr. Speaker . . . I may get into 

trouble here, but I’m going to say this one anyway. The person 

who spoke . . . the member who spoke just before me talked 

about the need to balance rights and responsibilities. That is a 

theme that I have been talking about for some time, and I want 

to emphasize it now with respect to the whole argument that 

was swirling around this country a month or two ago with 

respect to the decision that the province of British Columbia 

made about social assistance. Mr. Speaker, you will recall that 

they brought in a regulation insisting that people had to be in 

B.C. for 90 days before they qualified for social assistance. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Do you support that, Pat? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  The Leader of the Third Party asks me if I 

support that. I will tell him very directly, yes I do support that, I 

do support that. I think that people do have the right to be 

mobile in this country. It is important that people have the right 

to move from province to province. 

 

At the same time, there is a certain amount of responsibility as 

well, on those people and on those provinces, and what I would 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that right now the only national 

standard that we have left with respect to social assistance is the 

fact that no province can deny anybody social assistance on the 

basis of where they live  the mobility right. 

 

But we also have to look at the mobility responsibility and it 

needs to occur at a provincial level. I would suggest that if the 

son or daughter of the Leader of the Third Party chose to leave 

Saskatchewan tomorrow and chose to move to Victoria, B.C., 

that it should be either that gentleman opposite exercising his 

parental responsibility or it should be the provincial government 

here exercising their responsibility and for the 90 days that that 

child was in B.C. that their welfare costs would  



274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

be picked up by the home province, not by the province to 

where the person is moving. 

 

It’s only by having that sense of balancing rights and 

responsibilities nationally, all across the piece, that we’re going 

to be able to get into some realistic discussion about what is 

happening with social assistance. We cannot have the situation 

continuing where we have one province giving people one-way 

bus tickets to leave their province, another province opting out 

of an already tenuous system. We need to look, and to 

recognize that all of us as Canadians have some responsibility 

for people who, through no fault of their own, find themselves 

jobless and find themselves without an income. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give at least a couple of other members 

an opportunity to say some things today, so I’m going to wrap 

up. I do want to say that this country is not held together solely 

by federal financial blackmail. But this country is held together 

by that federal sense that together, collectively, with national 

standards, we, all of us, are bigger than the size of our own 

shadow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from a poem that to me indicates 

just how far the Liberals opposite have not travelled. Mr. 

Speaker, it sums up their philosophy, I think, and it sums up 

what is happening federally in this country now. It is a poem 

that was written by a man named F.R. Scott. He wrote it in the 

late 1940s, shortly after William Lyon Mackenzie King died. 

 

Mr. Speaker, F.R. Scott was at one point in his life the dean of 

McGill law school. He was also one of the authors of the 

Regina Manifesto. And later in his life, he was an adviser to the 

UN (United Nations). He had a very keen ability to look at 

people’s actions and to see what was really behind them. So he 

wrote this poem, entitled “W.L.M.K.” 

 

 How shall we speak of Canada, 

 MacKenzie King dead? 

 The Mother’s boy in the lonely room 

 With his dog, his medium, and his ruins? 

 

 He blunted us. 

 

 We had no shape 

 Because he never took sides, 

 And no sides 

 Because he never allowed them to take shape. 

 

 He skilfully avoided what was wrong 

 Without saying what was right, 

 And never let his on the one hand 

 Know what his on the other hand was doing. 

 

 The height of his ambition 

Was to pile a Parliamentary Committee on a 

  Royal Commission 

 To have ‘conscription if necessary 

 But not necessarily conscription’, 

 To let parliament decide  

 Later. 

 

 Postpone, postpone, abstain. 

 

 Only one thread was certain: 

 After World War 1 

 Business as usual, 

 After World War II 

 Orderly decontrol. 

 Always he led us back to where we were before. 

 

 He seemed to be in the centre 

 Because (he) had no centre, 

 No vision 

 To pierce the smoke-screen of his politics. 

 

 Truly he will be remembered 

 Wherever men honour ingenuity, 

 Ambiguity, inactivity, and political longevity. 

 

 Let us raise up a temple 

 To the cult of mediocrity, 

 Do nothing by halves 

 Which can be done by quarters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that sums up the current position of the 

federal Liberal government and the provincial Liberal Party in 

defending these shameful actions: “Always he led us back to 

where we were before.” 

 

Excuse me, we have worked very hard in this country to build 

up a precious social safety net. Of course it needs modernizing. 

Of course it needs changes. It needs to become more effective, 

but it does not need to be plundered in the way that the federal 

Liberals want to and in the way that the provincial Liberals are 

leading the parade with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to say I’m proud, 

immensely proud to be a Canadian. I have served on a 

municipal council and I was proud to be a Saskatonian. I am 

serving now in the provincial legislature. I’m proud to be a 

Saskatchewanian. 

 

And if I’m to believe the rumours of my federal MP who thinks 

I might run against him, perhaps some day I may end up in the 

House of Commons. But whether I do or not, I have to tell you I 

am proud to be a Canadian, and for me that is the most 

important piece of my identity. I’ve travelled all over this world 

and I will never give up my Canadian citizenship and I will 

never yield the fight to those people who would roll back the 

clock of time and have us once again be a dog-eat-dog country. 

 

I will be supporting the motion; I will not support the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 

entering this debate on the government motion, which is of 

course about the federal Liberal budget which is cutting . . . has 

just cut their budget, trying to reach a balance. The problem is,  



March 13, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve cut . . . 73 per cent of their budget cuts 

have been on the backs of sick people, on the backs of poor 

people, and on the backs of students. Health, social programing, 

education, those three critical areas that define us more so than 

anything else as Canadians. 

 

Budgets tend to be a government statement about what their 

priorities are, Mr. Speaker. Well the federal Liberals have made 

it very clear what their priorities are. The provincial Liberals 

today have made it very, very clear that they’re arm in arm, lock 

step with their federal cousins. And I say that’s a shame, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a shame that Liberals . . . I guess it proves the old 

saying, a Liberal is a Liberal is a Liberal. But it clearly shows us 

who it is that politicians listen to. And clearly the Liberals are 

not listening to people who require health care, educational 

services, or social programs through our social safety net. 

 

The Liberals continue to blame the sick; they blame the poor; 

and they blame the students for their ineptitude, for their lack of 

ability to improve their financial budget situation. This is the 

legacy. And we see today very clearly the provincial Liberal 

opposition acting as apologists for their federal counterpart. 

 

It was interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, to hear earlier this day the 

member for Thunder Creek saying, you know it doesn’t matter 

what numbers the Minister of Finance uses, doesn’t matter what 

numbers the Minister of Finance uses. Well after the Liberal 

fiasco of yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame them for 

running from numbers. I don’t blame them one bit for not 

wanting to talk about numbers. And I certainly don’t blame 

them after yesterday’s fiasco. I don’t blame them for picking 

numbers out of the air or being reluctant to pick further 

numbers out of the air. 

 

The numbers that the opposition have to come to grips with, 

and I’d like to hear them just once say this number is wrong  

73 per cent of the cuts in the federal budget tabled last week, 73 

per cent of the cuts are to sick people, are to students, and are to 

people who require social assistance, social programs through 

the social safety net. Challenge that number if you can. I don’t 

believe you can. I certainly haven’t heard it. 

 

The member for Shaunavon is poking great fun at this, and it 

may be a laughing matter to you, sir; it is not a laughing matter 

to us on this side of the House. We want to look after the 

people of the province to the best of our ability. We’re asking 

you to set aside this petty, goofy politics where you’re 

defending your Liberal cousins. You think it might be that 

senator might look good in front of your name? Well good luck. 

Good luck! There’s absolutely no other logical reason why the 

member for Shaunavon or the member for Thunder Creek 

would be so adamant, so headstrong in their defence of the 

federal budget cut  this cut of 73 per cent to Saskatchewan 

people. No reason for it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I heard the . . . Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I 

heard the member for Thunder Creek talking a little bit about 

the job that the provincial government does in taxing banks, and 

he was decrying that we do somehow a less than stellar job in 

Saskatchewan. And he held up his federal cousin as a stellar  

example of how it is that banks should be treated. 

 

Well let me just point out a couple of things to the minister for 

Thunder Creek. How does Saskatchewan treat banks? Well for 

your information, Mr. Member, Saskatchewan levies the highest 

corporate capital tax on banks  the highest in all of Canada. 

The highest corporate capital tax on the banks in all of Canada 

levied right here in Saskatchewan by this government. 

 

Saskatchewan has the highest corporate income tax rate on 

banks in Canada  the highest corporate income tax rate on 

banks in Canada at 17 per cent. We in addition provide no 

special exemptions on sales taxes for banks in Saskatchewan, 

something that other provinces are wont to do. 

 

That’s the reality. If you want to talk about taxation and fair 

taxation, quit wasting your breath on this side of the House, on 

our Minister of Finance. Talk to your federal Minister of 

Finance about real, meaningful tax reform that will help the 

people of Saskatchewan. Do that. Do yourself a favour; do the 

people of Saskatchewan a favour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  In contrast the federal government in its last 

budget, I just want to say, they’ve extended a temporary surtax 

on banks. They’ve extended it a modest period of time, and the 

tax as a result of this budget is going to go  that the federal 

government collects from all the banks  is going to go from 

$60 million in fiscal ‘95-96 down to $40 million in ‘96-97. 

 

How in the world can a Liberal defend that record? A 50 per 

cent cut in a temporary tax on banks? And you hold that up. 

This is wonderful. This is the Minister of Finance, the federal 

Liberal Minister of Finance’s answer to fair taxation. I think 

you’ve got to give your heads a shake. 

 

Join with us. This motion is all about government’s choices. 

The numbers are quite clear  73 per cent of the cuts of the 

federal Liberal budget are on the backs of sick, poor people, 

and students. You choice  and you have a choice today. Very 

soon we’re going to be voting on this government motion. Your 

choice is very simple. 

 

Stand up, defend your Liberal cousins and maybe, just maybe, 

you might get to be a senator  one or more of you might get 

to be a senator. But you won’t gain the respect of the people of 

Saskatchewan and you don’t deserve it either. Your choice is 

stand up for your federal cousins with their backwards policies, 

their lack of meaningful tax reform, or join with us and call on 

the federal government for real, meaningful tax reform that has 

real meaningful effect for the people of not only Saskatchewan, 

but of all of Canada. 

 

I invite you to vote with us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by saying that I do not intend 

to support the amendment, and I’d like to tell the  



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 1996 

members of this House why. 

 

There are times in politics, Mr. Speaker, when people have to 

stand to be counted. In a few moments, we’re all going to have 

to stand to be counted and there are two things that the people 

of this province need to be asking of the members opposite. 

 

First, to whom do they listen? Do they listen to their 

constituents on health boards who have written to the federal 

Finance minister and to the members opposite and said, these 

cuts are going to be devastating. Or do they listen to their 

friends in Ottawa, their federal big cousins who come and tell 

them what their positions should be? 

 

But the much more fundamental question is this: politics is 

about choices and in a moment we’re all going to be standing 

and telling the people of Saskatchewan what our choices are. 

And I warn the members opposite, this is a very carefully 

worded motion. What it says is 73 per cent of the cuts in the 

1996 . . . 

 

(1645) 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I am going to call the . . . Order. 

I am going to call the minister to order, because I caution her 

she’s spoken to the motion, and I’ve recognized her without 

giving warning to the Assembly because she is eligible to speak 

to the amendment; and as you have the floor now you may only 

address your remarks to the amendment, having previously 

spoken to the main motion. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Okay. What I’m saying to the 

members opposite is this: I am rejecting their amendment 

because I believe that the issue here is simple. Seventy-three per 

cent of federal cuts are to health, education, and social 

programs. What the amendment would do would set that aside. 

We don’t care about that. 

 

What we are saying and why we oppose the amendment is this: 

we are expressing our concern about a budget that would cut 

health, education, and social programs by 73 per cent. And I 

warn the members opposite, if they support the amendment 

setting aside the original motion, we will in this House and 

outside of this House tell the people of Saskatchewan again and 

again and again that you don’t listen to them, that you are 

prepared to cut health, education, and social programs, by 73 

per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:48 p.m. until 4:58 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  9 

 

Osika Aldridge McLane 

Draude McPherson Belanger 

Julé Krawetz Gantefoer 

 

 

Nays  30 

 

Romanow Mitchell Wiens 

MacKinnon Lingenfelter Shillington 

Anguish Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Upshall Kowalsky Crofford 

Calvert Pringle Koenker 

Trew Bradley Lorje 

Nilson Cline Serby 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Wall Kasperski Sonntag 

Jess Murrell Thomson 

 

The division bells rang from 5:01 p.m. until 5:31 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas  31 

 

Romanow Wiens MacKinnon 

Lingenfelter Shillington Tchorzewski 

Whitmore Upshall Kowalsky 

Crofford Calvert Pringle 

Koenker Trew Bradley 

Lorje Scott Teichrob 

Nilson Cline Serby 

Stanger Hamilton Murray 

Langford Wall Kasperski 

Sonntag Jess Murrell 

Thomson   

 

Nays  nil 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 p.m. 

 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 247 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 247 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 247 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 247 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 247 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 247 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 247 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 247 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 248 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 248 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 248 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 249 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 249 
Murray ................................................................................................................................................................................ 249, 266 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 249 
Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 249 
Upshall......................................................................................................................................................................................... 249 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
Humboldt Charity Fund-raisers 

Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 249 
Green Lake Saw Mill Agreement  

Sonntag ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 249 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 250 

Keystone Bulk Transport in Moose Jaw 
Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 250 

Royal Bank Cup Junior A Hockey in Melfort 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 250 

Prince Albert Regional Enterprise Centre Opens 
Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 250 

National Congress on Rural Education 
Bradley ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 251 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayment 

McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 251 
Upshall......................................................................................................................................................................................... 251 

Rural Economic Development 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 252 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 252 

McDowell Report 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 253 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 253 

Proposed Service Districts 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

Municipal Government Administrative Costs 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 255 

Video Lottery Terminal Revenues 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 255 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 256 

 
 
 
 



INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
Bill No. 18  An Act to enable direct reduction of the Provincial Debt 

Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 256 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 256 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
McDowell Committee 

Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 256 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 257 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
Cuts to Federal Transfer Payments 

MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 257 
Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 
Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 264 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 266 
Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 267 

  Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 269 
  Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 271 
  Trew............................................................................................................................................................................................. 274 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 275 
 Recorded divisions......................................................................................................................................................................... 276 
 
 


