
























































May 27, 1996 Hansard Evening


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1879 
 May 27, 1996 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
Item 1 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I welcome the 
minister and his staff here this evening. 
 
Just a few things  and I guess we’re probably following up on 
questions earlier today  but they had to do with some of the 
mining concerns that have been raised by people today, and I 
just want to hear, Mr. Minister, your view on where some of 
their concerns . . . how they’re going to be addressed somewhat. 
 
So I’d like to start, Mr. Minister, by just touching on a few 
things. I notice that in my notes, it shows where some of these 
mines take years by the time they come to fruition and start 
producing and the companies can actually see some returns. 
And in fact I believe one fellow today mentioned that the 
McArthur River project took some 22 years in becoming a 
payer to the people that invest in that mine. 
 
And so I guess what the concern is from our point of view and 
the point of view of the people that are the owners of these 
mines and investing in these mines is, what in fact is the 
provincial government doing to shorten the process, if in fact 
the provincial government is part of a problem, you know, 
environmental reviews or whatever that process is. And so 
could you give me a quick explanation of how the process 
works  not only, I guess, from your relationship to the mining 
industry but also to other levels of government and where some 
of the hang-ups are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With respect 
to McArthur River specifically, the mine was discovered in 
1979 and since then, as you will know, there’s a lot happened in 
terms of uranium development and development of mining 
opportunities here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I guess it would be fair to say that I will acknowledge the 
process by which a uranium mine is brought on stream, it’s a 
very slow and it’s a very costly process. It is a joint initiative of 
the federal and provincial government and I have represented 
the concerns of industry at provincial Energy ministers’ 
meetings. In terms of the cost of the process and in terms of the 
length of time it takes to make those decisions, now I can’t say 
to you nor will I say that there aren’t some things that we can be 
doing and would like to see happen at the review process level 
to speed it up, because it is a costly proposition for shareholders 
and for the developers. 
 
I think the one thing that I’m as much concerned about as 
anything is the duplication at times I see at a federal and a 
provincial level. And we’ve been working with my counterpart, 
the minister of Resources Canada, at that level, to see what we 

can in terms of stopping and alleviating some of the duplication 
in terms of process. I can’t say that we’ve been terribly 
successful, but we’re certainly working on it. We understand 
the implications on industry, and we certainly would like to 
shorten the time. I certainly don’t want to abdicate the 
responsibility of this provincial government because we are 
now the stewards of the process. It was set up jointly in the 
previous administration to do the reviews. 
 
I’m comfortable with the fact that we’ve put together a process 
whereby due diligence environmentally does occur, and I think 
all of the people of Saskatchewan are concerned that that 
happen. On the other hand, we want to see the development. 
We want to see it happen as quickly as we can and at least cost 
to the proponents as we can. And we have been working and 
will continue to work to shorten that process, to lessen the cost 
of development of some of the new mines that are coming on 
stream. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now when you 
talk about the duplication of regulations, I’m uncertain as to 
why we have to duplicate. And I’m not sure which is the 
lengthier hold-up in the process, whether it’s federal, which I 
guess you and I directly can’t influence as much as we would 
like, perhaps. But if you look at the provincial regulations, Mr. 
Minister, are there some regulations that in fact if you dropped 
the provincial regulations in its entirety, if it’s covered federally 
anyways, would that shorten the process, or is there something 
that the province is requiring over and above what the federal 
government does? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to 
the member opposite, as you will know, the regulations with 
respect to this review on a provincial basis are put in place by 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), by our provincial body. The federal regulations 
as it pertains to the environment would be put in place by 
Environment Canada. So you have two arms, one provincial 
and one federal, I guess, both trying to ensure that due 
environmental diligence is done. I would think it’s fair to say 
that we will continue to pressure, as the Department of Energy 
and Mines, to ensure that we aren’t doing twice what can be 
done appropriately once. 
 
With respect to uranium development, I guess I would want to 
say that this resource is . . . it’s a Saskatchewan resource. This 
is where the activity, the mining activity, takes place. I think we 
could appropriately deal with many initiatives that the federal 
government has involved themselves in. I certainly don’t want 
to preclude their right nor their ability, nor would I suggest it 
should be done. 
 
To do due diligence in terms of environmental concerns, I can 
only say that it will take some cooperation between the 
provincial and the federal governments, both understanding that 
mining development in Saskatchewan, whether it be uranium 
mining or whether it be mining of other forms in other 
jurisdictions, is viewed worldwide by a global investment 
community. 
 



1880 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

And it concerns me that sometimes Saskatchewan is not viewed 
as Saskatchewan per se, on a global basis, but is viewed by 
what takes place in Canada, what takes place with national 
environmental regulations and environmental process. I would 
think that there is some room for streamlining. I think we can 
do it without damaging the integrity of the process, which we’re 
all concerned about. It’s not a matter of developing for 
development’s sake. We need to ensure that we’re doing it in an 
environmentally safe manner. 
 
But I worry sometimes that the reputation that we get as a 
country is sometimes one of too much regulation, too much 
control, too much due process. I don’t think that that case can 
be made in all circumstances, because I think of Europe as an 
example. I know that some of the scrutiny and some of the 
processes that have to take place in the European community 
makes it very difficult for any kind of a development to take 
place. They don’t work in times of five years or even ten years. 
They work in time frames of 30, 35, and 40 years in terms of 
planning, putting in place a process for development. 
 
So although I think that we do have a process that can be sped 
up, I wouldn’t suggest to you, nor do I believe, that we have the 
most cumbersome rules in this country in terms of putting 
developments on stream. I think we have, in some cases, a 
happy medium and some I guess it maybe takes a little longer 
that we’d like to see. 
 
But I can say to you that I certainly wouldn’t want to be, nor 
would I suggest this government should be, part of a process 
that doesn’t involve itself enough in terms of the decisions. 
There are some countries that are I guess so starved for 
development that due diligence won’t take place and I don’t 
think any of us want to see that. I think with respect to 
development, it’s got to be done in a responsible manner. 
Shortening the time frame is important and we will continue to 
work with industry and with the federal government to attempt 
to do that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Minister, you know I don’t for a 
moment want to have you think that we don’t, you know, 
wouldn’t want you to go through your due diligence. The 
concern would be whether in fact there’s part of a process that’s 
done, I guess, by SERM in regards to setting up environment 
review panels and we’re having some public input. Is this not 
something that your department or another body, I guess, could 
handle in a shorter time frame? 
 
I don’t know how much public input or what the length is 
allowed for a project like McArthur River. But you know, I 
think the perception of the people is that in fact we’ve got a lot 
of environmental groups that you’re trying to appease. And I 
don’t know that, and I’m not going to accuse you of that, but is 
there some of that in there and could we shorten it up. 
 
Because there’s no doubt, I mean we’ve got a couple of the 
richest ore deposits in the world, or maybe several, but a few 
that should be coming on stream sooner rather than later. And 
perhaps with the richness of these ore deposits it doesn’t matter; 
we’re going to have companies continuously coming here 
regardless. And I hope that to be the case. But I’m just asking, I  

guess, if there’s some way we can shorten this up. 
 
And so if it’s SERM, you of course are monitoring . . . your 
department would monitor this to a great degree. And what I 
guess I’d like to know firstly, is there a separate review panel 
for each project, or does SERM have a set group of people on a 
panel; or are we constantly having to train new people? I’ll 
leave it at that for a moment. 
 
(1915) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite. I think some of these questions, certainly more detail, 
could be given in estimates, in SERM’s estimates. In terms of 
details and a more detailed overview, what I can say is the 
background of this is that SERM entered into an agreement 
with Environment Canada so that we could put together a panel 
that would view more than one development, keeping in mind 
the legislative requirements of the province and the legislative 
requirements of Canada. They are reviewing a number of 
proposals: McClean Lake, Cigar Lake, Midwest; and so it’s a 
process that goes on. And as the information comes to the panel 
from the proponents, they’re reviewed, they’re studied, and 
recommendations are made, decisions are made. 
 
I think the one comment that you made that I would maybe 
want to clarify to a degree is with respect to the position we 
take in terms of the development. We have legislation in this 
province that has certain requirements that need to be met. 
There are people on both sides of this issue, both 
pro-development and those who are opposed to uranium 
mining. There are people in northern Saskatchewan who take 
the position that the development activity and the benefits of 
that activity should be more for the northern folks. It becomes a 
very broad-based debate; broader, some would argue, than may 
need to be. 
 
But I want to say that we try to balance the interests of those 
with environmental concerns. Those who are shareholders and 
stakeholders in the development side of it want to see a return 
for their shareholders and we want to see development and job 
opportunities for Saskatchewan’s northern people and for 
northern businesses. Quite clearly a lot of that activity takes 
place outside of the North; a lot of it takes place in the North. 
And any development that creates jobs and creates wealth in 
this province we welcome, but keeping in mind that there are a 
number of people who have differing views. Those views 
should be and are heard in the panel discussions. 
 
And yes, we will continue to try and reduce the time it takes to 
go through these processes and the costs that it takes for the 
process. And as I’ve indicated, we will be working with our 
federal counterparts to see if we can’t do just that. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’ll throw 
out an offer to you. In fact if there’s anything that the official 
opposition can do to aid in ending some of this duplication  
which will be giving in on your part somewhat, I suspect  and 
perhaps in dealing with the federal government, please just give 
us a call. 
 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1881 

Mr. Minister, I see on page 16 of the Estimates, we have a 
break . . . well it’s not a breakdown as much as I need it to be, 
in the non-renewable resources. Well let’s take uranium as the 
example. Can you tell me how much of this is tax, and what 
would be in royalties, and how is that royalty structure or tax 
structure to the mines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With 
respect to uranium, it’s just about all Crown royalties. There’s 
very little in terms of taxes. 
 
You mentioned what you can do to speed the process. I think 
what’s probably already happened is the leader of the federal 
party, the Prime Minister of Canada, had a cabinet shuffle 
recently and removed Sheila Copps as Environment minister. 
So let me tell you if there was anything that’s holding a process 
of consolidation and removal of duplication, that would have 
been already done. 
 
But I want to say that I certainly accept your offer. We need, I 
think, a strong voice from Saskatchewan representing 
Saskatchewan’s concerns in Ottawa. Certainly our Premier and 
the ministers on this side of the House attempt to do that, and 
there are times when we can use the benefit of the, I guess, the 
knowledge of our federal counterparts from the official 
opposition. And certainly we will, have been, and continue to 
call on you for some assistance in that regard in the years to 
come. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Getting 
back to the non-renewable resources, it looks like all of those 
. . . well of course they would, they’d fall under your purview. 
Is it possible  and you may have those figures with you this 
evening that you could send across  the breakdown of tax 
versus royalties for each of those commodities, would you have 
that with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  If I could, to the member from 
Wood River, we can either read them into the record verbally or 
we can send them across for you with the breakdown. And I’m 
assuming you’d want those for uranium, potash, gold  you’re 
talking minerals here now? Okay. We’ll send those across then 
in writing. I’m not sure if they have them . . . they’ll have the 
figures here but I’m not sure if we’ll have enough copies. Well 
I’ll check and if they got them, we’ll send them tonight. If not 
we can send them over later. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Beyond 
minerals, you’re also going to include all oil and gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We can include oil and gas 
royalties and taxes as well. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, do you have a breakdown as 
to how the royalty structure works for each of those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I have them in the form that I can 
read into the record, if you’d like . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Okay, we’ll send them across then. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, just getting back to that 

environmental review panel. And I appreciate what you were 
saying about perhaps we should ask these detailed questions of 
SERM when they come up. But surely your department must 
stay in very close contact with what’s happening in the mining 
industry as far as how the environmental review panel is 
affecting it. 
 
And as I’d asked before  and I don’t know if you addressed, 
gave an answer, to it  but does SERM take care of the 
assessment, the review itself? Do they create a panel and then 
who is on the panel? And what influence does your department 
have on the panel, if any, whether it be just to have some of the 
members, perhaps of your department or of the industry, that 
you will ensure become panel members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Right. Well I think it’s fair to say 
we don’t, as a department, have any input into the appointment 
of panel members. Once they’re appointed I think it would be 
inappropriate for us to make comment because of the fact they 
are an independent panel. That’s the nature of the panel; that’s 
what was struck; that’s the reason it was set up. 
 
I can say that the concerns of industry, as they are brought to us 
and as they are brought to me as the minister, are shared with 
the minister of SERM as well. You know, I know there are 
times when industry will be having a difficulty with an 
environmental regulation or a process, and ask that we do what 
we can to press upon our colleagues that it’s creating 
difficulties for them. 
 
So in those cases we will make presentation or representation to 
other departments to describe industry circumstance for them. 
 
And you know, in working closely with industry you become 
fairly familiar with their day-to-day concerns and their 
day-to-day problems. Some you can fix and some you can’t fix. 
Some you can fix internally, some require some small 
adjustments that you can do within the department, and at other 
times it’s under the purview of another ministry. And so those 
are the things that would be discussed with a minister directly 
or at the cabinet table, and that’s sort of the process. 
 
But with respect to the panel, this is an independent panel set 
up by SERM. We work with it. When we find areas where we 
think there would be positive changes that could be effected, we 
bring it to the attention of certainly our minister, we bring it to 
the attention of the federal Resources minister, and we’ll bring 
it to the attention of the federal Environment minister. So that’s 
sort of the process and that’s how it works from our 
perspective. I hope I’ve answered your question. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, getting back to the tax 
royalties, I guess the questions will have to be broad because of 
course we haven’t had time to view the packages that you’re 
going to be sending across. 
 
But one of the concerns and comments that I’ve heard from 
industry people, mining industry people, is that in fact your tax 
and royalty regime is the highest in the world right here in this 
province. And I’m not sure if they view it as a gouging, but 
would there be more industry, would there be more mining  



1882 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

industry, in the province if we had a different rate or a different 
tax structure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think it’s always fair to say 
the lower the tax and royalty structure, the more opportunity 
there will be to attract investors. What we try to do is to find a 
balance between that royalty structure and taxation level and the 
shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan who own those 
resources, and a fair return on the investment of the proponents 
of developments, and a fair return for their investors. And that’s 
always the key. 
 
And I think as I said earlier, there are always areas where 
governments, jurisdictions, are willing to see a lower rate of 
taxation based on their circumstance, than others. What we 
attempt to do is work closely with industry to try and find a 
balance where they can attract investment and where they can 
put together partnerships that will develop our resources. 
 
It’s always a tricky subject. On one hand, you have people who 
say, tax the large corporations more; the resource sector has got 
room for more taxation. And on the other hand, industry will 
say that they are taxed to the limit. 
 
There is no doubt that our royalty and taxation regime, with 
respect to both potash and uranium, are high. We try to work on 
the basis that they should have a fair return on their investment, 
and that the resource is owned by the people of Saskatchewan, 
and the return should come to them. In particular, when we’re 
looking at non-renewable resources that we’ll never see again, 
we want to be able to leave some type of legacy for the people 
of Saskatchewan for the resource that’s being developed, one 
that we know will never, never again come back for 
development. 
 
So it’s been our position to try and take a proactive, partnership 
approach with industry to work out a fair regime for their 
shareholders and for our shareholders, the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I would think it’s fair to say that we’ve 
been fairly successful. 
 
If you look at the oil and gas industry as one example, the 
number of wells, of horizontal wells, that have been drilled in 
Saskatchewan and the production and what we have done in 
terms of expanding our known renewable resource, I think 
we’ve done a fairly good job and we’ve been able to find that 
balance with that sector. 
 
But those discussions are ongoing with mining, with the oil and 
gas sector. And we continue to work closely with them. The 
department is very accessible, and I certainly try to achieve 
accessibility within my office and the people I work with in my 
office so that we can maintain some understanding of both’s 
needs, both the people of Saskatchewan and shareholders and 
developers of the resources. 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I guess you’ve actually 
touched on it. It is a balancing act; it’s a tough balancing act. I 
would agree with that. But I think from an industry point of  

view, where I can see their concern is on one hand, they’re 
saying you’re the highest tax/royalty jurisdiction in the world. 
Okay, and if they find that they can do their business with that 
tax/royalty environment and find success here, then I guess you 
do have some sort of balance with the industry on behalf of 
taxpayers. 
 
But on the other side of the coin, you then should do what you 
can to ensure that they don’t have these lengthy, lengthy periods 
and that duplication. So it’s not a question; it’s just a comment. 
From my perspective, it looks like they’re getting sort of a 
tough ride on both ends of the stick, and I would encourage you 
to do what you can to have them so that . . . because your point 
is good about the legacy, with our own children. We want to 
ensure that there’s resource and resource revenue for years to 
come. But on the other hand, we don’t want the environmental 
review processes to hold it up to the point where other 
jurisdictions start to entice these companies to go elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Minister, moving on to oil and gas for a moment, can you 
tell us how in fact in the last few years your royalty structure 
has changed? And I believe there has been some change with 
horizontal drilling. And I’m not . . . I guess, probably that’s got 
a structure all of its own, tax and royalty. Can you just give us 
sort of an overview of how this works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well you’re talking as one here 
who is . . . I’m not a technocrat, believe me. And when it comes 
to the details of what is a very complex royalty and taxation 
structure, it’s difficult to describe the changes. 
 
I can say to you the changes were made that created incentives, 
and we think the incremental activity . . . and as a matter of fact, 
the oil and gas industry credit the changes in early ’94 with the 
increased land purchases and the increased activity. We 
changed some from time- to a volume-based royalty. We 
introduced a third-tier vertical drilling which is a low rate for 
new wells, for new development. I’m told that there was put in 
place then a new incentive for development of natural gas 
wells. They’re, as I’ve said, they’re very complex. I’ve had a 
look at them, and I think when I look at them initially, I believe 
I understand them. But as you get away for awhile and haven’t 
seen them, they’re very complex. 
 
But I can say the oil industry itself has taken a very proactive 
approach since those changes have been introduced, and I think 
the area that you and I both come from in south-western 
Saskatchewan and south-central Saskatchewan is evidence. The 
activity out there and the number of wells that have been 
drilled, and the number of people that are working, the number 
of service rigs, and the number of developments out there have 
been a good indication that it’s a policy that’s well received by 
the industry. 
 
And on the other hand, the royalties that we’ve been able to 
generate and the revenue been able to generate through those 
changes, that’s certainly helped with our financial position here 
in the province. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well that’s a  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1883 

good place to start, in the south-west. In fact I guess most 
people don’t realize where . . . that you’re from my riding and 
probably wish you were still there. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know, in the south-west we have a number 
of these high water producers, some low barrels. Now I 
appreciate what you’re saying about some of the new start-up 
wells having a lower royalty structure, and I’m sure that’s 
helping drive some of the industry right now. 
 
But on the other side of this coin, you have wells that because 
it’s volume based . . . and I don’t know, I think it’s about 18, 19 
years average life span of the well. Correct me if I’m wrong. 
But now in those later years when that production falls off and 
they’re dealing with high water, low production  we’re 
talking six, ten barrel a day wells  there we have some 
concern. There’s a number of these wells, and if they’re held by 
larger oil companies, wealthier oil companies, they’re more 
likely to shut them in. I’m not sure what the rate is where they 
find them to be not profitable any longer. But what can the 
government, the provincial government, do to help the low 
producers, the high water producers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, I am told by my 
officials, who have a pretty good handle on this, and I am told 
by them that the royalty rate structure as it exists now, is both 
. . . is price sensitive and I guess volume sensitive, in that as the 
volume goes down . . . and it’s dependent of course on the rate. 
We try and build in a rate of return as the production on these 
wells will decrease. 
 
But I think it’s also fair to say that on an ongoing basis we work 
with industry. And where royalties need to be modified . . . 
some need small tinkering here, there. We try to develop a 
royalty structure that will last for the long haul. That isn’t 
always the case because sometimes markets will change fairly 
dramatically, more than ever anticipated. So we, over the course 
of the years, will continue to work with the industry to adjust 
these royalty rates as the markets demand and to ensure that 
they get a fair rate of return on their production. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, now when you’re talking 
about this being price sensitive and volume sensitive, I recall 
seeing your graph at one point where in fact your volume 
sensitivity didn’t start at zero. There were so many barrels per 
day production before you were charged a royalty. Is that still 
happening today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, that still is the case today. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I was actually 
hoping that you would offer up more, perhaps the graph or the 
breakdown of what that structure is. In fact can you supply us 
with that, for each well, starting at zero? And I don’t think 
that’s a lot of work for your department because I’ve seen this 
stuff before, and I’m hoping that you have it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We’re just looking to see if we 
have some visuals, but I understand that the cut-off is five 
barrels a day, that there is no taxation at five barrels. 
 

Mr. McPherson:  In your estimation, Mr. Minister, is that a 
low enough figure? Should it perhaps be double that? Would 
we save some of these family operations that are the ones out 
there operating these low producers or some of the smaller oil 
and gas firms that in fact are employing some of the local 
people, say in the Shaunavon-Eastend area? Or is this . . . you 
know, from the 5 to 10 barrels, does it make it just that much 
tougher to make a go of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do, by 
golly, have a graph here and the officials have been kind 
enough to find it in the reams of material that they brought with 
us. And I’d like to send that across to you. You can have a look 
at it. It gives you some kind of an indication of how the royalty 
structure works. 
 
When we set the royalty structure we look at an overall revenue 
base, what we’re expecting from the resource, what the 
requirements of the government are. And I guess we could set it 
at 10 barrels a day as opposed to 5. But if you look at the 
number of wells that are producing between that level, and the 
amount of revenue that would be lost, it becomes very cost 
prohibitive. And if you’re going to allow a royalty reduction in 
one area, if you’re looking at a global number, you’re going to 
have to pick it up somewhere. 
 
So where then do you go, you know? And that becomes the 
balancing act that we talked about a little earlier. And that’s 
why we continue to work with industry and with producers to 
try and find a balance across the range of slower producing 
wells, medium producing wells, and our higher producing 
wells. That’s why we work with them to develop a royalty 
structure that makes some sense with respect to horizontal 
drilling. 
 
So all of these things are a balancing act. And you can make an 
argument that one should be changed, you know, in favour of 
another, but as we did the analysis and when we were putting 
the royalty structure in place, it was deemed that the five-barrel 
level would make some sense. I don’t see a page here but . . . 
there we are. I’ll send this across to you. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you give 
me some understanding as to what neighbouring provinces do 
in respect to these very low producers or high-water producers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you. I am told that no other 
jurisdiction gives a break for a water cut. It’s not in Alberta, not 
here, not in any jurisdiction that we’re aware of. They don’t 
give a break for water cut. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  What about just low producers then, Mr. 
Minister? Is there . . . well do you have information on what 
provinces do for just low producers, without getting into the 
water cut? 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, with leave to introduce some 
very special guests. 
 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank the 
members of the opposition and the minister for this intrusion. I 
want to introduce some very special guests. Mr. Chair, there are 
few guests who actually come to our Chamber and pay to be 
here. These are paying guests, Mr. Chair, and let me explain 
that. 
 
In our church in Moose Jaw, the congregation of Zion United, 
once a year we have what we describe as a service auction and 
members of the congregation donate services. I donated, this 
year, a tour of this wonderful Legislative Building of ours, plus 
supper out in Regina, reasonably priced, and 15 minutes free 
complaining time. And my guests tonight have paid a 
substantial dollar to be here. So I would like to introduce them 
and I would like all members present to welcome them. They 
are the Hogg family from Moose Jaw  Lloyd Hogg, Carol 
Hogg, Evan and Jason Hogg, and Val Janko. Please welcome 
our guests from Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you. Mr. Chairman. What a 
price to pay. But welcome to the legislature. 
 
The rate in Alberta is that they don’t have a five-barrel cut-off; 
theirs is zero. So that I guess is the difference between us in 
Saskatchewan. The royalties and the rate structure in Alberta is 
different than is ours, but I guess they base theirs based on their 
needs and their production; we base ours on our needs and our 
production. But that’s the difference in terms of your previous 
question. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. However, 
looking at the graphs that you’ve sent across, and I appreciate 
having those so soon, once it hits five barrels a day then it 
increases dramatically. It’s quite a dramatic increase. And I’m 
just wondering then in  we’ll use Alberta as the example  
do they have a much lower increase to their per cent of royalty 
rate? 
 
(1945) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess what 
I’d want to say, there would be . . . and I think there is no sense 
trying to or attempting to compare the royalty structure in 
Alberta as with Saskatchewan. We have, I guess, over the 
course of years, always had a different rate structure based on 
the kind of oil and the kinds of production that we have. Our 
average production in Saskatchewan is somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 16, 17 barrels a day, where in Alberta the 

production is much, much higher from the same well. 
 
It’s again, as I’ve said, a matter of finding what you can 
generate in terms of return for the taxpayers, but at the same 
token allowing producers still the opportunity for investing and 
creating jobs through the activity here in Saskatchewan. I would 
think it’s fair to say that Alberta can afford much lower 
royalties based on their production. And that’s been the case. 
 
But what I think is interesting is that we have been able to, and 
what I find encouraging, is we have been able to find a lot of 
producers who like doing business here in the province. And 
that’s why they’re investing in land sales, and that’s why 
they’re drilling out in the area that you and I both know very 
well. That’s why it’s busier than all get-out around Swift 
Current right now with respect to production and with respect 
to exploration and drilling of actual oil wells. 
 
So I guess in one respect, it’s unfair to compare a graph with 
respect to Alberta royalties and ours because I think what we do 
is we tailor our royalties to the Saskatchewan condition and the 
Saskatchewan market. We tailor them to a fair rate of return. I 
think Alberta plays in a much . . . is a much different 
circumstance than we are. But the fact that we have been able to 
generate the activity that we had since 1994 in Saskatchewan 
tells me that we’ve done something very positive, and that’s 
evidenced by the activity in the oil patch. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, I won’t disagree because 
several of those wells are being drilled on my own land, so it is 
appreciating when you see as many rigs coming out and putting 
pumpers up and helping economies out there. 
 
But yet we’re talking about something quite different when 
we’re talking about existing wells, low producers, ones that 
have actually reached the end of their life span. And you and I 
both know that those are the ones that are being dropped by the 
big players, but in fact they become the family operations, the 
small firms of one, two people, operating these low producers. 
 
And some of the concern that has been raised  and so now 
you’ll see where I’m coming from  some of the concern that 
has been raised by these people that are trying, you know, to 
make a living on these low producers, in fact help economies in 
places like Shaunavon, is in fact the amount that . . . perhaps 
the difference between 5 and 10 would make it profitable. 
 
And I’m not sure how closely you monitor this or see how 
many wells are just shut right in at say eight barrels, where in 
fact if they were ongoing with just a small amount more break 
. . . And I agree, we won’t do the comparison with Alberta, but 
you and your department must have done some analysis of what 
would happen if it were at seven barrels, or eight barrels, or 
nine barrels. 
 
And I just think that would be a lot better, to keep those 
operations going if in fact there were just that small amount of 
latitude given to these producers. Because on the other side of 
the scale, they have a very hard time getting any capital to 
purchase these from the larger oil companies that in fact are 
going to shut them in or putting them up for sale. 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

And I’ve had it raised by some firms that in fact they can’t get 
financing in this province and they’re having to go to 
out-of-province financial institutions to get financing if they 
were to purchase low producing wells here in this province. 
 
So as Energy minister this has got to be a concern to you and I 
just want to hear your view of it. So that’s where this was 
going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think it’s fair to say that the 
department monitors the number of shut-in wells on a regular 
basis. And whether it be a low producing well, or whether it be 
the amount of activity in the patch, all of these things are 
monitored. 
 
Those figures come to the department on a regular basis and I 
would think it’s fair to say that if it’s felt that there’s a 
difficulty, if there’s a problem in one particular area with 
respect to a royalty, if it’s felt that it’s stifling the action in that 
area, certainly we’re willing to have a look at it. 
 
If it’s deemed that there could be activity and quite a bit of 
incremental activity created by a tinkering with the royalty 
structure, certainly we’ll look at that as well. 
 
And I hear what you’re saying with respect to your area and 
your concern that the lower producing  say eight barrels a day 
 wells are perhaps being shut in because of the royalty 
structure. What I will undertake to do is have an internal look at 
what has happened with respect to the activity in that kind of a 
well in the last while. And our people will . . . I will have a 
discussion with them with respect to whether or not it would 
make some sense to do some changes to that particular royalty 
regime. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, have you, your department, 
given any consideration to having some way that these smaller 
firms can access capital for the purchase of these lower 
producers if in fact they are handcuffed, as I know some of 
them are, in this province? And rather than have them shut in 
or, you know, purchased by out-of-province holders, is it not 
worthwhile to look at some vehicle to help these people out? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think we take the position 
that if the royalty structure will allow for a reasonable rate of 
return, it shouldn’t be the Government of Saskatchewan that 
would have to be in a position, nor do we want to be in the 
position, where we’re financing that kind of activity. 
 
I think as you look at your royalties, you look at what the 
markets are. You look at what the return should be on particular 
developments as the banks will do. And if there’s a reasonable 
rate of return and if the credit worthiness of the company is 
such that the banking institutions, the lending institutions, want 
to do business with them, I guess it would be my guess that that 
shouldn’t be a difficulty. Just as investors will look at annual 
reports of different oil companies, whether they be small or 
whether they be large, to see if they’ve been doing well for their 
shareholders. If they’ve been doing well for their shareholders, 
there shouldn’t be a problem in terms of generating capital for 
development. 

But we don’t believe that we should be in the lending business. 
It’s certainly not our intention to move in that direction. 
 
What we at Energy and Mines feel is appropriate, that we 
understand the people who work in the industry. We understand 
the industry, understand the markets. And they’ve spent . . . this 
particular department has spent many, many years, and they’ve 
got decades of expertise to be able to put that together and to be 
able to do that. So based on the information that they compile in 
their corporate memory, it would be my suggestion that the 
royalty structure should be able to create a reasonable amount 
of return, thereby creating investment opportunities. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess we 
would agree. I mean if you can stay out of being a lender or 
getting involved in the financing side of this, that would be . . . 
we’d far sooner that you do as you’ve promised and look at the 
royalty structure and see if there’s some relief or some benefit 
to the province by making a small amount of change to in fact 
make it better for lending institutions to help these people out. 
 
Just to change gears here a little bit, Mr. Minister, in the 
Supplementary Estimates on page 3, I see we have Energy and 
Mines. There was additional funding required for expenses 
relating to out-of-court settlements and some downsizing costs 
of just about $8 million. Do you have a list of what those 
out-of-court settlements were, who they were to, and for what 
purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you for the questions. I have 
a short note that I think I might send across to you. As a matter 
of fact, I will send across to you. It sort of outlines the 
background and the history of the out-of-court settlements. And 
I think it might be somewhat helpful in terms of an 
understanding of the history of these. These are not initiatives 
that had been very recent. Some of the were from a 
considerable time back, Scurry going back to 1974. And I think 
if I were to send you these explanations, it would probably be 
more helpful than to try and describe over a longer period of 
time what the background of these were. So I’ll send this across 
with the page. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll review this, 
and perhaps the next time you’re back with your officials, we’ll 
have a few questions on this. 
 
I guess the last thing that I’d like to ask this evening, I recall 
back a few years  and you may think I’m doing this to have a 
little political fun, but truthfully I’m not  I recall some 
research done by I guess it was then Mr. Craig Dotson in 
regards to some $8 billion of debt that was created by oil and 
gas firms and put onto the backs of the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
And could you explain in what way did that happen, and what 
have you and your government done, Mr. Minister, to change 
that. And I see you enjoy it; I think you remember the paper that 
was done, and I’d like to hear your comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess, Mr. Chairman, I’d say to 
the member, if he has a copy of that study, I’d like him to send 
it over because it’s not one that I’m familiar with. So I would  



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

have a difficult time commenting on it. But if he has a copy and 
send it over, I’ll certainly study it and be willing to make 
comment. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I will have that undertaking, Mr. Minister. 
I think you recall the document. I agree it’s been a few years, 
and you probably don’t have it as accessible as I may, and so 
that’s all the questioning I’ll have this evening. 
 
(2000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m 
pleased to welcome my officials back again tonight. To my 
right is Brian Kaukinen, the president of Sask Water 
Corporation. To my left, Wayne Dybvig, the vice-president of 
water resource management; and on the other side of Mr. 
Kaukinen is Dave Schiman, the manager of financial planning. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman, and welcome to the officials. Mr. Minister, I have a 
number of questions today, and then one of my colleagues will 
be asking specific questions on the Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline. 
 
My first question is: the smaller rural communities have made 
significant investments in their water and sewer systems. These 
systems create local employment and they require local 
supplies. The revenues generated by these systems stay in the 
community and they’re reinvested in the community and in their 
infrastructures. Does Sask Water realize that by taking over 
these community systems, such as Humboldt, that they are 
depriving these communities of the economic benefits derived 
from operating their own utilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well in response to that, let me first 
describe the process. This was initiated by the communities and 
requested to Sask Water to put together a regional system. 
There were meetings throughout the area, throughout the 
different communities. 
 
As you will know, there was quite a bit of controversy in the 
community of Humboldt. There was community meetings. As I 
understand it, there was a vote in the community. The 
community decided through that vote, through their democratic 
process, to be a part of this regional system. 
 
I think it’s important to understand that the Sask Water 
Corporation is there as a resource when requested by 
communities to help put together technical engineering 
expertise, to put together the engineering for water systems. 
This was not a matter of Sask Water asking the communities to  

become part of a proposal that they had put forth. This was 
something that many communities banded together to see if 
they could improve the quality and the supply of their water and 
if they could do it at an affordable rate. 
 
Sask Water Corporation works with the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration), a federal arm of the federal 
government, in terms of working on financing. We provide 
technical and engineering expertise. We were at many public 
meetings to help to facilitate so that there could be an 
understanding of what would be proposed on a project of that 
scale. 
 
The corporation officials would attend public meetings when 
requested, but I want you to know and I want you to understand 
this was not initiated by the Water Corporation. This is 
community-based initiatives by communities  Humboldt 
being one of them  and you will know as well as I know that 
it wasn’t without some controversy in Humboldt. 
 
And in terms of changes to the costs of operations, I would 
suggest that you’re probably right. And I don’t know the 
numbers. I might be able to find that for you, but it’s important 
as well to understand that this water system only delivers to the 
town gate. This water system does not include the infrastructure 
within the community. So in terms of what happens within that 
community, if there was local employment, in all probability 
there will still be local employment. 
 
But the source of water will now be secure and it’ll be a 
long-term supply of water. So in terms of changes and in terms 
of initiation, certainly there will be some changes but I want 
you to know that this was an initiation of those communities 
that you were well aware of. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, Mr. Minister, I 
would like to welcome your officials, and beforehand I would 
like to relay a thank-you to them for coming and helping us to 
understand some of the details that we need to know. 
 
Mr. Minister, you just mentioned that the initiative taken was by 
the community, that they in fact wanted to have water as such, 
and they were the ones that determined whether or not they 
would in fact use Sask Water or whether they would use an 
EDR (electrodialysis reversal) system. 
 
From what a number of people tell me, they are not too sure 
that they had enough information to make a proper 
determination. Now we can simply say that that’s no one’s fault 
but their own because they had opportunities to come to 
meetings. 
 
What I’d like to ask you, Mr. Minister, is that at one time, if I 
have my figures right, the EDR system calculations, of how 
much it would cost to have an EDR system in, was around 24 
million, and the Sask Water projections were 32 million. At that 
time I understand that there was a sheet of calculations of what 
it would cost for power for the EDR system to operate over 30 
years. Those calculations were indicated to be up to 6 per cent 
more per year for power to operate the EDR system. And that 6 
per cent was carried on every year for the next 30 years. 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you is, is that what the 
people of Saskatchewan have to look towards as their increased 
cost of power for the next 30 years, is 6 per cent per year over 
the next 30 years? Because that’s the calculation that these 
people were given. And of course when they consider that, they 
realize that that cost of an EDR system would be much too 
much. But I find it very hard to believe that we all have to look 
at a 6 per cent increase in power over the next 30 years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I would not want you to confuse 
consumption and incremental consumption, thereby incremental 
power use, with a 6 per cent increase in the power rate and the 
cost of power. Because I’m assuming that there was a 
consumption level factored in. 
 
As you will know, the Power Corporation’s rates have been 
frozen until the year 2000. And I would assume after that we 
will go through our review process to determine what realistic 
and reasonable power rates will be. But I wouldn’t want you to 
misconstrue a 6 per cent incremental power cost, global power 
cost, for increase in the cost of power per kilowatt hour, 
because I’m sure that there was some consumption figures 
factored in. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the 
questions I posed to you during written questions during the 
session, I asked you a question with regards to the 
Humboldt-Wakaw water pipeline. And one of the questions I 
asked for was could you provide a breakdown of the $201,000 
that your department has quoted in a letter to the RM (rural 
municipality) of Fish Creek. 
 
First of all you said the construction cost of that 17.6 
kilometre-long pipeline, which would have been the area 
between the river and Wakaw, you said the materials were 
worth $58,000. Now in the information given to the people at 
Fish Creek, they were told that the materials would be $84,000. 
So I’m wondering why the change in your answers to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The initial estimates, I am told by 
the officials, was $84,000. Upon reviewing and negotiating 
with those who would be in a position to supply the material, 
we came up with a cost of $58,000. The balance of that would 
be for installation and the costs of installation. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could I 
ask you if the word installation pertains to labour costs? The 
$135,000, does that pertain to labour costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, I’m told the 135,000 does 
include labour, the cost of equipment, and the depreciation on 
the use of the equipment, fuel. It would, as part of the labour 
component, it would require separating the fresh water return 
from the inflow, which means incremental labour. So it’s not 
just the matter of throwing a pipe in the ground and covering it 
up. The estimates by the contractors are in the neighbourhood 
of 135,000. So a total cost  material, with labour, equipment 
costs  would be around $200,000. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what part 
of that $135,000 is specifically attributed to labour? 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the officials that it’s 
very unlikely that they would break the quote down on those 
bases, that it would come as a matter of labour, depreciation on 
equipment, and fuel, and then materials on the other hand. 
 
(2015) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, to come 
up with $135,000, that amount, there must have been some 
calculation of costs, and labour must have been determined in 
that. You can’t come up with $135,000 saying, well let’s just 
throw in this and that, and we would assume it’s going to be 
about that. I believe there had to be a labour calculation, and I 
would very much appreciate if you could bring that to me, or in 
the next couple of days I would be most happy to receive that, if 
possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, another question that I’d like to ask you is . . . 
when I asked you in my written question about how this 
operation is going to be financed, you mentioned that Sask 
Water’s debt financing was a portion of the initial capital cost. 
Now I want to know who in fact is financing this project? 
Where is the money acquired from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told that it’s all debt financed 
through CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), through the Crown Investments Corporation, 
which is the parent corporation of Sask Water Corporation. 
 
With respect to a breakdown, on your previous question, I will 
undertake to pursue this through the corporation with the 
contractor to see if he can give us a breakdown of the fuel and 
the equipment and the labour. I think I know where you’re 
going, based on your comments in question period the other 
day. And if . . . I think what you’re trying to determine is the 
exorbitant costs, as you would put it, based on the Crown 
Corporation tendering agreement, which I won’t happen to 
agree, but we will certainly be more than pleased to have the 
contractor break his quote down and I’ll send it to you by letter. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So what you’re saying is 
that Sask Water is financing its own project, is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The breakdown is this: CIC 
finances $25.7 million and the rest comes from the 
infrastructure program and from PAWBED (Partnership 
Agreement on Water Based Economic Development), federal 
government, through federal initiatives. So that’s how the 
financing is broken down. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I asked that question 
because one of my constituents simply asked me the question. 
They said, in fact, are these Crown corporations becoming a 
lending business and lending their own money out for their own 
projects and for their own, I guess, benefit in the long run for 
general revenue? So would I tell them yes, that in fact this is 
what’s happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  You can tell them that the project is 
self-financing, partially through federal grants, and federal 
funding through PAWBED, and through the infrastructure  



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

program, and that the balance . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
You don’t have to agree with me. I’m telling you how it’s 
financed. And the balance is $25.7 million that’s financed 
through a loan from CIC. That’s how it’s financed. I can’t 
change the facts. Those are the facts. I’ve given them to you. If 
you know better or if you have other information, then you 
share it with me. 
 
Ms. Julé:  No, Mr. Minister, I’m not shaking my head 
because of anything except that it seems to me that PAWBED 
has put in $3.8 million and that I can understand. But to have 
the rest, the $25.8 million financed by Sask Water itself, in fact 
borrowing money from itself to finance this project, may be 
something that the taxpayers of the province would have a little 
bit of trouble with. 
 
I would like to refer you to the infrastructure money, 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program grant of $2.8 
million. That is partially, I understand, federal government 
money and that was determined . . . I’m wondering whether the 
infrastructure money, when it’s given over to the province, has 
been determined by the federal government beforehand and 
given over in a lump sum per year or whatever to the province; 
or in fact if the federal government, in conjunction with the 
municipalities and the provincial government, have got to come 
to some conclusion on a project that is going to be financed by 
this infrastructure program before the money is turned over. 
 
And does the money have to be used for specific projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  There were three areas where 
infrastructure money from the federal government were spent. 
The first was . . . and the largest lump was given to the 
provincial government for those to determine where they might 
go. The second portion of that went to the municipalities for 
them to determine which projects they might want to initiate. 
There was some funding left over and that was allocated to 
projects that were determined both by the federal administration 
and by the provincial administration to be worthwhile projects 
in the province. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m happy 
for the people that want to have this water on the 
Humboldt-Wakaw water pipeline, but when I look at . . . I’m 
thinking also of the taxpayers of the province. When I look at 
$2.8 million that is put towards a project that will serve about 
7,000 people, and I look at the money that we need for all of the 
province to do with health care and education, I wonder if in 
fact this $2.8 million is a very smart move. I question it and I’m 
sure the people of the province do. I’m wondering if the returns 
to the province are that lucrative that in fact you would assess it 
to be a great thing to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I want to say to the member, first of 
all, this is a self-financing program over the length of the 
project, over the lifetime of the project. It involves about 
10,000 people in the area that it will serve, and I guess you can 
question whether or not government should in fact assist 
communities in putting together funding and financing for 
water projects. I would think it’s fair to say that the vast 
majority of the 10,000 people to whom this will serve would  

agree with me that it was a priority and that it will remain a 
priority, and that it will serve them well. 
 
And I think over a period of time, the community of Humboldt 
and the people in Humboldt who voted for this project and 
supported it in a public vote will hopefully see the spin-offs of 
economic development opportunities in that community, based 
on the fact that many industries require a good deal and a great 
supply of water in order to position themselves or in order to 
determine a place where they might operate from. 
 
So I would want to say to the member that it wasn’t that this 
project didn’t go without public scrutiny and without due 
diligence from the municipal governments and from the cities, 
from the towns, and the villages who are going to be served by 
it. And I think they’ve made their decision. We made our 
decision that we would look for financing for them. We found 
some, working with the federal government. Some of this 
funding, we’ll remind you, comes from the federal government. 
Whether it’s through PAWBED or infrastructure, it’s federal 
tax dollars. But the bottom line is that we’ve been able to serve 
10,000 people through this project that will be built over the 
course of this summer and into the fall, and will serve, I 
believe, the 10,000 people in the communities in which they 
live very well. 
 
The test of time will determine whether it was a prudent 
decision to make. I happen to think that in Saskatchewan, an 
area where we have in too many areas very low quality water, 
people serving their homes and their livestock out of dugouts 
with very much substandard water, will think that it’s very good 
investment. 
 
I think the fact that we’ve been able to bring the costs down to 
something that’s liveable is again another achievement. And 
we’ve done that by working with the communities, with the 
federal government, the municipalities, the provincial 
government, to bring it down to a cost that those people can live 
with. 
 
And I frankly make no apologies for the way it was financed. I 
think it’s a reasonable way of financing water projects. It’s 
based on a cost-recovery analysis of rates over the capital cost, 
and determining, you know, the life span of the water lines. 
 
So I think the test of time will show that those communities are 
going to be very happy with the decision they’ve made, keeping 
in mind it’s been their decision and not the provincial nor the 
federal government’s. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to sort of confirm 
to you that the reason I’m asking these questions is not because 
I don’t think that the people of that area have made a decision. I 
know they have; certainly they had a vote. Some of my 
questioning is because of my concern about what might happen 
in years to come  not only to that constituency, which is 
primarily mine, but also to the province, as a result of this. 
 
And I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister, is the $6.13 per 
1,000 gallons, is that rate guaranteed to these users on the 
pipeline for the next 30 years, or is there a chance that they may  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

have to pay more? And if they pay more, why would it happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The initial cost is $6.13 per unit. 
This is administered by a local steering committee made up of 
local people within the area of the infrastructure. There is, built 
in, a four-year ramping-up rate, but it’s their decision to make 
in terms of whether there be any increase in a given year, as I 
understand it. At the end of this term, at the end of the payback 
to the loan, that infrastructure becomes theirs; it becomes the 
property of those communities. 
 
So in terms of what they might ramp these rates up, I guess part 
of it might have to do with inflation in the province, Canadian 
inflation rate, which might impact on ours, and what they deem 
their client group can manage in terms of rate increases. But 
I’m told it’s 4 per cent. 
 
The steering committee makes the decisions and if they were to 
increase it 4 per cent every year, I guess that would mean it 
would be paid off much quicker than if they increased it by zero 
for the next five years, and 2 per cent each year thereafter. I 
mean it’s their decision; it’s their infrastructure. Our only role 
now is to help put the project together and to ensure that it’s 
built, operating well for them, and it then becomes their 
responsibility to pay off the capital debt. 
 
(2030) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think most of the 
people that had bought into this and wanted to use this way of 
receiving water were certainly under the impression that $6.13 
would be the cost to them to have treated water for the next 30 
years, and that money would pay for the water, operations, and 
everything to do  in fact the maintenance and the whole 
works  everything that would have to do with them receiving 
the water. 
 
And I think that’s why the ones that did buy into it did buy into 
it, because they believed that that rate was what they were going 
to get. I just seriously hope that there’s no major increases to 
their costs, and as you have indicated, there very well could be. 
So that’s one of the reasons again I’m putting this forth, is 
because I think the people there deserve to know what the 
future may hold for them in this regard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by my officials, and just in 
asking roughly how many meetings the Water Corporation had 
with local communities in terms of delivering information to 
the different communities, I’m told that, besides all of the 
letters of inquiry that were written to the corporation, that were 
written to the minister’s office for a response, there were in 
excess of 30 meetings over a three-year period. It was our 
intention to offer ample information to as many communities 
and as many people who would listen and I guess partly 
because in order for the project to go, the communities certainly 
needed to have the public support in their areas, which they did 
and do. And so we certainly were wanting to be open to them. 
 
In terms of the payback period and in terms of the overall costs 
of the project, other than the initial financing, the financing is 
fixed. The interest rate on the financing is fixed. The capital  

cost is fixed. You will know that the operations in the 
maintenance will be a variable. You can do an estimate, but I 
don’t think there’s any way you can fix those to the penny. 
 
But I think it’s fair to say that the steering committee will use 
due diligence, as they would if they were running their own 
water system within their own communities. Right now 
municipal councils and town councils will make the decision on 
water rates based on the costs, the capital cost, of their pumping 
station, their treating plant, their management costs, their 
operating costs, what it costs for breakdowns. 
 
So I don’t know that any city or any community will fix costs 
for 30 years on a cost-per-unit basis because there are some 
variables, and this is, I guess, no different. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, what is the 
interest rate that will be paid on the debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told that we haven’t borrowed 
all the money so that the financing isn’t as yet fixed. It will be 
soon. But they modelled it on 9 per cent. Hopefully that figure 
will come in less, depending on the cost of the money is when 
they go to the market. But I would assume that that should be 
fixed very shortly, and that should be done in a matter of 
months. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, this 
afternoon and in previous days, I have talked about the RM of 
Fish Creek portion of the pipeline. I would appreciate if once 
again, for my colleagues’ sake, to tell me what was the rationale 
of relocating the water treatment plant from the river to 
Wakaw? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Important, I think, to understand 
that initially the proposal where the treating plant would be 
located on the intake site was a proposal by the steering 
committee who initially looked at this. And that’s how they put 
together the proposal. 
 
Upon review by the technical people within the Water 
Corporation, it was moved based on two elements  one was 
the cost, and second was operating efficiency based on where it 
would be technically most feasible to do the treating. And that 
determined that the existing site that has been chosen made the 
most sense in terms of economy and technical ability to deliver 
a clean supply of water. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, common 
sense would tell a person that the water treatment plant should 
be located near the river. In considering that the plant wastes 
are removed from the treatment stream, what are the estimated 
additional annual costs and the 30-year accumulated cost of 
pumping the waste water volume from the river to the treatment 
plant at the Wakaw site? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I guess maybe common sense 
at first blush may not be common sense, and I don’t suppose we 
could say that all the time. And I guess once technical 
evaluations are done, and the people who are in the business of 
designing and building water systems can bring a technical  



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

common sense and a cost-effective approach to some of these 
initiatives . . . 
 
I’m told that at the existing site, there would have been no need 
for backwash because the existing sewer and lagoon system can 
handle the effluent from the treating plant. And it was much 
less of a problem at the site that was chosen than it would have 
been if it had been at the mouth of the river, because the 
infrastructure to be able to deal with all of that would have had 
to have been dealt with there; then infrastructure would have 
had to have been built, where it’s already existing at the site 
that’s been chosen. So as I’ve said, what appears to be common 
sense to perhaps you and I when you first look at a proposal 
may not be that way after the people who do it for a living and 
design these systems for a living have a look at it. And I guess 
such was the case in this regard. 
 
I mean I can understand the people from Fish Creek and the 
RM of Fish Creek, in that you’ve got a raw water pipe running 
by their place going to a town down the road, and they were 
perhaps assuming or hoping that they would have treated water 
dropped off at their place as it went along. And so I can 
understand their concerns. I can also understand why they 
would want us to look at a proposal whereby we would run 
treated water back. 
 
And I guess what has to be done now, as you and I discussed in 
my office the other day, if the folks in that area are willing to 
look at moving treated water back to their farms, that we can do 
that. What will be critical is knowing how many people would 
want to take that kind of initiative up, which is what I was 
hoping you would help me to determine in your conversations 
with the folks out there, to determine better what the cost per 
unit for them might be, because as you will know, the more 
utilization, the easier it would be to bring the cost per unit 
down. As well, it might be that the rest of the people within that 
whole distribution network may be willing to amortize that 
portion with the rest of the capital construction cost. And it may 
be that the steering committee would recommend service to 
those farms and tie it into the whole network. 
 
And I mean, I think those are some of the questions that have to 
be asked. And those are some of the answers and the truths that 
we would want to search out before we go down the road too 
far here. It may be more economical for those farms to treat raw 
water on site. That might be a much cheaper solution for them, 
depending on, I guess, the volume they’re going to be using, 
depending on how many of them would be involved. 
 
And these are all questions that hopefully you and I can work 
together to determine some answers for. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, speaking 
of our meeting, after we had that meeting, it was truly my 
understanding that the two people sitting with you around that 
table, I believe, were an engineer and I can’t remember who the 
other person was. But my understanding was that they were 
going to take this situation, and they were going to talk to the 
steering committee again, and they were then going to talk to 
Rick Kindrachuk, the administrator of the RM of Fish Creek. I 
had no understanding from you that you wanted me to talk with  

you in talking with those people again. I thought you were 
going to take care of it. But if you would like me to talk with 
them and set up a meeting, I certainly can do that. 
 
If I can go on just a little bit more here. When you talk about 
the common sense aspect and that Wakaw had a lagoon already, 
I understand that Wakaw’s lagoon had to be expanded to 
accommodate the backwash water, and that expansion was at an 
estimated cost of $300,000. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can’t give you the costs, I don’t 
have those with me, but I can tell you that they were both costed 
out, the one at the river  or at the intake, and the one at 
Wakaw. And it was much cheaper to do it where the steering 
committee finally agreed to put the pumping station or the 
treating plant. 
 
Ms. Julé:  So, Mr. Minister, is it a fact that the lagoon had to 
be expanded then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think what would be helpful is if 
we would supply you all of the details  the cost of the 
infrastructure at the intake if they were to take raw water and 
treat it right at the intake; the cost of expansion through the 
infrastructure where the existing treating plant will be; and the 
differential between doing it at the mouth and doing it where 
they’ve done it. And I will have my officials put all of that 
information together for you and I will send you, in writing, that 
material. 
 
As well, I understood with respect to the meeting we had the 
other day, that you were going to do some legwork, but it 
doesn’t matter. What I will do is I have asked Mr. Kaukinen to 
ask the official to deal with some of the questions that have 
come out of your questions tonight and out of your comments 
when we met a week or so ago. 
 
And we will undertake to talk to the people in Fish Creek to see 
how many would be interested in the uptake base, and as well 
we’ll talk to the steering committee to see if they would be 
interested in absorbing that capital cost into the overall 
infrastructure, remembering that it would be their decision. And 
we will undertake to do that and we’ll get back to you with 
answers to all of that. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
appreciate in all the information that you’re going to give me if 
in that information you would tell me whether or not the lagoon 
had to be expanded at an estimated cost and what that cost was. 
I would like to know, if that lagoon was expanded, what was 
the cost of the land for the expansion? I would like to also 
know who that land was purchased from, and I would like you 
to, I guess, tell the people that are involved with the cost of this 
pipeline what the total additional cost was for that treatment 
plant at Wakaw and for that pipeline going between the river 
and Wakaw. 
 
Because it seems to me that there’s $201,000 for those people 
in the RM of Fish Creek to pay, and if there is $300,000 for the 
expansion of the lagoon, that’s $501,000. And even if you look 
at the $300,000, and we talk about cost efficiency of where to  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

locate the plant, I’m not just . . . and also the accumulated cost 
over 30 years of pushing that water from the river into the 
treatment plant for 10 miles, I would presume that that kind of 
cost would come to much more than locating the plant at the 
river. 
 
Mr. Minister, in a letter dated May 1, 1996 to the RM of Fish 
Creek, you stated  at least the letter was signed by you  that 
the site of the treatment plant was chosen after careful 
consideration and located at Wakaw to take advantage of 
pre-treatment chemical mixing and water temperature 
moderation in the long pipeline. This results in an improved and 
more consistent water quality as well as operational 
efficiencies. My question to you is, what chemicals will be 
injected into the raw water for pre-treatment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think one thing, one thing can be 
sure  there will be chlorine in it. I’m assuming that. The 
officials don’t have a breakdown of what chemicals will be 
used in the treatment, but we will undertake to get a very 
technical briefing for you in terms of the chemical composition 
of the treatment that will take place at the treating plant. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, the reason that I ask that is because 
if there is a treatment of chemicals, there’s going to be chemical 
reactions and so on occurring within the pipeline. So because of 
those pre-treatment reactions and that occurrence, there is going 
to be particle settlement in that pipeline. So I am just trying to 
estimate what the additional annual cost for increasing pumping 
due to reduced pipeline coefficients and for pipeline cleaning is 
going to be. I’m wondering, you know, whether or not you went 
that far, because if we’re estimating the cost of this thing, we 
should estimate it thoroughly. 
 
(2045) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  You certainly have gained my 
interest now because I am more than interested to determine 
where you’ve developed your engineering expertise. I’m told 
. . . but nonetheless, good questions you ask. But I guess it 
might be cleaned or pigged out, perhaps, every two years as 
opposed to every three years. I’m just not aware of how quickly 
that process might take place, but we’ll undertake to find out 
what chemical reaction there might be and what the cost of that 
kind of process might be on an estimated basis. 
 
Ms. Julé:  I’m just also wondering if the capital and 
operating costs for the individual systems will increase because 
of those pre-treatment chemicals and the sediments, you know, 
over the years. 
 
You want a good question? I’ll give you a question, an 
interesting one here. This was brought forward to me by 
someone else and I guarantee you that it’s something that I 
wouldn’t have thought of. But I’d actually like to have you 
answer this question somehow in the days ahead  not 
necessarily here. 
 
I’d like you to kindly provide the thermodynamic heat transfer 
analysis that would determine the water temperature moderation 
in the long pipeline and the impact it would have on water  

quality and operational efficiencies. So if you can’t remember 
that, you can always look in Hansard. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just have some other questions here that I would 
like you to answer, if possible. Of the $15.22, the amount that 
was given to the RM of Fish Creek users, I want to know how 
much of that was attributable to their share of the capital cost of 
the main pipeline system and the water treatment plant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I have to apologize. I had the 
answer on the tip of my tongue to your first question. It just 
slipped away on me momentarily. 
 
What I’m going to do is undertake to find the best engineer 
we’ve got within the corporation, with the most technical 
expertise, to put together the longest and most detailed answer 
that I possibly can. Because I think I’m going to sit down and 
read it because I’d kind of like to understand it too. You’ve 
twigged my interest right now. 
 
So with respect to the costs that you asked, the per unit cost I 
guess is 6.15 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 6.13, I’m sorry, 
and the portion that you question is about $4.50 per unit plus 
extra costs. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Okay. I’m not going to ask you to have to get up. 
I’m just going to give you a few more questions, and please 
note them in Hansard and pass the answers on to me. All right? 
 
In conjunction with the last question, of the $15.22, how much 
is attributable to the share for the RM of Fish Creek  the 
users in the RM of Fish Creek  of the operation and 
maintenance costs of the pipeline system and the water 
treatment plant? Of the $15.22, how much is attributable to the 
operation and maintenance cost of the reverse pipeline? And of 
the $15.22, how much is attributable to the amortization cost of 
the reverse treated water pipeline? 
 
The other question is, of the $4.52 per 1,000 gallon for raw 
water, how much of that is attributable to their share of the 
capital cost for the raw water pipeline? And of the $4.52 per 
1,000 gallon rate for raw water, how much of that is attributable 
to their share of the operation and maintenance cost for the raw 
water pumping and pipeline? 
 
And I thank you, Mr. Minister, for bearing with me. I have 
gotten some answers from you and I look forward to the rest of 
them as they will come to me in the days ahead. And I hope 
within the very few days ahead, because as you well know, the 
trenching is, I think, under way for this pipeline, and the RM of 
Fish Creek would like to certainly have some answers here and 
so would the rest of the people that are users on that pipeline. 
 
So thank you very much, and I’ll turn this over to my colleague. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once again, 
welcome to the officials, and to yourself as well. And these 
questions that I have will be basically dealing with northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Several days ago I was advised by a number of northern  



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

municipalities that Sask Water’s capital grants assistance 
program was discontinued and no longer considered a priority 
by the government. 
 
Could you give us the background as whether there’s any basis 
to some of these statements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, to answer the 
question of the member, we don’t have a capital project or 
program within the Water Corporation per se that would pertain 
to northern Saskatchewan. That would be an initiative of 
Municipal Government. We, as I’ve indicated before on these 
kinds of projects when there are requests, we’ll do technical 
and engineering expertise, and we have those people available. 
Where we don’t have in-house, we will work with communities 
to bring outside of the corporation expertise. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  What involvement has Sask Water 
Corporation with the northern municipalities and towns and 
villages? Do you play a role in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Just, I guess, maybe even a more 
concise explanation  our role is basically that of project 
management. We will try to put together consulting expertise. If 
tenders are to be let, we would do an analysis of the bidders’ 
proposals to assist the communities, ensuring that they get the 
best value for their dollar. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  So for example, if Fond-du-Lac had a project 
and it’s an Indian reserve, then Sask Water would go in there, 
and you would do an assessment of the project and you would 
determine that this is the best use of their dollar. And that’s the 
extent of your involvement when it comes to Sask Water 
Corporation in northern Saskatchewan. And that if you done 
that, then these services would no longer be paid by the 
government. Then it had to be paid for by the communities that 
are getting the particular services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The process would be such that 
Municipal Government, in their budgetary process, would put 
together a capital pool, I am assuming, working perhaps with 
some federal assistance if that were available, look at the 
number of projects that they might be able to assist with, then 
we would be called in to assist to cost out a project for a 
community, for an area. 
 
Those aren’t . . . earphones aren’t working tonight. I found that 
out. It’s very difficult to hear, so I’ll try and speak up a little bit. 
 
But we would assist in costing out a project, we would engage 
any engineers, any contractors, those kinds of folks, and once 
the project was put together and operational, we would send, if 
requested by the community, our people to train local people to 
run and manage and maintain the facility. That would be the 
role of the Water Corporation as a project . . . as it would 
pertain to a project in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess the second part of the question then. 
Suppose there was a water project in northern Saskatchewan, 
and because we always hear the $15 billion in debt comment, 
suppose this project was $100 and if you went in there and you  

provided a consulting service or consulting and all the expertise 
necessary to ensure the best bang for that dollar, would there be 
a cost that you would charge to that particular community or is 
that service free? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, it would be done on a 
fee-for-service arrangement and it would be invoiced to 
Municipal Government for whatever services we would deliver 
for that kind of a project. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Was this fee for service always available or 
just recently within the last few weeks have you changed your 
mind on offering this service free? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I am told that we have worked with 
Municipal Government in whatever form it happened to be 
around for years and years back to the old DNR (Department of 
Natural Resources) days on a cost-for-service basis. But again, 
if a project is initiated jointly by Municipal Government or by a 
community through Municipal Government, we would play the 
same role that we have for a long, long period of time. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Again, going back to that $100 figure, from 
what I can understand, take a community like Stony Rapids, a 
far northern community, if they were to ask the government to 
put in water and sewer, the Municipal Government would then 
say yea or nay to the project, and if they do say yea, then Sask 
Water Corporation will come in there and charge additional 
dollars to that community for the supervision and to ensure that 
dollar’s spent correctly. Is that a proper assumption to make? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, whatever arrangement the 
Municipal Government would make with the local community 
in terms of cost sharing and revenue sharing, that would be the 
arrangement that they would . . . or cost sharing . . . that would 
be the arrangement that they would put together. 
 
We haven’t changed, I guess, our position with respect to 
developments from the old DNR days, as I’ve indicated. We 
work through whatever RM’s delivering those kinds of projects 
in northern Saskatchewan in the manner that I indicated just 
moments previously on a fee-for-service basis, and it would be 
all part and parcel of their budget, what they would put together 
on an annual basis. 
 
And once they’ve determined what they’re going to spend, I’m 
assuming that dialogue would take place with northern 
communities to determine, I guess, the most need, and based on 
that they would put together an analysis of the costs of the 
project. If funding was available, they would ask us to come in 
on a fee-for-service basis, the Water Corporation, to do the 
services that I outlined earlier. And that’s how that process 
would work. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess the other question that I have is: has 
your department ever been approached by the Municipal 
Government or by a northern community to do a feasibility 
study on having Sask Water Corporation actually own the water 
and sewer systems in some of these communities? 
 
(2100) 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told, and I wasn’t aware of this, 
but I’m told that we just recently turned back a facility to the 
community of Stony Rapids that was owned by the corporation. 
 
I think what I would like to make clear here this evening is that 
the Water Corporation in itself is not a utility and we have no 
intentions of turning it into a utility, a utility corporation. The 
role of the corporation is to facilitate, to do the kinds of things I 
indicated earlier, to engage contractors, engineers, and basically 
put together programs and projects and make sure that they’re 
done in a cost-effective and in a coordinated approach, and to 
work with local communities in training people to operate their 
facilities. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I guess that goes back to the next question. 
Obviously when you talk about communities, and we’re all 
aware of the northern Saskatchewan communities where 
infrastructure has been one of the biggest set-backs in northern 
Saskatchewan. There are many communities that still haven’t 
got water and sewer. 
 
Has there been any effort by Sask Water in trying to tie in 
federal grants or a strategy to provide water and sewer to Stony 
Rapids, or do you guys just simply wait for the municipal 
government or the federal government to come and do some of 
that work and then you respond to it? Like, do you initiate some 
of these projects or do you just respond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well we’re not project proponents. 
We would be there to act in the, you know, in the capacity that I 
indicated earlier. That would be the role of Municipal 
Government. 
 
In terms of whether or not there would be some federal funding 
available, that quite clearly would not be a decision that we 
would make. We’ve certainly been encouraging, where we can, 
the opposition and the federal government, when we deal with 
them directly, to curtail the amount of cut-backs to programs, 
whether it be health care, education, or whatever it is, because 
our revenue’s basically one pool. And when we lose funding 
dollars it means fewer projects go ahead. We have to priorize 
education, health care, and social services here in Saskatchewan 
and have been struggling to maintain the funding. And 
unfortunately that means pressures on other arms of our 
budgetary process. 
 
I can sympathize with the member. I’m somewhat familiar with 
northern Saskatchewan, certainly not to the degree you are. And 
if I were to stand in my place this evening and tell you that I 
think all of those communities have been served adequately for 
infrastructure, you and I would both know that I probably 
wouldn’t be accurate because there are some of those 
communities in northern Saskatchewan that really do need an 
upgrade to some of their infrastructure and in some cases need 
infrastructure, period. 
 
So I want to say to the member that it’s one of the areas that I 
think over a period of many, many years in Saskatchewan, we 
haven’t done enough in that area, up in the North. And I don’t 
want to move off of the Water Corporation estimates, but I 
think I would like to comment that northern Saskatchewan, I  

think, has had short shrift in lots of cases. Housing is certainly 
inadequate in many areas, as you will know, and it’s something 
that needs to be addressed, and I think it’s something that we 
need to look at as being a priority within our planning. 
 
Infrastructure, I think the same can be said. It’s a very costly 
process, as you will know, in the North to get anything done, to 
get anything built, to get things repaired. And it’s something 
that we really, I think, as a society need to turn our minds to. 
There are many communities up there that I think have done 
quite a lot with quite a little, and I know that the member has 
great concerns about that. I hear him in question period, and I 
hear when he makes some his speeches during private 
members’ day and estimates. And I recognize that you have 
some concerns with northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess tonight I just want to tell you that you’re not alone 
because many of us recognize there are problems up there that 
need to be addressed, and hopefully over time we can bring the 
level and the standard of living in some of the northern 
communities to a level with southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I just want to confirm in a simple answer, I 
guess, yes and no. And I do appreciate some of the comments 
you’re making. Has your department ever approached the 
northern village of Beauval to take over their water and sewer 
operation due to a fact that they needed an extension or 
expansion, and they could not afford to do it on their own. Was 
it ever a project plan? Was it ever anticipated? Was it ever 
researched? Was it ever proposed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think the situation would probably 
be somewhat reversed, but I’m not sure that the Water 
Corporation would be the arm of government that Beauval 
would want to approach. Municipal Government, that would be 
more their role. We wouldn’t, in all likelihood . . . well I 
shouldn’t say all likelihood. It’s just it’s not policy that we 
would accept that kind of a proposal. 
 
The funding for those kinds of projects, for expansion to those 
projects, would be through Municipal Government. And we 
would expect if a package within their budgetary framework 
were able to be put together, that if we were asked to facilitate 
and do the project management, we would certainly be more 
than willing to do that as a corporation. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I’m just going to bounce around again here. 
On the PAWBED, could you give me some of the examples of 
some of the northern communities that may have participated in 
applying for certain projects, and what these projects were and 
what the total costs of the projects, if there were any, within the 
PAWBED agreement with the federal government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Okay, what I have is a fairly 
extensive list of PAWBED projects that we have been as a 
province involved in. It’s a fairly lengthy list and it’s not 
separated north, south, east, or west. It goes back for a 
considerable period of time. But I can undertake to send a copy 
of this, if the member’s interested. And he can look through and 
that might give him some answers to some of his questions. If 
he’d be interested in this I can send it over. Okay, we’ll  



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

undertake then to send a copy over. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  No, I’m just worried that in essence to 
PAWBED and many of the other opportunities associated with 
water, and of course all the opportunity with northern 
Saskatchewan . . . There’s a lot of water in the North. And I 
guess my big point is that the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, 
in what it’s supposed to be doing, I think should take a larger 
role in ensuring that a community like Stony Rapids and other 
communities that are having severe problems in terms of 
servicing the residents with safe water and proper disposal of 
sewer is done in an orderly fashion. 
 
And I guess the other question, the point I want to make is 
when you look at PAWBED, there’s been very, very few 
communities in northern Saskatchewan that have come forth 
with some projects under this joint effort by the federal and 
provincial government. And the reason that is being the case is 
that they lack the very basic essentials of running water and 
sewer. 
 
So in that point, I just wanted to point out that I think there 
should be more of a proactive role at Sask Water Corporation to 
try and determine how best to address the situation in northern 
Saskatchewan. And although I see the mandate, as you 
explained to me, is to ensure adequate, reliable, and safe water 
resources for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan now 
and in the future, so I would suggest that adequate, reliable, and 
safe water be the very essential thing that we all take for 
granted, and that’s the delivery of running water and sewer 
services for Stony Rapids. 
 
So with that, thanks again, Mr. Minister, and I know we’ll have 
further questions as we go along. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m wondering if 
the minister has ready or if he could supply the package of 
global questions that we have asked for. Are they ready at this 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I think these are the packages that 
you requested, and I’ll send one to the Leader of the Third Party 
as well as one to the opposition. As soon as they find the page. 
Oh we got better than the page here. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Send them over under armed guard here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, exactly. They won’t get lost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Chairman, if I could, I’d like to 
thank members of the opposition for their questions and I’d as 
well like to thank our officials. The Water Corporation officials 
came in from Moose Jaw and they’ve been waiting here, I 
think, since about 3 o’clock this afternoon, so I want to thank 
them for their patience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2115) 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my 
left I have Ron Woodward who is the president of 
Saskatchewan Research Council, and to my . . . no, wait a 
minute  that’s to my right. It’s been a long day. 
 
To my right, President Ron Woodward, and to my left is Crystal 
Smudy who is the controller for Saskatchewan Research 
Council. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials. I’m very happy to see you. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you give us a breakdown of what the main 
achievements you feel were for the SRC (Saskatchewan 
Research Council) in the past year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess 
it’s been a year of achievement and it’s been a year of some 
change. I should indicate to members opposite that we have, 
and I’ve introduced tonight, a new president for the corporation, 
Mr. Ron Woodward. He has spent some time here in 
Saskatchewan. He spent some time with the research council in 
British Columbia and we were fortunate enough to retain his 
services as the president of the corporation. And I’m looking 
forward to some very interesting initiatives under his 
leadership. 
 
We have done an internal restructuring with a focus to more 
internal efficiencies of operation. Hopefully, we can provide 
services in the most cost-effective manner possible, and the 
restructuring with respect to the organization has been part of 
that. We have also put a new focus on ag biotechnology and 
technical commercialization. 
 
And I think that these, in fact, are exciting times for the 
Research Council. We, as you will know, attempt to work on a 
cost-recovery basis of operation. I think the Research Council, 
over the period of years that it’s been functioning, has showed 
that and has shown that in fact we can achieve some major 
initiatives working with industry, in partnership with industry, 
and can advance economic development opportunities and 
expanding the way in which we develop economic 
opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I guess I want to say these are, I think, exciting times. Our 
economy continues to expand into new areas. And I think that 
the Saskatchewan Research Council can really be a very 
positive influence in facilitating new people with new ideas, 
new types of business to the province. Very exciting, what’s 
happening. 
 
In Saskatoon . . . we’re having a little competition here, Mr.  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

Chairman. I’m having a very difficult time hearing myself. But 
having said that, I think that the developments that are taking 
place in Saskatoon at Innovation Place with respect to ag 
biotechnology and other new technologies are going to have a 
very positive influence on the Saskatchewan Research 
Council’s role in developing and working to develop the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
I think it’s also fair to say that members of your caucus will 
have some firsthand knowledge of some of the good things the 
council has done over the past years, and certainly I think it’s 
something that we hope will continue. I think that we’ve got a 
very good and capable staff, people of a good understanding of 
the Saskatchewan situation on the board. And so I think it’s got 
a very positive future for us and will continue to play a very 
positive role here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair:  Order. Members, the din here is getting a little 
bit loud. If you wish to carry on a conversation, I invite you to 
do so much quieter. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
can you give me a breakdown of how the $8 million in last 
year’s grant was spent. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Under the headings of the grants, 
the research branch is a total of $2.093 million; technology 
transfer, 1.208 million; extension services and C&D 
(conservation and development), 912,000; corporate, 250,000; 
and the subtotal under that particular grant structure is 4.463 
million; SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) is $3.423 million; for a total of 7.886 million. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, can you give us an idea of how 
many of your clients are private sector and how many are public 
sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  The aggregate amount is $18.212 
million. From industry, the amount is 9.262 million. We receive 
from the federal government 2.998 million; from the province 
1.489. And the operating grant is 4.463 million. And as I said, 
that’s a total of 18.212. We’ve got those in percentages if you 
want them too or . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, has the money that was received 
from the federal government been going up or down in the last 
few years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I can tell you that it’s been going 
down, which is part of the difficulty we had with respect to 
restructuring. Some of the contracts that we had received in the 
past were no longer available because of their fiscal restraint 
programs, which meant a reduction in the number of contracts 
that we . . . people that we had contracted to service those 
contracts. I think we can share with you those numbers if you 
would like. 
 
I’ll just then read them into the record. Okay, in 1992-93 
received a total of 2.732; ‘93-94, 2.696. It went up just a tad in 
‘94-95, and we are receiving in this fiscal year a fairly dramatic 
decrease from the federal government. 

Ms. Draude:  Is that due to one specific client or project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  One of the major decreases we’ve 
had is in petroleum research. We’re down about 600,000 for 
this fiscal year that we’re in, which is for us a fairly dramatic 
amount because we really have relied on the research and 
development dollars from the federal administration, coupled 
with what we’ve been able to put in on our own, and it’s a 
major part of revenue generation, as you will know. 
 
A lot of the horizontal well technology that’s been developed in 
Saskatchewan was assisted by the Research Council working 
with industry, and so even though it’s a very small number in 
the big scheme of things, for us it has a fairly dramatic impact. 
 
I should say to the member opposite that this is going to be one 
of the focuses and one of the discussions that I will have with 
my federal counterpart, Anne McLellan. I know that her budget 
has been set for this year and I understand all that. I’m very 
disappointed that we didn’t receive as much as we would have 
liked or as much as we feel the importance of our industry here 
in Saskatchewan would dictate should be delivered here. And 
it’s one of the areas that we’re certainly going to focus on next 
year to see if we can have the federal government more 
involved with research and development dollars as it relates to 
the petroleum industry. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Did these research and development dollars 
from the federal government, were they just not spent this year 
or were they . . . did they give these dollars to another province, 
or to another research council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I don’t have the numbers here and 
we were just trying to recall from a briefing note that I know I 
had looked at just a while back. It was one of the questions that 
I asked of the officials, and Energy and Mines are somewhat 
tied into this as well. 
 
But I know that Alberta got a fairly substantive increase. As 
well they’ve moved some research initiatives to Devon, to the 
Alberta Research Council, and you know, certainly there the oil 
and gas industry, the petroleum industry in Alberta is important, 
and it’s important for them in their province. And I understand 
that there are areas of jurisdiction that might take precedence 
from one minister over the other and I’d never ever accuse 
anyone of . . . or that of even being the case. I don’t believe that 
to be the case. But I think it’s important to say that we will be 
pursuing incremental dollars next year to back-fill for what 
we’ve lost for this year. And certainly we’re going to be very 
aggressive in those discussions and in that debate. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, we understand that Alberta is 
basically the headquarters for the oil and gas people. That’s 
where they like to be seen. But also Saskatchewan has been 
priding itself on the fact that we are sort of the centre for the 
biotechnology. Have you been able to get more federal dollars 
for research and development in that area? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’m told by the official that a new  



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

initiative that’s jointly funded by the federal government and by 
the province is a $4 million ag innovation fund that will be 
doing its work in Saskatoon. 
 
I think the member makes a very good point when she describes 
Saskatoon as being, I guess, a hub and a growing presence in 
the world in terms of ag biotechnology and the understanding 
that we have certainly the research people here, we have the 
facility that’s growing, we’re attracting industries. And I think 
that there’s one area that really does have a major potential for 
us. 
 
I think in my opening remarks I indicated that ag biotechnology 
is one of the areas that the Research Council was structuring 
itself to be able to work with and to help to facilitate 
advancements in that area. 
 
And it’s really, I think, a bright and shining example of what we 
can do and what we need to do here in Saskatchewan to be able 
to expand our image around the world and our ability to be able 
to be part of the world market-place and attract large 
corporations here to do their work that they will spread 
throughout the world. 
 
So I think that our involvement in that respect is very timely. 
It’s been one that’s been staged and it’s been one that’s been, I 
think, managed very well by the province in the last few years. 
And I think it just holds so very much potential for us. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand that we 
never like to lose some of the dollars we have from the federal 
government, but I also know that the biotechnology centre that 
we have here is something that we should be stressing very 
strongly, and there’s probably lots of places that we could be 
marketing it to. Could you give me an idea of what you 
consider Saskatchewan’s main emphasis for attracting new 
clients and opportunities to this province is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think there’s no doubt that 
what will attract industry is a very high quality of research 
capacity and capabilities. And I think we really have positioned 
ourselves here in Saskatchewan with very capable and adequate 
post-secondary education facilities that have trained people who 
have gone throughout the world and have gained reputations as 
people in different fields of expertise and known to have been 
trained and educated here in Saskatchewan in our two 
university campuses. And so I think in terms of what we have 
as local researchers and a local research base, we can boast 
people who are second to none. 
 
So I think the first thing in order to attract investment from 
outside of the province is our people. And I think the same can 
be said of our workforce, whether it be those that have gained 
post-secondary education or those who have come through 
trades training. We really have excelled in building a 
knowledge base within our populace even in spite of the fact 
that we’re only a million people plus. 
 
I think the other part is infrastructure and what we have there to 
house these kinds of expansion and what we offer when people 
are looking for a place to house their research facilities and  

their developmental facilities. So I think those are two elements 
of what we have to offer and what we’ve been able to offer. 
And it’s proven by the fact that we’ve got that kind of activity 
here in our province. 
 
I think the third, and probably as important as anything, is that 
investors are looking for a stable political climate. And I think 
that that’s something that we have in the few short years since 
our election in October of 1991 been able to . . . we’ve been 
able to put that in place. 
 
I know when in 1991 when we started looking at our budgetary 
process and what were our priorities, well certainly the one 
priority was that we had to discontinue building the provincial 
debt that was eating us up inside. Fifteen billion dollars of debt 
and $850 million of interest a year doesn’t  when you’re 
looking at a $5 billion plus revenue base  really doesn’t 
create a lot of excitement in terms of investment activity I 
would suggest. 
 
And I think the fact that we’ve been able to curtail the yearly 
deficit budgets, and that we’ve been able to pay down some of 
our debt, and that we have a plan to continue to pay down some 
of our debt, and that we have a plan that when we can we will 
be looking at reduction in taxes  I think that those are some 
of the initiatives that investors are looking for. And I think all 
of that combination of things afford us the opportunity to look 
forward to a major expansion in the biotech area as well as 
other areas in the province, whether it be the mineral industry, 
whether it be oil and gas, or whether it be the retail sector. 
 
I think that kind of a climate is something that, without, nothing 
happens. And I think we’ve shown, as people of Saskatchewan, 
that we really are serious about getting our fiscal house in order. 
I think we’ve taken some good first steps. We’ve got a long 
way to go but I think those are some of the things that will 
assist us in helping to develop and grow our economy. 
 
And the numbers are showing it. The last three years the growth 
rate of GDP (gross domestic product) of 8.8 per cent, well over 
some of the neighbouring provinces, and so I think it’s 
something that we can be pleased with and we can be very 
proud of. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m wondering if 
you could describe if there are any of the employees of the SRC 
have done any travelling to promote global marketing of the 
SRC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I guess I’ll just sort of give an 
overview of the philosophy that we use, and the approach that 
we take in terms of marketing, and how we want to put those 
arrangements together. 
 
We don’t view the Saskatchewan Research Council as the 
vehicle, rather as the facilitator working with industry to help 
develop their ideas, their thoughts, their markets, and that’s the 
approach that we take. We do it on a fee-for-service basis. Our 
goal is to make the Research Council self-sufficient and there 
have been a number of initiatives in terms of working with 
industry to help them solidify their markets. I’m asking the  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

officials to put together some examples and I’m sure you’ll be 
aware of some of them yourself. Many of them are fairly well 
known. But I think it’s fair to say that the philosophical base 
that we approach this with is that it’s a partnership  the 
Research Council with private industry. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, while your helper is getting you 
these numbers, can you give me an idea if there’s been any 
additional responsibilities or functions been added to the SRC 
for this year. Was the SRC given any additional responsibilities 
or functions for the coming year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  As you will know, we’ve made 
some changes in the budgetary process to another part of my 
portfolio, and that’s the SECDA (Saskatchewan Energy 
Conservation and Development Authority), the entity that was 
operating in Saskatoon. It’s now being wound down. Part of . . . 
and I’ll just say a couple of words about that, if I can. 
 
Part of the mandate of SECDA was to put together and assist us 
in determining what the options were for future energy supplies 
for the province of Saskatchewan. They worked very diligently 
over the short period that they were around. Their thoughts and 
what they brought to government was encompassed in the 
energy strategy  the Saskatchewan Energy Strategy. So that 
part of their mandate was fulfilled. We were charged  as all 
government departments were  with attempting to, I guess, 
cut the costs of operations because of some of the pressures that 
we faced as a government; and the decision in this budget was 
that SECDA would be wound down. 
 
One of the projects that the people of Saskatchewan, I think, 
embraced and felt very comfortable with, and we still think, 
although not complete, that there is some potential for energy 
savings, the ice rink energy audit program  that will be 
transferred to SECDA and will be administered through 
SECDA . . . or through SRC, I’m sorry. Too many acronyms 
here and it’s too late in the evening. But Saskatchewan 
Research Council will be looking after that part of it. 
 
I have some areas that the SRC has been involved in, and the 
kind of initiatives that they’ve been involved in there. They’ve 
worked in Malaysia with respect to oil. There’s been some work 
in Poland, sharing technical management. Central America, 
there’s been some work there with respect to tech transfer. And 
Chile as well, we’ve done some of that there too. There’s been 
some work in Japan with respect to oilseeds. So I think it’s fair 
to say that you can see that industry is branching out, and that 
there is some technology and some information that we can be 
sharing with other areas of the world, and these are just some of 
the examples that the Saskatchewan Research Council has been 
involved in last year. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I realize that you had the 
responsibility for SECDA as well as for SRC, and they’re both 
very important facets of government. But I’m disappointed to 
see that when the responsibility for SECDA was given to the 
SRC, there was no addition funding went along with it. 
 
I’m wondering if you can . . . don’t you think this will have a 
negative effect on the ability of the SRC to actually carry on the  

functions that were required of them previously? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  We’re expecting no impact on the 
other initiatives that the SRC was involved in. And I may as 
well move one step ahead, because I think you’re referring to 
the jobs that were eliminated within the Research Council 
subsequent to the disbanding of SECDA. Part of that . . . and 
the staff complement in the Saskatchewan Research Council 
fluctuates; it varies, and it’s all market driven. It’s market 
driven based on the number of clients we have, the size of the 
projects, how labour intensive the initiatives that they would 
ask us to work with them on. And this basically determines the 
size of the staff complement. 
 
So although we’ve had a reduction in the last while, and as 
we’ve indicated there has been a restructuring internally to 
focus on ag biotechnology and technical commercialization, I 
think that it’s fair to say that that number will change, based on 
industry’s demand. You will know that some of our contracts 
come from the federal government. Some come from provincial 
initiatives. And over $9 million comes from industry. 
 
So the demand that they place on the employee-staff 
complement in the SRC will change just based on the kind of 
work that they ask us to do. But I don’t want you to be thinking 
that the move of the audit program over to SRC is going to put 
any pressure on the other work that they do because that’s just 
not simply the case. 
 
(2145) 
 
I think the program will be continued. It will work well. 
Hopefully we can increase the uptake. We did a lot of audits 
that weren’t picked up on, and hopefully we can expand that 
and make the program even work a little better over at the 
Saskatchewan Research Council. Not suggesting that the 
SECDA staff didn’t do a great job because they did a good job 
in the program, and we were very proud of what they’ve done. 
But the reality that we had to deal with meant that there had to 
be some costs of administration reduced. We felt this was the 
most appropriate way within the Energy portfolio to be able to 
do that. And I think that there will be some very positive 
announcements made in a very short period of time with respect 
to energy efficiency initiatives that the government will want to 
embark upon. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I find it a 
little hard to believe that if you have less staff, less money to 
work with, and you’ve given them more work, that it’s going to 
be possible for them to carry on their job and carry out the 
mandate that you’ve talked about in glowing terms, about what 
the SRC’s going to be able to accomplish. 
 
I’m finding it . . . I’m hoping that we’re not putting such an 
undue amount of pressure on them that they won’t be able to 
actually make a difference. There’s a huge opportunity out 
there, like you said, but I think that they are being negatively 
impacted by the budget that was given to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think, Madam Member, it’s 
fair to say that the Saskatchewan Research Council is not unlike  



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

other arms of government, in that civil servants are being asked 
to do more with less  whether that’s in the executive arm of 
government, or within the Crowns, or within sort of 
arm’s-length corporations like the Saskatchewan Research 
Council. 
 
The realities of economic pressures and fiscal pressures on 
government are such that this is the scenario we are dealt; these 
are the cards we’re dealt; and so we have to play them through. 
 
I think the same can be said for private industry, in that in a 
world of change, they’re changing their structures and the way 
they do business. As well, people are asked to do more with 
less. I think SECDA is no different. We’ve challenged SECDA 
with respect to a change in their focus, in what they’re going to 
be focusing on. I think they’re going to be very successful. 
We’ve got some very hard-working and innovative people 
there. 
 
And I understand what you’re saying in terms of budget 
restraint. It’s difficult for all of us to deal with it, but that’s the 
reality in which we work, all of us, including MLAs (Member 
of the Legislative Assembly). I note around this room, there are 
eight fewer of us in this session than there were last time. Some 
of the rural ridings are a little bigger. And so, I guess, we’re 
being asked to do a little more with a little less, even MLAs in 
this Chamber. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, has there been any other 
government departments that use the facilities and capabilities 
of the SRC, and is there any encouragement for other 
departments to use them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Well I think, you know, we 
certainly try to utilize the executive arms of government. The 
line departments try to use Saskatchewan Research Council. I 
mean it’s our arm, and it’s our arm of expertise that we can use 
and we can draw on. 
 
The Department of Highways uses SRC. Sask Water, we just 
dealt with some of the estimates on Sask Water Corporation, in 
terms of water quality. We were discussing the 
Humboldt-Wakaw pipeline and the need to upgrade a lot of the 
sources of water for rural residents in Saskatchewan. We use 
the Research Council to develop water quality technology for 
us, economic development. 
 
So I think many departments focus on what Saskatchewan 
Research Council can do within the provincial government, but 
I think as well, the federal government recognizes that we have 
some abilities to assist them in their initiatives, as evidenced by 
the amount that we contract with them on an annual basis. And 
hopefully we can increase that amount. We can increase the 
amount of work that we do with them and for them and make it 
a stronger corporation over the years. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Just a short clarification; if the Department of 
Highways has SRC do some work, do they pay them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Yes, as I indicated, they do operate 
the test track for the Department of Highways, and they  

reimburse the Research Council for the work that they do. As 
I’ve said, whether it’s in-house, whether it’s another arm of 
government, or whether it’s industry, we work on a 
fee-for-service basis, on a cost-recovery level. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, one of the Acts that was passed 
lately was the addition of $100 million to SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation) for a research and development 
park for Regina. I find it . . . I’m wondering if the Research 
Council has had some input into some of the work that might be 
carried on at that park, and what kind of dialogue is taking 
place to see if there is something that would enhance the SRC 
through this new park, through SOCO. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I am told that discussions have 
happened and have taken place with SOCO with respect to the 
role that SRC may play as the new park unfolds and as that 
concept develops, whether it be informational technology, 
whether it be assistance with respect to petroleum research. But 
I think nothing has been finalized, fair to say, but that SRC is 
very much involved with the concept. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, the PAMI, prairie agricultural 
manufacturers institute at Humboldt, has apparently been very 
busy and I’m wondering if there’s been more work given to it, 
or if it has acquired more work in the last year, and how they 
are doing their marketing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  As you may know, the 
Saskatchewan Research Council had a management contract 
with PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute). That 
agreement ended on April 1. They have hired their own 
president, who is, I guess, taking on an ever increasing role in 
terms of developing marketing within that particular 
corporation. So the involvement between the Research Council 
and PAMI has somewhat changed, although I think that we 
would certainly be available to work with them on projects of 
mutual benefit. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Is this going to result in a loss of monies to the 
SRC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  It was a very small management 
contract and on fee for service, so the net loss for the Research 
Council really will be minimal. 
 
Ms. Draude:  At one time in the past the SRC had been 
working with people who were willing to donate money as sort 
of . . . no, in a fund towards helping the SRC with some of their 
projects. Has there been any continuation of efforts to receive 
donations from groups, and if so, what is the money being used 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I am told that there are donations in 
the aggregate of around $85,000  25,000 of which was last 
year. 
 
The policy of the council is that the principal of the fund will be 
retained and that the interest that accrues on that will be 
expended in different programs. So as those donations will 
grow, if they do, it will mean more and more for doing these  



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

kinds of projects. But it’s basically a very small fund. As you 
can see, 85,000 wouldn’t offer up much in terms of program 
dollars, but it’s something, and it’s a start. And certainly it’s 
very much appreciated by the council. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, Alberta has as one of its 
mandates to play a critical role in bridging the gap between 
basic research and commercial applications. 
 
Mr. Minister, I consider that a positive role as to many small 
manufacturers who need a hand with hands-on help, from 
entrepreneurial work to global marketing. How is the Research 
Council approaching this difficult problem in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I was afraid they were going to vote 
the estimates off before I had a chance to answer. 
 
We have a fund called TecMark, a program called TecMark. 
And under that there’s $200,000 that’s set aside for small 
manufacturing in terms of helping them to get their products to 
market. It’s not a big fund and we recognize that. 
 
I think that it’s fair to say that Economic Development is 
looking at initiatives and partnerships that we may be able to 
put together with industry on a larger scale. I think in terms of 
some of the smaller manufacturers, that this is a very 
appropriate fund in that it can focus right in on a smaller 
initiative that sometimes get lost along the way. So as I’ve said, 
it’s not a great deal of money, but I think to help to facilitate 
markets and discover markets for small business, it’s a very 
good start. And certainly it’s one of the focuses of the SRC for 
this upcoming year. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, last year the SRC was able to 
administer one of the programs that helped some of the students 
like engineers from the university for job placement. I think it 
was JobStart was the name of the program. Does the SRC still 
have that as one of its mandates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  It’s job trust, is in fact operating. 
It’s now in its second year. We believe it to be a very successful 
program and hopefully that it’s something that can be 
maintained over the long term, depending of course on whether 
or not funding can be earmarked, but it’s  as I’ve said  in 
its second year of operation and very successful thus far. 
 
(2200) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Was new funding put into it for this year or 
was it just the funding for the second year of last year’s project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  It is the second year of funding 
from what was allocated for last year, so it was a two-year 
program. It’s not new funding this year. So as I’ve indicated, 
we’ll be looking to see if we can find some funding to extend 
the program. But as you will know, the budgetary process, such 
as it is, there can be no guarantees, but knowing that it is 
functioning for this year. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you have the 
global questions answered for this department. And if you’re  

. . . while you’re looking for them or while you’re discussing 
this with your people, I’d just like to thank you and your 
officials. And I appreciate the effort you had to put to come 
here to Regina and answering these questions. And I do 
appreciate the fact that the Research Council is a very important 
part of Saskatchewan’s technical base, and I’m hoping that 
there’s going to be money to put toward for projects such as 
JobStart, to let the people out there in Saskatchewan understand 
the importance of it and realize that there is hands-on help so 
that we can get involved in technology and the global market. 
And again I thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I’d like to, Mr. Chairman, thank the 
members for their questions tonight, and I appreciate that. The 
questions in written form will be forwarded to you. I understand 
they’re not quite in form that we’re ready to send them across, 
but they’ll be coming very shortly. They’re, I think, very 
important questions that you ask. It shows frankly that you have 
some understanding of the Research Council and are interested 
in its ongoing operations, and I appreciate that. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 35 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  I just would like to take the 
opportunity to thank my officials for their work tonight and all 
members of the opposition that participated in the estimates. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Chair:  The Department of Finance last appeared May 
13 and before that appeared before the committee April 29. I 
invite the minister to start by introducing her officials again, 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. On my left is Bill Jones, the deputy minister of 
Finance. Behind Bill is Bill Van Sickle, the executive director 
of the administration branch. On my right is Larry Spannier, the 
executive director of the treasury board branch. Behind me is 
Glen Veikle, the director of the taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs branch, and behind Larry is Bruce Gray, senior fiscal 
policy analyst. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Madam 
Minister, the other day we were discussing the unfunded 
pension liabilities and you were leaving . . . may have left the 
impression that the unfunded pension liability was under 
control or that you’d answered the questions. But I looked 
through Hansard and all the answers you gave me really never 
addressed the fact as to what you are doing, or your government 
is doing, to address the long-term, unfunded pension liability as 
it sits today, and where it will be tomorrow. And I’m still 
wondering, Madam Minister, whether over the past few days 
since we raised the question last time if you’d come up with a 
strategy to address this unfunded liability which the Premier is  



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

taking a fair bit of interest in. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, we will pay our pension obligations as they come due. 
We have made changes, or the previous NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government made changes in 1978, to ensure that the 
current plan is fixed. That is, every person who’s been hired by 
the government since 1978 is in a plan which is fully funded, 
and which is very taxpayer friendly, inexpensive to taxpayers. 
And I guess the final thing we’re doing is ensuring that the 
province is in a good fiscal position so that we are in a position 
to continue paying pension obligations as they come due. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So basically what you’ve just said, Madam 
Minister, is that you’re not really . . . you don’t really have a 
strategy in place other than as the demand on the pension plan 
becomes obvious, and as the annual demand for the funds are 
there and if there isn’t enough . . . aren’t enough funds in the 
unfunded liability, then the province will make up the 
difference and you’ll just tackle it on a year-by-year basis. 
 
I think, Madam Minister, that we should maybe be looking 
ahead at trying to bring that fund into a position where it can 
carry itself, rather than allowing it to grow as we’ve seen over 
the last five years by  as the auditor has pointed out  this 
unfunded liability has grown by 500 million. Even if you just 
held . . . even if it just held its own over the last five years 
instead of growing, it wouldn’t be that much a bigger burden as 
we’re beginning . . . as we will see it. 
 
And I think, Madam Minister, if you continue to allow the 
unfunded liability to grow on an annual basis, then when it 
comes to having to pay out on that plan, Madam Minister, it is 
going to become a major hardship for any Finance minister, you 
included. 
 
And who knows, maybe two years down the road, Madam 
Minister, you’re going to be facing the fact that you’re going to 
have to dig into the treasury, which means less funds for health 
care and education and the other services that the Premier was 
talking about this last week, I believe, when he was in Ottawa, 
about the social programs and the infrastructure that we have to 
protect. 
 
So I think, Madam Minister, what I’ve been suggesting, we 
need to have a strategy  not a strategy that says we’ll address 
it when we get to it, but a strategy today that brings that 
unfunded liability into a manageable position. 
 
And if you’re going to suggest we’re just going to address it as 
we get to it and when the problem hits us, fine and dandy, I can 
accept that, except for the fact, Madam Minister, all I see down 
the road is a greater reduction of the funds to the essential 
programs that your government and all governments talk about. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this government is no longer in a position  no 
government in Saskatchewan is in a position — whereby 
they’re going to be just able to just manage year by year, as 
occurred in the 1980s and before in this province. 

We now have in place balanced budget legislation which 
requires every government to lay before the people of 
Saskatchewan a four-year plan as to how they’re going to 
manage the province’s finances, a four-year plan as to how 
they’re going to deal with the province’s debt. In that four-year 
plan the pension obligations for the government are covered for 
that four-year time frame. So it’s not accurate to say we are 
going year by year. We actually have passed legislation to 
ensure that no government in Saskatchewan ever again can 
manage the province’s finances on a year-to-year basis. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So, Madam Minister, what I’ve heard you say is 
you basically have already acknowledged that there will be 
funds that you will have to draw on and you’ve already made 
provisions for those funds in the upcoming years, on an annual 
basis. You projected that this shortfall is going to start hitting us 
and we’re going to need some financing and you’ve already 
planned for it. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  What I’ve said to the member 
opposite, Mr. Chairman, is we have laid before the people of 
the province a four-year plan which outlines all the government 
spending for the next four years, including the payment of all 
pension obligations. 
 
And if in fact the member was accurate in talking about the 
crisis, I would note that no credit rating agency has yet 
identified this as a crisis for the province. Oh, they do talk 
about the debt. You would see the spending of the province 
going like that. And in fact what you see over the four-year plan 
is the spending of the province relatively flat. 
 
So what we’re saying is over the four years we have planned for 
the financing of all pension obligations in this four-year period. 
Claims that there is some dramatic crisis looming over the 
people of Saskatchewan are not borne out by the fact that that 
spending curve is essentially a flat or flattened one. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 
Minister, and good evening to your officials. 
 
Another matter of concern to us related to pensions is with 
respect to the MLA superannuation plan. I know the Provincial 
Auditor had some concerns with respect to the payment of 
spousal benefits. Would you be able to just outline for us in the 
Assembly here this evening what those concerns may be and 
what your department may be doing to address those concerns? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the point being made is this: if an MLA passes away, 
the spouse automatically gets 60 per cent of the benefits as they 
exist. We have taken the legislation as meaning if we give to 
superannuates a cost of living increase above the basic pension 
 that is, we index it for that year in some way  then we give 
the spouse 100 per cent, the surviving spouse 100 per cent, of 
the benefit if the MLA passes away. 
 
So really what it is, it’s a difference of interpretation. The 
auditor believes we really only need to be giving 60 per cent of 
that indexing to the spouse. We believe the requirement is 100 
per cent. 



May 27, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

We’re talking about a very small amount of money though 
because it only applies to when we allocate. Normally none of 
the pensions in the government per se, the MLA pensions or the 
public service pensions, none of them are indexed to inflation. 
They’re just flat. So it only applies when we actually grant in 
our budget an increase, and that we give 100 per cent of that to 
the spouse of an MLA who has passed away. 
 
(2215) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. But with 
respect to these supplementary increases, if you’d have . . . 
would it not make sense though to make sure there isn’t any 
grey area in this regard and to amend whatever legislation 
would be necessary so that . . . it’s not that we’re disagreeing 
with paying these spouses 100 per cent of these additional 
benefits. But should we not just do some housekeeping here in 
this regard? I know it’s been mentioned previously that this 
would be undertaken at some future date, and perhaps is this 
not the time? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. This is not a big bone of contention between the 
auditor and us. You know, we don’t fundamentally disagree, 
and I don’t think he fundamentally disagrees. It’s a matter of 
how we’re interpreting what our obligations are and what the 
legislation says, and we’re looking at it. We have no objections 
to making a change if we actually believe it’s necessary. I think 
we’ve had a legal opinion which says we don’t need to make 
the change. But we have no problem continuing to look at it and 
coming to some common understanding with the auditor on this 
one. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It was of a 
serious enough nature that the auditor did feel necessary to 
make a note of it with respect to Department of Finance. 
 
Another matter that he makes note of is concerning the losses 
with respect to purchases of annuities under the MLA 
superannuation plan and just what sort of a procedure you may 
have in place with respect to handling those, in fact. Might you 
outline that for the Assembly this evening? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Actually, Mr. Chairman, to the 
member opposite, in this session you’ll see some legislation that 
will begin to deal with this issue. There’s legislation before the 
House which will separate new annuities from existing 
pensions and annuities. And the new annuities will have the 
profits and losses taken care of in a way recommended by the 
auditor. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Switching the 
topic here towards a matter that of course is of concern to 
everybody in the province. It’s the matter of the PST (provincial 
sales tax) issue. I know the member from Regina Elphinstone 
and your Economic Development minister in a trip to the 
western part of the province discussed the provincial sales tax 
with people in that area, and I know he at that time was 
expressing support for a property registration system which 
would stop people from travelling out of province to PST-free 
Alberta for purchases. And I wonder if we could have the  

minister’s view on this issue, and could you tell us if your 
department has studied whether a system such as was suggested 
by the Economic Development minister is even remotely 
possible. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I think it’s important to take measures to ensure that 
the taxes of the province are collected  all across the 
province, not just on the western border. And we do take 
measures to ensure that that occurs. There are protections in the 
system, because if you have large items  vehicles, for 
example — they have to be registered, and when they register 
the tax has to be paid. We do audits to ensure that taxes are 
being paid. 
 
But the real bottom line that I want to emphasize is that, in 
Saskatchewan, we do not have a major smuggling problem as 
occurs in other parts of Canada. If you look at provinces like 
Ontario, Quebec, even Atlantic Canada, they have, in many, 
many instances a significant level of smuggling. I think what 
you would find in Saskatchewan statistically is that people here 
believe in paying their taxes, and the vast majority of people do 
pay their taxes. And I think that’s the backbone of our 
compliance efforts, that we continue to reassure people that it is 
important to pay their taxes, because their taxes go to provide 
their health and education services. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, I know at this same trip, I 
believe, the minister for Economic Development had in fact . . . 
I believe he’s quoted in the North Battleford paper as 
suggesting it’s immoral for people to cross-border shop with 
respect to avoiding PST. And I know the people in this province 
do like to see their leaders, in fact, lead by example. People are 
concerned about when people have power, whether they abuse 
such power, and I know I’ve asked other members opposite 
with respect to this and I’d just like you to perhaps just clarify 
this as well. 
 
Yourself and other cabinet colleagues, do you undertake to 
make any major purchases out of the province and avoid PST? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I think the people on this side of the House believe 
very strongly in Saskatchewan and in the strength of the 
economy and of course we would purchase everything possible 
within the bounds of this province. I find the question a little 
startling for that reason. 
 
The Chair:  Order. Order. Order. Before we continue with 
the Department of Finance consideration, I’d simply remind the 
member for Thunder Creek that the Department of Finance 
questions should be related to the Estimates book as opposed to 
personal questions of hon. members all the way around. 
Therefore I’m just cautioning that that particular last question 
probably should not have appeared before the department . . . 
pardon me, before the committee estimates. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I’ve taken 
note of that. The minister made mention of not having any 
significant problems with respect to smuggling as it relates to 
PST issues and I know, however, though that tobacco has been  



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 1996 

an issue that has been of concern, I believe, in this province 
where there has been occurrences of smuggling, I believe 
predominantly from provinces east of us. 
 
And I would just like the minister this evening to outline what 
sort of procedures your department may have in place with 
respect to detecting smuggling of that nature. How many people 
may be involved in your department in that regard? And also 
maybe you might just make some comment if it would also 
entail some additional enforcement with respect to trying to 
curtail smuggling with tobacco. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this is actually a good example of what I was talking 
about  Saskatchewan people believing in paying their taxes. 
 
When the federal government lowered tobacco taxes and made 
the offer to all Canadian provinces, the province of Quebec 
accepted the offer and lowered its tobacco taxes. Very quickly, 
Ontario and Atlantic Canada believed they also had to lower 
their tobacco taxes because there would be smuggling, not just 
from outside Canada but from within Canada. 
 
It was one of the difficult moments in our relationship with the 
federal government, because we do not believe you should have 
two different tax regimes across the country. 
 
Western Canadian governments believed that we could resist 
such a tide because people here would not decide that just 
because they could get cheaper cigarettes from another part of 
Canada that it was worthwhile to do that, even though they had 
to become involved in smuggling. 
 
We do not take any particularly extraordinary measures to stop 
tobacco smuggling within the province of Saskatchewan. It’s 
just part of our general tax compliance measures. We have an 
agreement with the province of Manitoba, because Manitoba 
has the border closest to Ontario, to help them in policing their 
border. Even there that’s not a significant issue right now. 
Initially there was a belief that we had to ensure that people 
didn’t think they could just bring cheap cigarettes across the 
border, but even there, there is not a significant, extraordinary 
effort required to ensure that there isn’t tobacco smuggling. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, in the last few weeks we’ve 
seen a number of the bond rating agencies release their reviews 
for the province, and those agencies have suggested that there 
has been some progress, and that is positive. But each of the 
agencies, of Moody’s and the Canadian Bond Rating Service, 
have both expressed grave concern about the level of debt in 
Saskatchewan. And that concern is a very real one, and the 
agencies want to know how the government intends to attack 
that provincial debt. 
 
The government’s whittled away at the debt by selling off 
Cameco shares, but what worries the bond rating agencies is 
how Saskatchewan would be able to reduce the overall debt if 
we ever had an economic downturn in this province. Without 
the sale of Cameco shares, the government would in fact barely 
be producing a surplus today. With the recession, the 
government might in fact even be running in the red. 

And given that the bond rating agencies are not confident that 
this government’s debt reduction plan is adequate enough, will 
the minister tell the committee here this evening what she 
intends to do to present a genuine debt reduction plan, as I have 
asked for comment previously. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I will note with great interest the member’s 
observation, and I’m glad it’s written into the record that he 
believes the credit rating agencies lack confidence in this 
government’s management of fiscal matters, particularly debt 
reduction. We will record that, and we will observe on that in 
future days because the member opposite is once again on 
record saying that he believes credit rating agencies are going to 
reflect on this province’s financial performance in a less than 
positive way, and we will see exactly what the member will be 
saying. 
 
I would say to the member opposite, what he needs to do is look 
at the budget. Every four-year financial plan put forward by the 
Government of Saskatchewan after an election has to include a 
debt management plan. No province in Canada has reduced its 
debt as dramatically as the province of Saskatchewan. 1994, the 
debt was 68 per cent of the gross domestic product of the 
province. By the end of this four-year financial plan, it’s going 
to be down to 44 per cent. 
 
And again, we must observe what other, outside independent 
agencies actually do say about our debt reduction. The members 
opposite, they are on record saying they do not believe that we 
have an adequate debt reduction plan. I say on behalf of the 
members on this side of the House, we have a debt reduction 
plan which is a model for the rest of Canada. And we will see 
what outside agencies do say about our debt reduction plan, and 
I will remind the member opposite again and again and again 
about what the outside agencies do say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Energy and Mines  Vote 23  

McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................1879 
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1879 

General Revenue Fund  
Saskatchewan Water Corporation  Vote 50  

Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1886 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1886 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................1886 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................1891 

General Revenue Fund  
Saskatchewan Research Council  Vote 35 

Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................1894 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................1894 

General Revenue Fund  
Finance  Vote 18  

MacKinnon ...............................................................................................................................................................................1899 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1899 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................1900 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................1884 

 
 


