













































May 17, 1996Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1679 

 May 17, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all 

from the city of Regina. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present petitions of 

the undersigned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan that 

show us that the government has failed to address the serious 

concerns of landlords who provide rental accommodation to 

Saskatchewan renters. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore our petitioner humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

action to allow an increase in the security deposits on 

rental properties to the equivalent of one month’s rent; and 

that your Hon. Assembly review the remedies available to 

landlords who are not given sufficient notice by social 

assistance tenants who vacate properties and whose rent in 

their new accommodations is paid by social assistance 

without regard for outstanding obligations in previous 

rental agreements. 

 

The names on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Moose Jaw, 

Arelee, and Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The majority of the people that have signed this petition, Mr. 

Speaker, are from Theodore, a community in my constituency, 

as well as Regina and Yorkton. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Southey,  

Moose Jaw, and from Regina. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the communities of Beaubier, Lake Alma, Minton, Gladmar, 

Estevan, Weyburn, and a few from Regina as well. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

too, to present a petition of names from people in southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre, the prayer 

reading as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 

close the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by a lot of concerned 

citizens in southern Saskatchewan ranging from Weyburn, of 

course through Regina  many from Regina  Montmartre, 

Crane Valley, Moose Jaw, Fort Qu’Appelle, Langenburg, 

Semans, Meadow Lake, Colgate, Swift Current, Gull Lake, 

Melville, Canora; a lot of concerned citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise again 

today to present petitions of names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, 

Arcola, Corning, Kisbey; all over southern Saskatchewan. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 

Establish Regional Telephone Districts, short titled The 

Regional Telephone Districts Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give  



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

notice that I shall on day no. 59 ask the government the 

following question: 

 

To the Minister of Finance regarding order in council 

282/96: (1) why was the order in council approved on 

April 30, ’96 when the program ran from April 1, ’95 to 

March 31 of 1996; (2) was this money included in the 

1995-96 Saskatchewan estimates; if not, why; (3) which 

department was responsible for providing the $7 million; 

and (4) which programs received the $14 million and how 

was this money divided? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on day no. 59 ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments, 

regarding the Crown Investments Corporation’s interest in 

HARO Financial Corporation: (1) what was the amount of 

cash flow generated by HARO in the first quarter of 1996; 

(2) what was the amount of net earnings or losses 

generated by HARO in the first quarter of 1996? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to all 

the members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 

group seated in the west gallery. These are a group of St. 

Timothy’s Scouts. There are, as you can see, a large number of 

Scouts there  five, and their two leaders, Russell Littlemore 

and Jack Zess. 

 

I’m not sure whether the five will be able to generate enough 

questions to keep us entertained for 20 minutes when I meet 

with them later or if I have to pull out my speech number three, 

but at any rate, I ask all colleagues to join me in welcoming the 

group to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure today to introduce to you and all members of the 

Legislative Assembly, a group of grade 7 school students from 

the Elizabeth School in Kindersley. 

 

There are 42 students from Kindersley that have made the trip 

down here today, Mr. Speaker. Their teachers are Dave Burkell 

and Maureen Robbin. Their chaperons are Nancy Kelley, 

Tracey Baxter, Nancy Torrey, and their bus driver is Jim Baker. 

 

I’d ask all members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to welcome 

them here to the Assembly here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

. . . a great pleasure for me to introduce, seated in your gallery, 

40 seniors from Southey, Saskatchewan and their director, John 

Orban. You’ve got it listed as director; I don’t think he would 

say that he was a director of them, but John Orban’s with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe so much to these seniors that have 

 

contributed so much to our province and made it one of the 

greatest places in the world to live. And I want to right now 

publicly thank the seniors for that. Our generation owes them so 

much. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them later and having a chat 

with them, and hope they enjoy their session here this morning 

and their tour of the building. And I would ask all members to 

please join with me in welcoming them here this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 

opportunity to introduce someone to you in the Speaker’s 

gallery who I don’t get a frequent opportunity to introduce. She 

is one of the better farmers in my constituency, one of my 

supporters, and happens to be my wife, Cheralyn. And I want 

all of us to join in welcoming her here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

torn about whether I should actually be here today. I didn’t 

know whether I’d get more harassment by being here or not 

being here this morning. 

 

Anyway, in anticipation of an upcoming private member’s 

statement  I don’t know whether I require leave for this or not 

 but I was thinking maybe I should talk the clock out right till 

1 o’clock, because I’m not sure what’s going to be said about 

me. 

 

But anyway, if I could just take a few liberties, first of all just 

by thanking everybody, all of the legislature including 

opposition as well. I really appreciated, as did Virginia, you 

coming out and celebrating with us and we really genuinely do 

appreciate that. So thank you very much. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, through you and to the other members of 

the Assembly, I would like to introduce a number of very 

special guests in the gallery. I’d like to begin with my parents 

 that’s those who made it this morning, by the way  my 

parents, John and Dorothy Sonntag, if they’d stand, please. And 

seated beside them is my brother, Patrick, and his wife, Rita. 

Seated beside them is my new wife’s parents, Paul and Nancy 

Wilkinson. In the back row is Jonathon Wilkinson . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I won’t forget. And last and 

certainly not least, and most important, my new wife, Virginia 

Wilkinson. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Sonntag-Wilkinson Wedding 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, today we want to 

demonstrate a rare act of unanimity with the members of the 

opposition. As the member from Melfort suggested yesterday, 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

this has been a significant week in the life of this legislature. I 

lost a room-mate and the member from Meadow Lake found a 

better-looking one. 

 

But in the process, members on both sides of the House have 

become closer in our mutual support of one of our members. 

My colleagues on this side of the House want to join the 

member from Melfort in wishing the canoeist, my dear friend, 

and member from Meadow Lake constituency, and Virginia all 

the best in their new life together. 

 

The vows were made late yesterday. They were graciously 

cemented by not one but two members of this Assembly, the 

reverend members from Moose Jaw Wakamow and Saskatoon 

Sutherland. This is a marriage off to a good start. As an aside, 

Mr. Speaker, I may be wrong, but I think this is the first special 

caucus meeting in living memory at which a sitting member 

was married  another reason why this week is special. When 

good things happen to good friends, we are all better for it. For 

myself, I’ve not lost a room-mate; I’ve gained a place to go for 

Sunday dinner. 

 

We wish both of you all the best in your married life. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Federal Task Force on Youth 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

in Saskatoon I had the pleasure of attending a town hall meeting 

focusing on youth. The meeting was part of a federal 

government task force on youth. I would like to commend the 

many people who attended the meeting, including three people 

from my constituency. They were Diane Olchowski, 

representing REDA (regional economic development authority) 

; Erin Kun, a student from Bruno; and Jeremy Elder, a student 

from Humboldt Collegiate who spoke on behalf of the students 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

This meeting focused on the needs and aspirations of people 

now in school and how they can more easily make the transition 

from school into the workforce. The discussions that followed 

resulted in some very valuable and creative suggestions. I was 

pleased to be part of those discussions, and I would like to 

commend highly the federal government and everyone who 

participated and took the initiatives that they did on behalf of 

our very valuable resource  our youth. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Life Report 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, regardless of where 

we live in Saskatchewan it’s good for all of us when a 

provincial business does well. It boosts our economy, it 

increases the contributions to the government coffers, and of 

course in this case it employs about a thousand people. And of 

course I’m referring to the annual meeting held in Regina 

recently and the report of Crown Life that they have . . . having  

its third consecutive year of increasing profits and expanding 

business. 

 

And I would want to congratulate Brian Johnson and the 

management of Crown Life and the board of directors, and 

quote Mr. Johnson when he said: “We do see a trend of 

improving performance continuing. The company sales are up 

everywhere in Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bodes well for the city of Regina and the 

province of Saskatchewan. And last year, Mr. Speaker, the 

company posted a $47 million profit and 45 million in l994 and 

so far this year the profits are up 9 per cent over last year. 

 

So I want to express on behalf of all members of the Assembly 

our special congratulations to the management, but most 

importantly the thousand or so good souls who work in this 

company here in the city of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Resignation of Melfort Mustangs Coach 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members of 

this Assembly have heard me speak often about the Melfort 

Mustang Hockey Club. Well today I have to announce that it’s 

with some regret that I acknowledge the fact that head coach 

Kevin Dickie has submitted his resignation effective May 31 of 

this year. 

 

I and the community of Melfort cannot express how much we 

owe to the talents of this one individual. Kevin and his wife 

Cindy came to Melfort five years ago. Since that time Kevin has 

coached the Melfort Mustangs for five years, winning the 

division four times out of five, the league twice, and then going 

on this year alone to capture the Hanbidge Cup, the Anavet 

Cup, the Abbott Cup, and were runners-up at the Royal Bank 

Cup. 

 

This shows the kind of dedication that Kevin has shown to this 

community. When interviewed on his success, Kevin has 

always attributed the success to the support of the fans, 

volunteers, and the hockey club. 

 

Please join me in congratulating head coach Kevin Dickie, 

thank him for all that he’s done for the Melfort community, and 

bid he and his wife Cindy and young family best wishes in the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Ms. Lorje:  While some of us were dancing the night away 

in Regina, there was an important black-tie affair held in 

Saskatoon yesterday, the first annual SABEX award dinner. 

SABEX stands for Saskatoon Achievement in Business 

Excellence. These awards have been established by the 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce and the Saskatoon Regional 

Economic Development Authority. 

 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

Before announcing the winners, first a few statistics. Five 

hundred and fifty people attended the ceremony. There were 31 

finalists in seven categories. All finalists were worthy 

nominees. 

 

And the winners were: Forvest Broadcasting as business of the 

year; they also won the marketing award. Standard Machine 

took home the innovation award. Bioriginal Food and Science 

Corporation captured the export prize. 

 

The new product award went to Display Systems International. 

Early’s Farm and Garden Centre, an old friend to green thumb 

enthusiasts, was given the well-deserved customer service 

award. National Refrigeration froze out the new business prize. 

 

Finally, the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix blacked out the community 

involvement prize. And it is my fond hope that they deserve it 

again next year. 

 

I congratulate all winners and all nominees for contributing to 

Saskatoon’s successful economic ambience. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sonntag-Wilkinson Wedding 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join with the hon. member from Rosetown-Elrose in 

offering, on behalf of our caucus, our most sincere 

congratulations to the member from Meadow Lake and his new 

family and his new wife, Virginia. 

 

Virginia, from the brief occasions that I’ve had to visit and 

speak with Maynard over the years, I’ve found him to be, just as 

you have I’m sure, a very truly honourable gentleman, and I 

look forward to the invitation some time to take part in a visit 

with you people. 

 

It is truly a momentous occasion, I think, when someone joins 

in marriage like you two have, and particularly under the 

circumstances of being here at the legislature. So we would like 

to offer our sincere congratulations and best wishes in your 

endeavours in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Syttende Mai 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  

 

Ja, vi elsker dette landet, 

som det stiger frem 

furet, værbitt over vannet 

med de tusen hjem. 

Elsker, elsker det og tenker 

på vår far og mor 

og den saganat, som senker 

drømme på vor jord. 

 

Today is Syttende Mai, the 17th of May, and that was the first 

verse of the Norwegian national anthem. 

On May 17, 1814 at Eidsvoll, Norway, 112 members of a 

constituent assembly approved the new Constitution of Norway. 

This small, primarily rural country of just under 1 million 

people asserted its independence in the turmoil surrounding the 

Napoleonic wars. Based on the French Constitution of 1791, it 

added special rights and privileges for farmers. This 

constitution is still in use in Norway, making it the second 

oldest after the U.S. (United States) Constitution. 

 

Norway today has about four and a half million people, but 

there are over 5 million descendants living around the world. 

Celebrations of the 17th of May take place in all corners of the 

earth. 

 

Today we join with all Norwegian descendants in 

Saskatchewan as we celebrate this Norwegian national day, 

especially the residents of Birch Hills and Weldon, Saskatoon, 

Estevan, Outlook, and Regina, where special parties are taking 

place. 

 

So I ask all members to join with the Norwegian descendants in 

the Assembly, the members from Saltcoats, Weyburn, 

Saskatoon Southeast, Regina Sherwood, Regina Coronation 

Park, and Regina Lakeview, and the honorary Norwegian, the 

member from Lloydminster, in recognizing this important day 

for all Norwegian Canadians. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Providence Place 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 

to the attention of this House the growing concern over this 

government’s decision to break its promise to fund the geriatric 

unit of Providence Place in Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow wrongly insists this is 

strictly an issue of concern to Moose Jaw residents. I will 

however grant that many constituents who voted for that 

member did so because they believed such a facility would be 

available for their relatives and themselves in times of need. 

These people are deeply concerned by the stance taken by this 

government and that member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I strongly urge the Minister of Health and the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow to reconsider their 

positions. I’d like to give them another chance to do so, and I 

would like to send over a number of letters from members of 

the Avonlea United Church who are concerned about what this 

government is doing to the geriatric unit at Providence Place. 

It’s my hope that the minister will inform these concerned 

Thunder Creek constituents that he’s prepared to keep his 

promise on funding this valuable unit. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Highway Maintenance 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re 

heading into a long weekend, and of course one of the busiest  



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

times on Saskatchewan highways. With the high level of traffic, 

the chance of accidents goes up. Many families with children 

will be on the highways this weekend, Mr. Speaker. The 

condition of Saskatchewan highways adds to the danger. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government truly wants to make the safety 

of Saskatchewan travellers a priority, when will the minister 

start listening to the complaints of Saskatchewan drivers and 

assume his responsibility for repairing our crumbling highway 

system in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for the 

question. I think the member realizes certainly that 

Saskatchewan has 25 per cent of all the roads in Canada. I’m 

sure he realizes, from a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) report not too long ago, that if you attached each 

road in Saskatchewan you’d circle the globe four times. 

 

When you take that into account, and our population which has 

to pay for the maintenance and the preservation of this road; 

and take an account of what the federal government has done, 

Mr. Speaker, with the cut-backs in health care and social 

programs and education where we have to back-fill that money; 

and then you also take a look at what the Tories did over the 

past 10 years when they were in power, Mr. Speaker — we 

have $851 million of interest that we have to pay each and 

every year — so I believe that the Department of Highways is 

doing an extremely good job under those circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

Saskatchewan people are a bit tired of hearing this government 

passing the blame on to everyone else other than themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that Saskatchewan tourism 

season gets under full swing this weekend with the opening of 

provincial parks. Tourism Saskatchewan is also trying to entice 

travellers to our province to find $15,000 in gold. With the 

deplorable conditions of the Saskatchewan highways and roads, 

I’d say the gold treasure is fairly safe. If this government truly 

wants to encourage tourism growth in this province, the 

Minister of Highways must start paving the way for success. 

 

Will the Minister of Highways tell the owners of Saskatchewan 

resorts and campgrounds that he is committed to their economic 

well-being and will take the necessary steps to improve the 

highway conditions for holiday travellers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for the 

question. Certainly tourism is a bright spot in Saskatchewan. 

It’s increasing every year, as is economic development in the 

province of Saskatchewan  oil industry, forest industry, and 

you can go on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to say that under the circumstances that the 

department faces, we are looking at different ways of funding 

roads — like partnerships with the private sector, Mr. Speaker, 

new technologies like low tire pressure. We’re also looking at 

better planning with rural municipalities and urban 

municipalities to spend the limited funds that are available more 

wisely. 

 

And I want to tell the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that 

during the past budget we in fact took $6 million out of 

administration in the Department of Highways and we’re 

putting that funding back into roads. 

 

And I know what the member would like; he would like to 

spend and spend and spend, and on the other hand reduce taxes 

and reduce taxes and reduce taxes. What I think would happen, 

Mr. Speaker, if that member was on this side of the House, we 

would have the same problem we had when the Tories were in 

power  large debts and large interest bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporations Review 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Mr. Minister, this morning you and the Minister of Economic 

Development announced that your government will be holding 

public consultations to be held in conjunction with CIC’s 

(Crown Investments Corporation) review of Crown 

corporations. What seems particularly amazing, however, is that 

every location for these public meetings is in a constituency 

held by a member opposite. 

 

You also weren’t able to tell anybody what this process will 

cost taxpayers. The process is already behind schedule, and in 

the long run you say the government makes the decision 

anyway, finally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing with a multi-billion dollar taxpayer 

investment that will have a dramatic impact on the people of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, will you tell the Assembly today 

how much it will cost to fill town halls with NDP (New 

Democratic Party) supporters in order to drive home your 

preconceived notions of the future of these Crowns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to answer the 

question on behalf of the government and remind the members 

of the House and the member opposite in particular that the 

Crown review is intended to give our very strong collection of 

Crown corporations a check-up. They have performed 

exceptionally well in providing employment and job 

opportunities for the people of Saskatchewan and revenue for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And they are now 

facing a deregulated  thanks to successive Tory and Liberal 

governments  deregulated, highly competitive environment 

and world in which they live. 

 

The objective of the Crown review is make sure that the Crown 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

corporations continue to be viable, strong forces for our 

economy in the 21st century. The total cost with respect to the 

actual review are going to be determined at the end of the day 

when the review is completed. But I can tell the hon. member 

opposite that they will be relatively, very, very small when 

compared about the importance of a review of a $7 billion 

portfolio, which is what they’re intended to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Data Centre Closure 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

media is reporting this morning that the Bank of Nova Scotia is 

closing its Saskatchewan data centre. It and the 57 positions 

will be transferred to Calgary. That’s an all too familiar story. 

Given the fact that the NDP government gave a considerable 

amount of money and effort to bring the CIBC (Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce) call centre to this province, will 

the Minister of Economic Development explain what efforts he 

and his government are making to keep this data centre in 

Saskatchewan? Are you simply just going to wave good-bye to 

these families and employees as they pack up and leave this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to answer 

the question from the member opposite. One of the most 

important things that we are trying to do here is to work with 

companies who have moved here from other provinces. And 

we’re trying to get control of the Liberal caucus, who by Brian 

Johnson’s admission, is trying to destroy companies and lose 

jobs for the province of Saskatchewan. That’s the first thing 

that I think many business people are now telling me. 

 

And we’re beginning to get a litany of letters from business 

people and you are too, I’m sure, Madam Member, because 

companies are saying that one of the worst, bad creators of 

image for the province in fact, is that Liberal caucus continually 

talking negative about the economy of the province, when what 

we need is a positive attitude and believing in the business 

people in the province. 

 

I attended SABEX awards last night in Saskatoon; huge 

optimism about the economy. I only ask you to come onside 

with the business community; join us, become more positive, 

and help out the economy of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporations Review 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this morning are for the Premier or the minister 

responsible for CIC. Mr. Premier, our caucus welcomes the 

Crown corporation review process announced this morning. 

However we remain concerned about whether your government 

is truly committed to real consideration of privatization. 

 

There have been conflicting messages coming out of your  

government. Shortly after the review was announced back in 

February, Barb Byers said the minister had personally assured 

her that privatization was not on the table. A couple of weeks 

ago, Mr. Premier, you seemed to indicate your government had 

no intention of privatizing SaskTel. 

 

The minister himself has called privatization an extreme 

position. Mr. Premier, will you give us a clear answer today. 

Within your check-up, as you called it, of Crown corporations, 

will you be looking at privatization as an option? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I think what has to be 

absolutely clear to the people of Saskatchewan  and I want to 

underline it again here this morning  is that there is a huge 

gulf between the government and the members who support this 

government and those of the Conservative and Liberal 

caucuses. And it’s a gulf based on a fundamental ideological 

commitment by the Conservatives and by the Liberals to pursue 

a policy of privatization. 

 

Federally we’ve seen the privatization of Canadian National 

Railways and Air Canada, and others are on the chopping 

block. And we all know the experience of what the former 

Conservative government did with respect . . . or attempted to 

do with the former SaskEnergy, still currently in Crown 

corporation. 

 

An Hon. Member:  How about PCS (Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Inc.)? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And the member says, what about 

PCS? And yes, PCS was privatized, I might add, at a book loss 

to the people of Saskatchewan in the order of $600 million, 

which if we had today we’d be able to do a lot of things for 

health care and for highways and other questions raised here. 

 

We are asking our experts in this area to give us the best, most 

efficient, honest appraisal of the Crown corporations to make 

sure that they continue to be a viable, healthy enterprise vehicle 

to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I’m very 

pleased that your review committee included Frank Proto, who 

is president of a company that went through a very successful 

privatization. Earlier this year, taxpayers saw the rewards of 

another very successful privatization when you sold off millions 

of dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars, of Cameco shares. 

 

Mr. Premier, the Manitoba government is currently in the 

process of privatizing their telephone company, MTS (Manitoba 

Telephone System), through a private share offering that gives 

Manitobans the first opportunity to buy shares. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you be looking at this, at privatization, as part 

of your review, and would you consider privatizing SaskTel 

through a similar share offering? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, again I think this 

question very clearly, very vividly, shows the difference of 

approach by the Conservatives and our government. The 

question is predicated that any review of the Crowns must be 

premissed on the notion of privatization. All the questions are, 

will we consider the privatization of SaskTel, like we do with 

Manitoba Tel, as they’re doing in Manitoba? He points to all 

the advantages, as he sees it, of privatization. 

 

He would have a Crown review which has one objective in 

mind, and that is to sell off those assets which don’t belong to 

us as individuals but belong to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, which assets have provided jobs, employment, 

have been able to compete in the world, and do so very 

effectively. 

 

What this Crown review is doing is giving our Crown 

corporations a check-up. Make sure that they can continue 

doing what they’re doing for the 21st century. Because we build 

the economy in this province, we believe, unlike the Tories 

which put all their faith in the private enterprise system full stop 

period, by a mixed economy  private, cooperative, and public 

sector working in tandem. That’s the difference. 

 

And we want an honest, complete, total review by experts upon 

which we can base our intelligent decisions thereafter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Patronage Appointments 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 

to the Premier. In 1994 the NDP celebrated a 50th anniversary 

 the golden anniversary of the first CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) government. And 1996 is another 

big year for the NDP because it marks the golden anniversary of 

NDP patronage. 

 

We have now identified 50 former NDP MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly), candidates, and candidates for 

nomination who have received some type of patronage 

appointment from this NDP government  50, Mr. Premier. 

And that’s not even counting the NDP activists or the Premier’s 

former law partners. 

 

Mr. Premier, what happened to your commitment to end 

patronage, and why are we now celebrating the golden 

anniversary of NDP patronage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that the process that we went through after the 

defeat of the Devine government in 1991 was a process of 

reviewing the appointments to many boards. We have set up, 

obviously, health care boards, and there are a myriad of 

processes where the public is involved. 

 

Obviously there are qualified Liberals who sit on some boards. 

In fact Harold MacKay co-chairs the PACE (Provincial Action 

Committee on the Economy) committee which is doing the 

review of the Crown corporations. And when he was attacked 

in the House, it came as a surprise to the members opposite that 

he was a long-term Liberal. Everyone else in the world knew. It 

makes you wonder how long they have been around. 

 

There are actually . . . if you did the same review of all of the 

boards and commissions, I’m sure you would come up with a 

list of as many names of people with Conservative and Liberal 

backgrounds. 

 

One should not be surprised that when you review thousands of 

names, that some will have a political background in various 

parties. The only thing I would ask and urge you is to identify 

your own members. Study it. Analyse it, because in winning 

elections you should know those kind of things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the case of 

Mr. MacKay, an NDP and a Liberal  what’s the difference? 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

The endemic and virulent practice of plugging partisan 

MLAs from the governing party into various agencies, 

boards, and commissions will stop. Partisan people, party 

people, and defeated MLAs and candidates ought not to 

serve on those boards. If we don’t succeed and continue to 

appoint party hacks, then I’ve got nowhere. 

 

Does that sound familiar, Mr. Premier? It should, because those 

were your exact words from 1991, but it seems you have a 

different song book now. 

 

Our caucus has introduced a private members’ Bill to have an 

all-party committee review appointments to boards and 

commissions. Those appointments would be based on merits 

rather than political affiliations. 

 

Mr. Premier, will you live up to the commitment you made back 

in 1991 by supporting our private members’ Bill; or do we have 

to wait until we’re celebrating the centennial or the bicentennial 

of your patronage appointments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I think the members opposite have 

learned one piece of history  that they’re probably going to 

have to wait 50 years, as they did after 1929, before they’re in 

government again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Because, Mr. Speaker, not unlike 

the Anderson government who was in power from 1929 to 1934 

or ’35  it took people 50 years to forget that mess and 

depression that they created  there likely will take 50 years to 

forget the Devine administration as well. 

 

But I want to say in terms of appointment we, unlike the former 

Devine government, do not go down the political list and 

appoint the hacks from your party. In fact you will be interested 

to know that just recently we appointed the former Conservative 

minister, Neal Hardy, to the Potash Revenue Review Board. 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

And so I say to the members opposite, if you have partisan 

people who are qualified, qualified people, put them forward; 

we will look at and review them. But one thing I would urge 

you, is to be selective because there are many of those people 

who helped run your administration that the public would have 

a great deal of difficulty with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Funding for Providence Place 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

community organizations that donated millions of dollars to 

build Providence Place and its geriatric unit in Moose Jaw met 

last week. At this meeting, the only geriatrician in our province 

indicated that he’d been approached by Regina Health District 

officials to head a geriatric program in this city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last fall the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

promised local officials that the Department of Health would 

encourage districts across the province to use the geriatric 

services of the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek Health District. 

 

Will the Minster of Health explain why he is shutting down a 

state-of-the-art and successful unit in Moose Jaw only to see it 

move to Regina. Or was moving it to Regina part of the plan all 

along? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I want to state categorically to 

the member that there is no plan on the part of the department 

to shut down the geriatric assessment unit in Moose Jaw, nor is 

there a plan to move anything to Regina. 

 

The Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek District Health Board has done 

its own planning in the community. It is working with 

Providence Place to attempt to come up with a resolution to the 

issue. 

 

There is a dispute between Providence Place, which has 

received a lot of provincial funding, Mr. Speaker, and the 

district health board about the level of funding that Providence 

Place should receive. But I have every confidence that the 

district health board and Providence Place, working in good 

faith to resolve their differences, will come up with a solution 

that will provide an acceptable level of geriatric assessment in 

Moose Jaw and an appropriate use for the beds in the geriatric 

assessment unit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I think the solution they’ll 

arrive at is that they’ll want the government to come through 

with what they had promised, which was separate funding for 

that unit. The Sisters of Providence helped finance the 

construction of the geriatric unit because of this NDP 

government’s promise of secure funding. 

 

They took this government at its word and also spent hundreds 

of thousands of dollars to train this geriatrician and his staff at 

both the University of B.C. (British Columbia) and the 

University of Alberta. Now because of this broken promise and 

the impending closure of the geriatric unit at Providence Place, 

the province’s only geriatrician may leave the province. Two 

people trained on the geriatric team have already left because of 

the uncertainty, and one of the two internal medicine specialists 

is poised to leave. 

 

Will the minister explain how he can betray the Sisters of 

Providence after they put forward so much time, energy, and 

money to make the geriatric unit a reality? How can you shatter 

their dream, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I believe that the district 

health board in Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek will develop an 

appropriate use for the 28 beds on the unit, in cooperation with 

Providence Place. And I believe that the district and Providence 

Place, working together, will come up with an appropriate, 

community-based method of providing geriatric assessment in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

This is a dispute between Providence Place and the district 

health board about the level of funding. That’s what it is, Mr. 

Speaker. The district is funded on a population base and 

needs-based system. The funding is equitable throughout the 

province. I am confident that the parties, working together 

without the kind of political interference that the member is 

advocating, will come up with an acceptable solution, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Health Care Reform 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 

editorial appeared in this week’s edition of The Melfort Journal 

which sums up how many Saskatchewan residents are feeling 

about the state of health care in this province. 

 

This article refers to the elimination of the Nirvana Pioneer 

Villa. It notes that the Melfort hospital has been transformed 

from a regional facility serving the people of north-east 

Saskatchewan to a mere shadow of itself with less than half the 

beds it once offered. It also states, and I quote: 

 

Simply put, health reform in the Melfort district has been a 

failure. It has resulted in the loss of many aspects of health 

care that this same government promised to protect only a 

few years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Health explain how his 

actions in any way live up to the commitment of health care in 

our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, this province has for 30 years 

been a leader in terms of meeting the health care needs of its 

citizens. And this province continues to be a leader in that 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

regard, Mr. Speaker, and we are recognized across the country 

for providing leadership. 

 

And what we are doing is building a health care system that is 

sustainable. What the member opposite wants to do and 

repeatedly does, Mr. Speaker, is to get up and suggest that the 

people are not going to be taken care of. And nothing could be 

further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are going to ensure that there is appropriate long-term care 

for people. The local health board in Melfort has a plan, as the 

member knows, to replace the beds that are being shut down at 

Nirvana. They have a plan in the long term for the use of 

Nirvana; they have a plan in the long term for a new facility in 

Melfort, Mr. Speaker. The member knows that. 

 

The member’s trying to suggest that the people will not be 

taken care of, Mr. Speaker. Nothing could be further from the 

truth, and that would be inconsistent with the record of this 

province when it comes to health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, a letter also appeared in last 

week’s edition of the Nipawin Journal which provides another 

indication of the crisis that currently exists in the health care 

system. And since the member from Carrot River Valley refuses 

to raise the concerns of these residents, I will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this letter notes that the Carrot River Hospital will 

soon be losing emergency services on the weekends, and states, 

and I quote: 

 

We might as well lock the door and throw away the key. 

We, the citizens of Carrot River, have no say. Do they not 

realize the impact that this will have on this community 

and surrounding area? Apparently not! This is just another 

step to undermine health care in Carrot River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain what is next for the 

people of Carrot River  a so-called health centre, or perhaps 

nothing at all? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the health board in the area 

will make decisions as to the appropriate services for the people 

in the area. But I want to say to the member that what bothers 

me about he and his party’s continual harping about the level of 

health care spending is the simple fact, and I know the member 

doesn’t like to hear it, that the federal Liberals have cut $50 

million in health care spending for the province of 

Saskatchewan this year; and the fact is, Mr. Speaker, the fact is 

that we back-filled and put in a dollar for every dollar they took 

out of the health care system. And the fact is that if we had not 

done that, if we had let the Liberal cuts stand, Mr. Speaker  

because we do believe in the health care system  the effect on 

the health districts in this province, Mr. Speaker, would have 

been 10 times what it is because of our commitment to funding 

health care, a commitment not shared by the Liberal Party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to bring to the 

attention of this House yet another editorial from this week’s 

edition of the Fort Qu’Appelle Times. This article notes that the 

Premier has established a perfect illusion. It states and I quote: 

 

The Great Roydini sets up the . . . (policy) by announcing 

his government will move . . . (more responsibly) for 

health care closer to the people . . . 

 

He does (it) by creating district health boards. 

 

The real purpose of the boards of course is to deflect the 

crap that’s going to fly when the government starts turning 

off the money tap. 

 

It’s an almost perfect deal for the province. 

 

However, it’s not so great . . . (when) you’re a local person 

sitting on one of these boards and trying to do some good. 

 

Will the minister explain if he is prepared to take responsibility 

for health care and end this illusion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, what the member isn’t saying 

when he says the district health boards were created is the fact 

that there were 410 health boards before the 30 districts were 

created, Mr. Speaker. And they were created to coordinate and 

rationalize health care in Saskatchewan so that we could have a 

sustainable medical system, a sustainable medicare system, in 

the future. 

 

And what is the member saying, Mr. Speaker? Is he saying that 

local people should not be involved in making health care 

decisions? If that’s what he’s saying, then I think the member 

should say so, Mr. Speaker. But if he’s asking me, are we going 

to continue to involve local people in planning health care in 

the districts throughout the province, yes we are, because when 

we work with the local people, Mr. Speaker, we will do what 

we’re committed to do. We will build a strong and sustainable 

health care system that will serve us well in the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Community Meetings Set for Crown Corporation Review 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to make a brief 

statement regarding a matter of some considerable interest to 

the people of Saskatchewan. Earlier this morning, I announced 

at a press conference the outline of locations, dates, and the 

format of a series of public meetings to be held in conjunction 

with CIC’s review of Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker will know that earlier this year I announced the 

review of SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, Sask Government 

Insurance, the Saskatchewan Transportation Company, and the 

industrial holdings of Crown Investments Corporation. 

 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

This three-part review will include an expert evaluation of the 

fiscal health of these Crown corporations and their assets, a 

review of the role of Crowns in the provincial economy and an 

examination of the public’s expectations and perceptions of the 

Crowns. 

 

In conjunction with this review, Mr. Speaker, public meetings 

will be held June 10 in Rosetown, June 11 in Lloydminster, 

June 12 in Swift Current, June 13 in Moose Jaw, June 14 in 

Estevan, June 17 in North Battleford, June 18 in Prince Albert, 

June 19 in La Ronge, June 20 in Nipawin, June 21 in Yorkton, 

June 24 in Saskatoon, and June 25 in Regina. 

 

I have asked the Provincial Action Committee on the Economy 

to organize this portion of the Crown corporation review. In 

response, PACE has established a subcommittee, Talking 

About Saskatchewan Crowns, or TASC, which is organized and 

will run these meetings. 

 

What we have put together is a process which will allow a large 

number of Saskatchewan people to join in an issues-driven 

discussion of the future of our Crowns in Saskatchewan. I am 

comfortable that we have a process which will allow anyone 

who wishes to address this issue to do so. 

 

We have asked TASC to ensure that the discussion taking place 

at these meetings is as wide-ranging as possible and that all 

ideas get a fair hearing. We have in TASC what I think is a blue 

ribbon committee of concerned Saskatchewan individuals who 

are committed to our province and to helping to build our 

economy. 

 

Will Olive, senior partner in the Regina law firm Olive Waller 

Zinkhan and Waller, will serve as chairman of the TASC 

committee. Other members are Frank Proto, president and CEO 

(chief executive officer) of Wascana Energy Incorporated; Gord 

Steininger, national representative of the Communications, 

Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada; and Ray 

Ahenakew, executive director of the Meadow Lake Tribal 

Council. 

 

As well as the public meetings, groups that wish to submit 

written briefs can do so until July 5. In addition, the three main 

political parties in the province have been contacted and have 

been asked to submit briefs. The briefs received from the 

political parties will be attached unedited to the final report of 

the review. 

 

TASC will report the results of the public meetings to a major 

conference on Crown corporations to be held in the fall. As 

well, the report of the meetings will be submitted to CIC for 

inclusion in the final report of the entire review process. Mr. 

Speaker, these meetings and this entire review are important to 

our province and the future of our province. I urge all members 

of this Assembly and all Saskatchewan people to take a very 

active part in this process. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would also 

like to thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement  

as well. And I would also agree with him that the meetings and 

the review process are a very important part of the future of this 

province. 

 

And as I’ve stated earlier, we do have some concerns 

surrounding the open-ended nature of the costs concerning the 

undertaking that’s before us. I think it would have been more 

appropriate to have at least provided some estimate of what this 

may have cost, and also with respect to location, so I won’t 

belabour that point. 

 

But I also want to mention the fact that I was a little bit 

concerned with the Premier’s comments concerning the Crown 

corporations and the review and where he made the statement 

that it was necessary to maintain a viable and healthy Crown 

sector. However, he forgot to mention one very important 

aspect of all of this is that we also have to undertake to make 

sure that the Crown sector remains accountable to the people of 

this province. 

 

So in that respect I think this review could become quite 

relevant to where we’re at in 1996 in terms of reviewing the 

role of Crowns in this provincial economy that we find 

ourselves in right now. And I also note with a great degree of 

interest that we will be able to submit an unedited copy of a 

briefing that we certainly will be presenting, as official 

opposition, with respect to the review of the Crown sector. 

 

And we as official opposition, before I take my seat, guarantee 

the members opposite that we will be doing everything we can 

to make this review process as meaningful as possible to the 

people of this province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, certainly 

we agree, as we mentioned earlier in question period, with the 

review process. We think that it is a step in the right direction in 

terms of providing a check-up, as the Premier has called it, on 

the Crown corporations of Saskatchewan. 

 

We think that indeed the review should include all options, 

including public ownership, including privatization, should be a 

part of the review process. The Premier says that we want only 

privatization. That could be no further . . . it’s very far from the 

truth, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is, is that we believe it 

should be an option, though. We think that in this area of 

deregulation and increasing global competition, that 

government should not be hiding behind their philosophy of 

only state ownership of public utilities. We think that 

privatization is a viable option. It’s something that’s being 

looked at in other provinces, most recently being looked at in 

Manitoba. 

 

I can’t help, Mr. Speaker, but to think back to the dinner that I 

attended not too long ago, and the member from Regina 

Northeast was in attendance as well, when the president and 

CEO of Hewlett-Packard (Canada) talked about privatization 

and talked about the relative value of operations like telephone 

utilities. And he talked about SaskTel specifically as being an 

excellent-run public institution that is worth considerable value 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

to the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

But he also  and the member is, I’m sure, aware of this  he 

also spoke about, is the relative value of that corporation going 

to be still there in the not too distant future, when you consider 

global economies, when you consider deregulation, and you 

consider all of the challenges that are going to be placed before 

public-ownership utilities? 

 

He talked about the fact that we’re into wireless technology 

now, Mr. Speaker, and how wire technology, which is primarily 

what SaskTel provides to the people of Saskatchewan, may 

become obsolete in the not too distant future. And he was 

suggesting that while there is considerable value in SaskTel 

right now, it may not be there in the future. 

 

And that is why . . . And I’m sure the member from Regina 

Northeast recalls that conversation, that speech that he 

provided, and how that should be an option. And that is why, 

Mr. Speaker, we think that it should be an option. That’s why 

we believe that the Crown corporation review is an important 

step in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go on record here today as making a 

prediction. I’m going to go on record as suggesting that I think, 

following this review, the NDP will do it. The NDP will 

privatize SaskTel because they will conclude the same as 

everyone else is concluding, that there is value there but there 

may not be in the future and they may as well get the value out 

of it while they can. 

 

So I think they will do it. I think they’ll do the right thing 

because they know it is the right thing to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, a 

group from the Corning School, five grade 4 and grade 5 

students, along with their teacher, Sharon McCarthy. 

 

I’m sure that what they make up for volume of students, Mr. 

Speaker, they more than make up for in enthusiasm and in 

eagerness to learn. 

 

I would ask everyone to welcome them to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1100) 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, the Speaker would 

like to bring a ruling. 

 

Yesterday the Government House Leader raised a point of order 

respecting the procedural acceptability of several oral questions 

about SaskPower policies and amendments to the SaskPower 

Act that are currently before the House. 

 

Citations from Beauchesne and May were quoted to support the 

contention that questions may not seek information about 

proceedings in a committee which has not reported — quoting 

Beauchesne’s 5th edition, page 133, paragraph 360 — and 

questions may not refer to the consideration of matters by a 

parliamentary committee; Erskine May, 21st edition, page 290. 

 

These citations, however, are not applicable to the 

circumstances of this case where the annual reports and 

financial statements of Crown corporations stand permanently 

referred to a standing committee of the Assembly, the Crown 

Corporations Committee. This is not a case where a specific 

issue has been referred to a committee for investigation and 

report. 

 

A parallel situation occurred yesterday in the House of 

Commons where oral questions dealt at some length with the 

issue of a Revenue Canada ruling on family trusts while the 

Public Accounts Committee was holding hearings on the same 

matter. 

 

It is not the practice of this Assembly to use the grounds that all 

corporations may be reviewed by the Crown Corporations 

Committee to restrict all questions in the House on Crown 

corporations. On the contrary, procedures in the Crown 

Corporations Committee restrict members from debating policy 

matters in that committee. It has long been the rule that the 

proper place to debate the policy of a Crown corporation is in 

the House. Crown corporations are frequently the subject of not 

only oral questions but of written questions, motions, returns, 

and in some instances, questions in Committee of Finance. 

 

One reason there is some confusion about this matter is that it is 

common for ministers to advise members to ask such questions 

in the relevant standing committee or in Committee of the 

Whole or Committee of Finance. And it is procedurally quite 

acceptable for the minister to answer in that way. However that 

does not in itself make the question out of order. 

 

The second part of the point of order was that oral questions 

dealing with legislation currently before the House are not in 

order in oral question period. It is true that oral questions 

relating to specific clauses and details of a Bill may be ruled out 

of order. As such, questions may be more appropriately 

addressed in Committee of the Whole. But it has never been the 

practice to prevent oral questions from dealing with the 

principle of a Bill or the public policy matters reflected in it. If 

such questions were prohibited, it would make it possible for 

members to prevent a sensitive issue from being raised in 

question period merely by introducing a Bill relating to the 

matter and letting it sit on the order paper. 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

I have carefully reviewed the transcript from Thursday’s 

question period and find that both the questions and the 

answers were in order. The questions themselves addressed 

matters of policy and are most appropriate to be asked in 

question period and thus the point of order is not well taken. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: — I table the answer to question 98. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 98 is tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 87  An Act 

to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 

rise once again and address Bill 87 which is the proposed Act to 

amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2). 

 

When I was up a few days ago, I made a couple of clear points 

on this Bill. It’s my hope that the members opposite will 

seriously consider them and start getting back on track and get 

back to the job of serving our families before they serve their 

family of Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my previous remarks, I pointed out to the 

members opposite that this Bill is very much a concern. It’s a 

concern because it proposes to give SaskPower more powers to 

spend, invest, and make deals with taxpayers’ money without 

the government making any changes to our badly tattered 

system of accountability. It makes sense that if those who wield 

power are given more powers and controls, those who serve as 

their watchdogs should also be given more tools to ensure those 

powers are being well used in the public’s interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is precisely what is not happening here. The 

members opposite may wish to say that this Bill is just a matter 

of bringing SaskPower into line with the other major Crowns. 

That seems benign or nice enough. But, Mr. Speaker, it brushes 

a serious problem posed by our tattered system of 

accountability out of sight. As we all know, a problem out of 

sight shouldn’t be a problem cast from our memory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in this province has a pretty long 

memory for what happened in the Devine era. I think everyone 

has a pretty good memory for the Blakeney era where the 

Crown corporations got rich while the rest of our families 

didn’t fare as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, simply put, this government deserves no more 

powers for any of its Crowns until it shows to the people of 

Saskatchewan that it intends to use those powers wisely. To 

continue to ask for more powers for this Crown or any other, 

without showing any willingness to update or improve the 

system of accountability, is a sign that this government does not 

intend to see these powers used wisely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower is a fine example of how to misuse 

powers. Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite get what they ask 

for in this Bill, I don’t believe these powers will be used wisely. 

I think many other people in this province also have their 

doubts. 

 

If SaskPower gets these powers, the man in charge of deciding 

to spend, sell, or deal with personal property, property I might 

add that belongs to the taxpayers, will be none other than Mr. 

Jack Messer himself. That, Mr. Speaker, is a concern to all 

Saskatchewan people. The fact that he would be wielding these 

powers or playing a major role in doing so is a sign this 

government cannot be trusted to use these powers responsibly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they want to give him free rein to spend money 

that rightfully belongs to the taxpayers however he chooses, and 

this government has no concerns about letting this happen. 

They have no concern because they are sure he will have to go 

to his board for approval for corporate plans. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one has to wonder whether this person can 

be counted on to represent our best interest. One has to wonder 

what sort of control a board could have over this individual if a 

Bill like this is passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say one has to wonder, because there’s no 

chance to make sure. The people of this province witnessed on 

several occasions Mr. Messer’s poor judgement with respect to 

spending quite small sums of money. When he got into the 

president’s office at SaskPower, he felt the digs were a little too 

drab and he blew a bunch of money with renovations. These 

elaborate renovations were not necessary, especially in a time of 

restraint. If the president’s washroom was good enough for 

George Hill and his wealthy tastes, then it surely should have 

been good enough for Jack Messer. 

 

Mr. Messer held no concern for the fact our province had the 

highest per capita deficit and debt in the doubt . . . in the 

country. He had no concern for the fact that a significant 

portion of the debt was held by the corporation he was entrusted 

to administer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he demonstrated that he could not be counted 

upon to make decisions on small things which would benefit 

the people of Saskatchewan. Why then should we count on him 

to handle greater responsibilities? 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously the board wasn’t quick enough to stop 

Mr. Messer on that one. 

 

They were no quicker at stopping him when he wanted a new 

leased car. Mr. Messer eventually had to return the fancy new 

Lexus and have a more reasonable car during the last several  



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

years. Now we hear that Jack Messer has rented a new car, and 

this time it’s a $40,000-plus Toyoto Avalon luxury car.  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister said yesterday in this House 

that Mr. Messer had to go to the board, and they sure were 

successful at stopping this waste of money. Not only were they 

too slow on the mark the first time, but they didn’t remember 

that first lesson. As a consequence, taxpayers and power 

consumers will be catching the bus or driving beaten-up cars, 

confident in the fact that they are helping pay for Jack Messer’s 

car while they can hardly afford their tax and power bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those same taxpayers, I believe, hardly want to see 

Jack Messer given more authority to spend money as it’s being 

proposed here in The Power Corporation Amendment Act. Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Messer’s use of taxpayers’ dollars or his 

management of taxpayers’ assets is questionable in yet other 

ways. During the restructuring period when many unionized 

employees and contractors faced lay-offs, we discovered that 

Jack Messer and his other NDP faithful, Carole Bryant, both 

received healthy raises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now we can count on Jack Messer to use these 

powers responsibly when during a time of downsizing and 

restructuring and closure of rural offices, he gets a raise for 

himself. What he should have done is shown some leadership 

and scaled back on his own salary and perks. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Messer is probably earning in excess of 10 times the average 

per capita income in this province, and that, Mr. Speaker, is 

offensive to many taxpayers. 

 

While Jack Messer received his raise, Mr. Speaker, others lost 

out badly. In my constituency, we lost at least one Power office. 

But more importantly, we also lost the rural underground 

distribution program. This program provided safe power to farm 

families all across the province. And as a replacement to 

burying overhead power lines, SaskPower is sending out 

stickers and letters reminding people to beware of power lines. 

That’s hardly a replacement. With the loss of this program went 

many jobs that provided income to rural contractors and to rural 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the minister say the boards will ensure 

good decisions are made with additional powers and keep an 

eye on Mr. Messer when such poor decisions are being made 

with more limited powers they already have . . . with the more 

limited powers. Mr. Speaker, this Bill will give SaskPower 

more powers without providing us with more tools to help us 

fulfil our role of holding the government and SaskPower 

responsible for their actions. I’ve said before that this is a 

matter of great concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why this is a matter of great 

concern involves reporting. SaskPower will now only be 

constrained by its board as to how it spends our money. If there 

is no limit on transactions, then at least it is important that some 

information on these is reported to the Assembly and the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government and Jack Messer have already 

shown a great deal of disregard for reporting information to the 

public. Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, at least some five 

subsidiaries of SaskPower do not provide the Assembly with 

financial statements. This is the most basic tool of 

accountability, and without it, we as an opposition are put in a 

difficult position. Without such basic information, we cannot 

defend the interests of the taxpayers in this province. 

 

There are other types of information that should be reported. 

For example, Mr. Speaker, while Jack Messer has a penchant 

for expensive things and salary increases, he also has a 

penchant for hiring consultants. We discovered last year that 

SaskPower hired a consulting firm called Towers Perrin to help 

them in the restructuring process by analysing the corporation. 

The consulting contract was reportedly valued at $10 million. 

Despite the efforts of the media to find out how much the 

contract was worth and who received subcontracts, none of this 

information was ever released to the public. 

 

This information may also include studies that could prove 

useful for the new Crown corporations review that the minister 

responsible for CIC is undertaking with the public. I think that 

some of the information should be released, provided it doesn’t 

reveal technical secrets of the corporation. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower and this government have not 

given us anything at all. We have no idea how much this will 

cost or . . . how much it cost or who received the money. I 

believe we deserve to know these things. If this government 

wants free rein to let SaskPower management spend our money 

however they wish, we at least deserve more thorough reporting 

from this government as to how our money is risked and spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other examples of where bringing 

SaskPower on par with Crowns like SaskTel would be a 

mistake. Last year, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned yesterday, 

SaskTel had bought several cable franchises in the United 

Kingdom that involved obligations to the turn of the century of 

close to $50 million. These were eventually sold. 

 

Not only did SaskTel buy this, but it was reported in the British 

press as negotiating with a struggling telecommunications 

company to purchase British Rail . . . Telecom, which is a 

British Crown corporation. The cost of the deal ranged between 

300 million and 600 million Canadian. Fortunately this never 

materialized as a larger British electronics firm was the 

successful bidder. 

 

The details of what happened aside, Mr. Speaker, this example 

shows what could happen if this Bill is passed. SaskTel was 

able to do all of these things without the taxpayers knowing 

because it had the same powers which the government proposes 

to give SaskPower in this Bill. Imagine that our accountability 

system is so slack in this province that our Crown corporations 

can try to buy Crown corporations in other countries without so 

much as a word being said by the Crown or the government to 

the taxpayers. That is a shameful situation, Mr. Speaker. By 

giving SaskPower these additional powers, the members 

opposite just want to extend this problem rather than have it 

rectified. 

 

(1115) 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

I would suggest, as I have and will continue to do, that major 

transactions of the Crowns should be placed under greater 

control. The government should adopt more recommendations 

of the Gass Commission and ensure this House has more 

pre-action controls; have the government issue a 

government-wide, comprehensive budget, and follow it up at 

the end of the year with a report as the auditor suggested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also suggest that the minister responsible 

for this Bill quickly refer to the auditor’s last report on CIC. He 

suggests that Crowns and boards of Crowns are not 

communicating properly. More importantly, a number of them 

are not providing the government with the information it needs 

to make proper management decisions and even control the 

projects. 

 

Not only do we in the opposition not have an adequate 

accountability controls, but this government has inadequate 

management controls. And that is scary, and it should be dealt 

with before the Bill is passed. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, if this government wants to give us a sign 

that these powers will be used responsibly then I would say, 

start hiring Crown corporation CEOs that are professional 

managers rather than professional politicians. 

 

I’ll now take my place, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to 

questioning the minister on this Bill in committee. 

 

Mr. Trew:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to briefly talk 

about this SaskPower Bill. But I guess I want to address the 

member from Thunder Creek’s comments. He’s talking about 

the Crowns and the inability of the opposition to get basic 

answers from SaskTel. 

 

As a member of the Crown Corporations Committee that met 

yesterday morning dealing with . . . I said SaskTel; I meant 

SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday morning Crown 

Corporations Committee met from 9 o’clock in the morning 

until 11 o’clock in the morning. Jack Messer was there, the 

minister responsible was there. The opposition were there and 

were asking some questions. Not one question asked was 

refused to be answered; answers were provided for every 

question asked. 

 

I don’t know where this accountability or lack of accountability 

comes from. Look at the Provincial Auditor’s report. We’ve got 

. . . SaskPower has a clean auditor’s report. Now where is the 

nonsense about inadequate management control, the innuendo, 

going after a chief executive officer who cannot stand in this 

legislature and defend himself. I think that is just 

unconscionable action. 

 

I think that what we see, the irresponsibility of the Liberal 

opposition, particularly the member from Thunder Creek, Mr. 

Speaker, is simply yet more of the same. What the member for 

Thunder Creek did with respect to Crown Life, he’s now trying 

to do with SaskPower Corporation. 

 

This Bill is eminently reasonable. It brings SaskPower into a 

more reasonable operating position vis-a-vis other power corps, 

brings us up to 1996, Mr. Speaker, as we prepare to run the 

corporation, the government, the operations of the people, into 

the next century. I will be delighted to take my place when the 

time comes, standing, if that’s what’s required, voting in 

support of this legislation. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

appropriate that we pair this Bill up with Bill No. 38, since they 

both amend The Power Corporation Act. I find it more than a 

little curious that this particular amendment was not included in 

the first Bill. I don’t mean to be suspicious, Mr. Speaker, but 

this government seems to have underhanded motives for so 

many of its decisions. Was there a reason that they chose to 

separate the two? 

 

In any case, this Bill seems to be as unfair to taxpayers as Bill 

No. 38. Let me qualify this. Bill No. 87 may possibly be even 

worse because it not only gives SaskPower more power, it gives 

SaskPower more freedom to spend taxpayers’ money. What 

kind of a government would agree to do this? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in an article in the Leader-Post the Energy 

minister was quoted as saying: “Deregulation and removal of 

trade barriers means swapping, selling, buying power.” He said 

that in some cases it could prevent SaskPower from entering 

into some of these arrangements that can then generate net 

profits for the corporation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how very thoughtful of this government. 

They are so worried about missing out on a chance to make 

money for the grateful taxpayers of this province that they are 

willing to introduce legislation that gives them more control 

over our money. What kind of twisted logic is this? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that same article the Energy minister said he 

does not believe there will be less public accountability if this 

Bill is passed. Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that there will be 

less accountability to the public, and I also believe that the 

government is fully aware of this. 

 

What they are proposing is to let SaskPower pass by the current 

rule that requires them to go through orders in council to 

receive approval for expenditures. The public can access these 

orders in council shortly after the government has made a 

decision. If SaskPower is allowed to bypass this stage, when 

will the public get a chance to hear about these expenditures? 

I’m sorry, but annual reports and freedom of information Acts 

do not hold the same level of public accountability as orders in 

council. 

 

This way too, if SaskPower makes a poor choice, the 

government can wash their hands of the situation. They can 

look to the taxpayers and whine that they didn’t know about 

these expenditures and can point the finger at someone else. We 

all know this is an art form that they have perfected. If it’s not 

the feds or the former Tory administration, it might as well be 

anyone else but the cabinet. 

 

Why should the taxpayers trust that SaskPower will not make 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

bad decisions with public money? Well I would like to think 

that the SaskPower executive is filled with honest, 

hard-working people and this would never be a problem. At the 

same time though, the president is quite clearly a political 

patronage appointment from the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this Bill gets passed, will the government take 

responsibility for the choices made at the Crown corporation 

level? Because the taxpayers will want to hold someone 

accountable, and when it deals specifically with their tax 

dollars, they have every right to expect accountability from this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are growing more and more sceptical about 

government spending. Every time this government hides their 

spending behind a piece of legislation, they are digging the hole 

a little bit deeper. Governing should not be about secrets and 

hidden choices; it should be about open, accountable decisions 

that are in the best interests of the public. And I don’t believe 

that the changes outlined in this Bill are in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the government is solving this problem the 

wrong way. The government says that the current process for 

funding approval doesn’t work because sometimes it takes the 

cabinet two or three weeks to sign the order in council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it takes two or three weeks to sign an order, 

something is wrong. Either the cabinet needs more time to look 

at the proposal before making a recommendation, which could 

be a positive thing for taxpayers, or they are too disorganized to 

make a decision. If that’s the case, maybe the procedure in 

cabinet needs to be refined. 

 

What is not acceptable is the solution proposed by the 

government in this Bill. Mr. Speaker, it is our job as opposition 

to hold this government accountable for its bad decisions, but it 

has also become obvious that we have to speak for the people 

of this province. The government has long since stopped 

considering that to be a part of their job. They will speak up for 

Crown corporation presidents or for their own self-interests, but 

they have no interest in speaking up for the very people who 

elected them to office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for such a short, straightforward piece of 

legislation, this Bill is highly controversial. We have many 

questions for this government and we very much look forward 

to their answer in Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Yes, I just want to make a few brief remarks, 

Mr. Speaker, because I’m very deeply offended by the remarks 

that we’ve just heard from the opposition parties. And I 

consider them less than forthright and less than frank in their 

appraisal of what this legislation is all about. 

 

And I want to say, when the member from Humboldt talks 

about the public having every right to expect accountability and 

to say that the government is hiding expenditures behind this 

legislation, that that is not in fact what is happening at all with 

this legislation. It’s an easy punch to throw in this legislative 

Chamber to say that, but it simply is not true. 

 

As was mentioned by my colleague from Regina just a few 

moments ago, earlier this week in the Public Accounts 

Committee of the Government of Saskatchewan, Tuesday 

morning, the auditor’s report was given for SaskPower 

Corporation, and it indicated that it was entirely in keeping with 

all of the expectations that the auditors had in their 

examination. There was nothing hidden; there was nothing done 

that was inappropriate. In fact they actually commended 

SaskPower for putting some of their projections and their 

expectations in terms of their operations for the future into the 

annual report. 

 

And so to indulge in a smear campaign and a campaign of 

innuendo and insinuation about the frankness and the 

forthcomingness and the honesty of this government is less than 

acceptable in this House, and it does not behove responsible 

opposition to engage in such tactics. And I want it said on the 

record that the opposition’s remarks are not an accurate 

reflection of what this legislation is all about at all. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1130) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

 

The Chair:  Will the minister introduce his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. My officials 

today are the same as when the Bill was last being considered 

by the committee: Lily Stonehouse, the assistant deputy 

minister; and Melodie Olineck, the department’s liaison with 

SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology). 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 

and welcome to your officials. 

 

It seems like a long time since April 24; I think it’s been a year, 

but it was only a month and a bit. We were discussing a number 

of issues the last opportunity, Mr. Minister, around the board 

members that make up the SIAST board. And there are a couple 

of things that have come to mind since your comments of that 

day. 

 

The question I would ask is if you could give me an explanation 

around what is the selection criteria for members of the board. I 

know I asked you the question previously around whether 

you’re posting them or whether you indeed advertise that there 

is a position open. But what I would like to find out from you is 

the specific criteria if I was to inquire of your department 

whether or not I would be eligible to be a member of the SIAST 

board. 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The hon. member, Mr. Chair, would 

probably not be acceptable because he’s a sitting member of 

this legislature. So I hate to disappoint him like that, but he’s 

not on the list. But almost everybody else is, if they have 

something to offer to the board. 

 

We look at the geography of Saskatchewan and we try and get a 

fair representation from around the province. We try to achieve 

some sort of gender balance. We try to ensure that aboriginal 

people are represented. We look for people who have an 

interest in the subject of training and have a background that 

would equip them to come to the work of the board with an area 

of expertise or an area of interest which would enable them to 

participate constructively in the work of the board. 

 

These are not criteria that are written down anywhere. But as I 

told the member the other day, we are considering fresh 

appointments to the board, and these are the things that are on 

my mind and on the minds of my senior advisers as we consider 

who could be considered for appointment, who would indeed 

make a positive contribution to the work of the board. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You indicated that 

you try to take into account gender, and I’m wondering in terms 

of the current make-up, what are the number of males, females. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I’m advised that at the moment five out 

of the twelve board members are women. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Another question around the members that 

make up the board. Currently, are there any people that 

represent the disabled or another visible minority other than, as 

you’ve indicated, that you strive for aboriginal representation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The answer to both those questions is 

no, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. What criteria is in place for the 

selection of the chairperson of the board? Does the board select 

from within, or does the minister and the department have 

control of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The Act requires that the minister 

appoint the Chair. And coincidentally, we are in the process of 

trying to select a Chair now. Again there’s no formal criteria. 

But my disposition is to make an appointment from existing 

board members. 

 

My predisposition is to appoint from existing board members 

for the reason, which I consider to be a compelling reason, that 

they’re familiar with the work of the board. They’re not 

someone brand-new who would have to go through quite a 

period of orientation to be able to do that job. I’ve been 

examining the suitability, the background, of the existing board, 

with a view to appointing a Chair from that complement. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  You indicated last day that the number of 

terms that a person may serve on the board I believe was two, 

and they were each three years in length. Is it common, Mr. 

Minister, for a person to have served two terms and to be off 

the board for awhile . . . are they then eligible once again to be 

a member of the board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That’s a very interesting question, Mr. 

Chair. And it’s one that has been on my mind because there are, 

in our province, a number of people who have served two terms 

on the board and who have been off the board now, and that 

very question of their eligibility for reappointment has been on 

my mind. 

 

I have taken advice on the question. And my advice is that after 

a person has served the two terms and has therefore resigned 

from the board, that person would in fact be eligible for 

reappointment in the future. Now we’re always most 

comfortable in these situations if we have some precedent to 

point to in . . . reappoint in these circumstances, in 

circumstances like this. And again my advice is that there are no 

precedents. In other words, there is no one in the province who, 

having serving two terms on the board and therefore not being 

eligible for reappointment, has in fact been reappointed after a 

period off the board. 

 

That’s not to say that it won’t happen in the future, because 

under both the old Act and the new Act it’s quite permissible 

for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to appoint someone 

who had been resigned from the board or removed from the 

board because they had served the two terms. 

 

So I can say to the member that I’m not contemplating 

appointing someone who had previously served two terms, but 

there would be nothing preventing me from doing that if I 

chose. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you for that answer. I appreciate the 

final comments. 

 

Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated the selection of the chairperson 

is usually from within, and I think that that’s an excellent idea, 

to have some continuity there. 

 

Is there a vice-chairperson, and is the same procedure followed 

by yourself? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Again the appointments are made by the 

. . . they’re both made by the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

 both the Chair and the Vice-Chair  and there has in fact in 

the past been both. 

 

We are in a situation now where the previous Chair has 

resigned and where the Vice-Chair has been the Acting Chair. 

And in the appointments that will be made, just probably while 

this legislature is still sitting, an order in council will be passed 

that will designate a Chair and a Vice-Chair. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, last 

day we were discussing the rate of remuneration for board 

members, and I think you indicated that was around $155. My 

question is that with the advent of conference calls  I’m sure 

that the members of the board of directors probably will 

undertake such calls  my question then would be, is, if they 

do undertake a conference call and they spend a significant 

amount of time, and I don’t know what that would be in terms 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

of time commitment, but if it’s a great portion of the day  two 

or three hours  is that considered a meeting? And would there 

be remuneration for that meeting then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Our understanding of the situation is as 

follows. I mention two points. First of all, there are a fairly 

large number of such calls; and secondly, the members of the 

board don’t put in a bill for them, so they’re not paid for them. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Could you explain the role that 

the executive committee has within the framework of the 

administration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, the board 

meets once a month as a rule, except not in the summer. So 

normal schedule of meetings would be 10 per year. They have 

an executive committee that has a number of responsibilities, 

and I think I can fairly describe them in the following terms. 

 

The executive committee will ensure the execution of board 

decisions and board policies to the extent that that’s necessary 

in between board meetings; that their name would suggest that 

— they are the executive committee — they will deal with any 

decisions that have to be made between board meetings that 

doesn’t require the convening of the whole board. And they will 

perform a similar function over the summer months when the 

board has no sitting scheduled. 

 

Now it’s a very difficult decision to answer because in all 

organizations these executive committees perform a somewhat 

different role. And I haven’t been on the inside of the operation 

of the SIAST board to know just exactly how this committee 

functions, but my answer is based upon what I do know about 

the operation of the SIAST board and my knowledge of 

organizations generally. 

 

I think this would, to summarize, not be unlike executive 

committees in other organizations that have an executive 

committee of their board of directors. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll group a number 

of questions together and allow you to respond to them, and it’s 

around the executive committee. My question would be  in 

light of your answer  questions would be, how many people 

comprise that executive committee? 

 

I assume that they are all chosen from the board of directors. 

And my question would be, is the appointment of a person to 

the executive committee your responsibility or is it chosen from 

within the committee? In other words, is it similar to the 

selection of the chairperson? 

 

And then the last point around the executive committee would 

be, when that committee meets to do the business in between 

meetings, or in the summer as you indicated, are they then also 

eligible for additional remuneration beyond the 10 meetings 

that they would be attending with the entire board present? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I think 

that I’m able to give accurate information on this but I put a 

caveat on, that we’re not absolutely certain. 

 

We believe that the number of people on the executive 

committee is four. It consists of the Chair, the Vice-Chair, and 

two other members who are selected by the board itself from 

among its number. So they are in fact all board members, and 

they are paid for their work as members of the executive 

committee on the same basis as if they were going to a meeting 

of the board of directors itself. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  If you would have the statistics from last 

year, for instance, what would be the number of times that that 

executive committee would have met in a 12-month period, 

more or less? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I’m sorry that I don’t have 

that information. We don’t have it in our briefing material. I can 

however, and I do undertake to the member that we will, inquire 

and find out, say, for the last fiscal year how many times the 

executive committee met, as the member has referred to in his 

question. 

 

Mr. Krawetz: .Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 

commitment. When the executive committee meets and is 

conducting business, you’ve indicated that it is to carry the 

board between full meetings. What powers does this executive 

committee have? What has been granted to this committee by 

the board? Is it allowed to spend monies? Is it allowed to make 

decisions? What would be its mandate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  As I indicated to the member, Mr. 

Chair, in a previous answer, I am not an insider so far as the 

operation of that board is concerned, so I don’t know precisely 

how it operates compared to other organizations. The member 

himself has been a member of a very large organization and will 

have some experience with executive committees. 

 

The Act is helpful to this extent; the Act says that “The 

executive committee may exercise any powers of the board that 

are delegated to it by resolution of the board . . .” 

 

And that’s as far as I can go with the answer. I do not 

personally know what sorts of delegations have been made by 

resolution of the board. If the member wants to, I’m quite 

happy to obtain that information and send it to him. But as I 

stand here today, I’m not able to give any further information. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  No, that would be fine, Mr. Minister. What 

I’ll look at is the clause that you’ve indicated that indicates the 

resolution is part of the board’s commitment. 

 

As most committees operating or as most board operate, they 

create additional committees to allow for special committees to 

take care of specific functions. How many such committees 

exist within the framework of SIAST, and what would these 

committees . . . what would be their tasks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  We know that the board has an audit 

committee, and it’s our understanding that the board from time 

to time creates ad hoc committees in respect of a particular  



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

matter that is before it. So far as we know however, the audit 

committee and the executive committee would be the only 

standing committees of the board. It may be that there are more, 

but we’re not aware of that today. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. The amendments that are 

proposed indicates that the, I think it’s referred to as the 

secretariat, would be the coordinating unit I think now of all 

four campuses. Because it’s now mentioned in the Act as the 

secretariat, has its role changed when it existed as part of The 

Institute Act, or is the secretariat’s function still basically the 

same as it was other than now that it’s described in the 

amendments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There is to be no change in the function 

of the secretariat. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  This is a financial question and maybe it 

would be better under estimates, but in terms of management, in 

terms of the secretariat itself, what monies are expended to run 

the secretariat? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, it’s a 

difficult question to answer because the secretariat’s budget 

includes major expenditures that are not related to the 

secretariat. If the member were to look at the department’s 

budget  or at least the SIAST budget  you would find that 

the secretariat carries the cost for the rental of all of the 

facilities that SIAST occupies in respect of all of its campuses, 

or institutes as they’re called under the new Act. 

 

And they also carry a lot . . . I think all of the salary costs. At 

least they have a very large salary element that is . . . that 

pertains to the whole of the institution, and not simply the 

secretariat. And in addition, they have a . . . they carry the 

budget for technology — I’m struggling for the right word here 

— the equipment and the information technology of SIAST. 

 

Looking at their budget, there is a . . . the total budget for the 

secretariat is $21 million out of a total of $109 million budget 

for SIAST itself. But of that 21 million, 14 million is included 

as payments to SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation), and those would be for the most part the facility 

costs. And salaries and benefits are over 3 million, and services 

are over 2 million. And that indicates of course that they’re 

carrying expenditures in the secretariat budget that are for larger 

issues than merely the operation of the secretariat itself. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you be able 

to provide a copy of that breakdown for me? Okay, thanks. 

 

Next area that I’d like to touch on briefly, Mr. Minister, is 

around the chief executive officer of SIAST. What is the criteria 

that is used for the appointment — and I know that you have 

not too recently appointed a new chief executive officer — 

what process was followed to secure that person? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, the current chief executive is 

Art Knight. And the appointment of the chief executive officer 

is a major function of the board of directors. The appointment is 

made by the board. 

In the case of Mr. Knight, I think Mr. Knight’s appointment is a 

very good example of how the process works. The board struck 

a committee which included members of the board, some 

members of the board itself, as well as representatives of each 

of the four campuses or institutes of SIAST. They advertised 

extensively. They received applications. They reviewed 

applications and short listed and interviewed quite a number of 

 it is our understanding anyway  quite a number of 

potential candidates, and then made their selection. And it was 

a function of, in the final analysis, a function of the board of 

directors. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you be able 

to provide us the range at which the chief executive officer is 

paid, the salary range for payment? 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I might mention before I 

answer the member’s question that Dan Perrins, the deputy 

minister of the department, has joined us. 

 

We’re not certain what salary is paid to Mr. Knight. We do 

know that it was negotiated between the board and Mr. Knight 

and that it is a salary. It is not a range. It is for a specific 

amount. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. With leave, to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Seated in the 

east gallery, I noticed a young man just arrive here not too long 

ago, Mr. Gille Labarge. The Assembly would be interested to 

know he’s an enthusiastic, hard-working SIAST student, so he’s 

arrived at a rather opportune time as we’re looking at Bill No. 3 

here, the Act respecting SIAST. 

 

He’s also . . . I don’t have to say, because of his presence here, 

he has a keen interest in politics as well. And I know him to be 

a hard-working volunteer on campaigns in the past. I know the 

member from Wood River has appreciated his assistance in that 

regard. So I would just ask everybody here today just to join in 

acknowledging him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 3 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. In 

the area of collective bargaining, Mr. Minister, when you refer 

to units, what would constitute appropriate units for the purpose 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

of collective bargaining? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  There are two bargaining units that we 

find at SIAST, both of which have been defined by the Labour 

Relations Board as the law prescribes. Speaking generally, one 

of the units is for faculty and the other is for administration, or 

employees involved in the administration of the institutes. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  A further question regarding collective 

bargaining, Mr. Minister. What positions are not considered as 

employees within the purposes of bargaining at SIAST? Are 

there employees there that are out of scope that are not 

considered part of the collective bargaining units that you just 

described? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The bargaining units were defined in 

the old Act in section 14. They are not defined in the new Act. 

They can be dealt with at the collective bargaining table, or they 

can be dealt with by the Labour Relations Board. 

 

The old Act  that is, the Act that’s presently in existence as 

we discuss the new Bill today  describes one unit as the 

academic staff members, and the second as all employees of the 

institute other than academic staff members. 

 

Now the exemptions, the out-of-scope people, are the president 

or the chief executive officer, the vice-president, the executive 

director, principal, assistant principal, dean, registrar, controller, 

auditor, director of human resources, director of computer 

systems, the treasurer, and the senior policy adviser. Now that 

was the management group under the old Act. So that’s how 

it’s been. 

 

Those exemptions were spelled out in subsection (7) of section 

14 of the old Act. So I believe I’m correct, as I stand here, that 

those are the people who are out of scope at SIAST now. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  If you could clarify for me, Mr. Minister, I’d 

like to refer to the amendment, Bill No. 3, clause 34, parts (b) 

and (c). When section (b) or clause (b) refers to . . . it indicates 

that: 

 

the Public Service Commission . . . may transfer any 

employees in the public service within the meaning of The 

Public Service Act to and cause them to become 

employees of SIAST . . . 

 

Could you indicate what that clause is actually stating? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Those sections or those clauses are not 

considered to serve any particular purpose now but were put 

into the Act in 1987 when SIAST was set up as a institute 

separate from the department. The member will know that prior 

to that SIAST was, for all intents and purposes, part of the 

department. And when they were set up as a separate entity, 

then the people who were employed there had to be transferred 

from the status of being employees of government to become 

employees of SIAST. And so clause (b) was put in that Act so 

that the Public Service Commission could move the people 

over, transfer them, and cause them to become employees of 

SIAST. 

We haven’t taken those sections out, but they will serve no 

purpose that we can think of after this Act is passed. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, and 

to your staff, I appreciate your answers, both in April and today. 

 

I would suggest, in our discussions around the actual clauses of 

the Bill, that when I read clause no. 32, you pointed that out 

before, and I note that you have not proposed that House 

amendment regarding that clause. And I think it’s quite 

ambiguous the way it reads. 

 

And I look at the preposition “it” as it is used in clause no. 32, 

and I believe that that “it” has reference, as you indicated 

before, to of course the Lieutenant Governor in Council. It is a 

person; it is not an it. And I would suggest that our caucus 

would have no problem with the House amendment that would 

correct clause 32 to read . . . by replacing that word. And I 

know you had suggested that might be a possibility, but you 

have not indicated that today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I think that we won’t amendment. I 

think the meaning of section 32 is clear. We had proposed an 

amendment to another section, and we tacked on this 

amendment. But we don’t have a separate one prepared to file 

with the Clerk and to handle in the way that the rules of this 

place requires, so we’re content with section 32 as it is even 

though it is subject to the criticism that the hon. member raises. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  We’ll leave it at that, Mr. Minister, and again, 

thank you for your comments regarding the help you’ve 

provided. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The Chair:  I invite the minister to move that we report the 

Bill without amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before doing 

that I would like to thank my officials for the help that they’ve 

given me today, and they have been a considerable help, as well 

as for the previous time the committee considered this Bill in 

April. And I thank them for their excellent help, which is 

something that I’ve come to expect from them. 

 

I would like, Mr. Chair, to move that the committee report the 

Bill without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 48  An Act to amend 

The Animal Identification Act 

 

The Chair:  Minister, I’ll invite you to introduce your 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, with me today is assistant deputy 

minister, Terry Scott, and the manager of livestock operations, 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

Merv Ross. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, welcome to you and your officials today, and I look 

forward to some progressive dialogue with Bill No. 48. 

 

I would first of all say about the Bill that there are some 

positive changes as a result of the amendments; but also once 

again there are some problems created through the regulations. 

 

If we could, Mr. Minister, I’d just like to briefly ask you a 

question  if there was anything in particular that prompted the 

amendments to this Act and in particular the amendments that 

are brought forward here today. 

 

(1215) 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  One of the main things that we tried to 

accomplish and are trying to accomplish, which is something 

that it’s not always easy to do, but that is to eliminate paper 

flow. You as a farmer and I as a farmer know how much paper 

can drive you crazy. And this is just a step to . . . one of the big 

things it does, it just cuts the paper flow down. 

 

With lifetime brands, you don’t have to renew every four years, 

cuts administration down. And also we’ve got supporting letters 

from the industry: livestock growers, cattle feeders, and the . . . 

(inaudible) . . . So the industry has been requesting. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. Could you share those 

letters with us as well? 

 

Just regarding then . . . And I guess I agree with you that any 

time we can cut paper down, which inevitably leads to less 

bureaucracy, that’s what we want to try and do, and to see that 

we have a system that works on track, but it is also fair. 

 

The question I might have for you, Mr. Minister, would be . . . 

when you talk about a delegate or a director, and it talks in the 

subsection about “designated by the minister,” of course done 

through regulations . . . which also begs the question then. 

When the director has the ability to delegate his authorities 

down to someone else, I’m wondering if that’s an advisable 

option for the director himself to have. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think it is advisable because there 

can be situations where the director may not be around in order 

to carry out his duties. He gets sick or . . . I mean there are a 

number of reasons. And in cases where there is a need to act 

quickly, then by a simple phone call, a director could delegate 

someone else to fulfil his role. So I don’t think there is any 

possibility of abusing power here; it’s just a matter of making 

sure that if, in an emergency situation, if it comes up, then 

somebody else can fulfil the role of the director. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Now the director will be appointed by the 

minister. Can you tell me then what background, what type of 

qualifications that that person would have to have in order for 

you to appoint him. 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the person would have to have a 

knowledge of the industry  of course that would be number 

one  and also an ability to administer the regulations and to 

have a working knowledge of the legislation, so somebody that 

knows the industry plus is a good administrator. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Minister. That would seem most 

appropriate. However when the director himself can delegate 

his authorities down, is there any parameters as to whom that 

person can delegate his authorities to? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The same would apply. We have people 

who work with the director, you know, on a daily basis who 

know the industry and who also have a knowledge of the Act 

and the regulations and how to administer them. So if there was 

a situation . . . and let me just say this, that I think it would be 

very rare, on a rare occasion that the director would actually 

have to delegate. But the same would apply that he’d have to 

have a knowledge . . . the person would have a knowledge of 

the industry and of the Act and the regulations and how to 

administer them. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Is there anything in the regulations that lays 

out the qualifications that you would use for a guideline to 

appoint that director? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, there’s nothing in the regulations 

that spells out how to appoint the director. But the 

appointments are . . . I mean the ministers in many parts of 

government appoint many people and often the deputy minister 

acts on behalf of the minister. So nothing in the Act but . . . I 

mean in order to have the office carried out in a manner that it 

was helpful to the industry, obviously you want to put 

somebody there, and the criteria would be that the minister 

would appoint somebody who’s knowledgeable. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Sorry, Mr. Minister, I didn’t quite hear the 

first part of your question with the discussion that was coming 

from your whip there. Did I hear you say that there was nothing 

in the regulations that lays out any guidelines for who you 

would pick to be a director? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That is correct. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Minister, so if there is no . . . Do you not 

think it would be appropriate then that there would be some 

guidelines laid out in the Act itself as to who would have the 

qualifications to be a director? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, I don’t think that’s necessary. And I 

will send across with the page the letters to the association and 

. . . that’s what you asked for earlier, letters that show of 

support for the Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move we report progress and ask 

for leave to sit again. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The committee reported progress on Bill No. 48. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Intergovernmental Affairs 

Vote 30 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  All of these people have been 

introduced before, but allow me to refresh our memories. To 

my right is the deputy minister, Greg Marchildon. To my left, 

and occupying the chair normally occupied by the Premier, is 

Paul Osborne, executive director of intergovernmental relations. 

Behind me is Melinda Gorrill, director of administration. Lynn 

Oliver  whom I’m not 100 per cent certain was here the last 

time  Lynn Oliver sits behind Mr. Osborne. She’s the senior 

adviser, information technology and telecommunications. 

 

(1230) 

 

Item 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to 

your officials, Mr. Minister. The last time we were up, the other 

member asked for a package of information. I was wondering if 

that package was completed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It’s not entirely done. Two or three 

of the questions they are still searching for information on. It’s 

one of the problems . . . I’ll say this in passing; it is not in any 

sense a criticism of how work is done or how you do your 

work. But the package of questions does take quite awhile. And 

one of the limitations of the system is that since it’s all got to be 

done before you get any of it, one of the difficulties with this 

system is you tend to wait quite awhile for any of the 

information. 

 

One of the options would be perhaps to give us these packages 

well in advance of the session next time. It takes weeks to do 

this, and these folks who are here assisting me today have spent 

a lot of time on it. One or two of the questions do take a lot of 

time, and that’s one of the problems of this system . . . is that all 

information travels at the speed of the slowest question, and a 

couple of them are pretty slow. We have been earnestly trying 

to get these. I was trying to get these ready for the return date. I 

say it’s 90 per cent ready, but there are one or two questions are 

dragging on. It’s just one of the limitations of this system. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. We do appreciate 

that it takes a lot of effort to get it together. 

 

I’m going to be just looking at some of the questions I asked 

last time, and I have a question. When you talked about the 

French language coordination and a suggestion that you had 

made that actually the federal government paid for some of that. 

Could you let me know how much money that was? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  During the upcoming budget year, 

the budget year we’re in now, the total amount is 180,647. I’m 

sorry; that’s the total amount spent in this area. The total 

amount spent is 180,647. The total federal contributions are 

$177,147. So total federal contributions cover all but 2 or 3 

percentage of the expenditures. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Also I understand 

that the federal government provided funds for the secretary and 

translation services for ministers’ conferences and when 

premiers or ministers met. 

 

You said that it would be $46,000 this year. How much was it 

last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The budgeted amount in 1995-6 was 

47,000. We actually only paid 39,100. The budgeted amount for 

this year is 46,000. 

 

I just add for the benefit of the member that these are partially 

translation services but not entirely. The secretariat also makes 

all the arrangements. They get the rooms. They get them ready. 

They get all the stuff: the water and the glasses and all that stuff 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And microphones, right. And all 

that kind of thing. So it’s partially translation, but only partially. 

It’s also just the general arrangements. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Another one of the questions that 

was asked was the trips that were taken by various departments, 

and I’m wondering if a department . . . Like the trip that was 

taken by the Minister of Economic Development to Nicaragua. 

Is that paid for by the Department of Economic Development or 

your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No. The travel of each minister is 

covered by his or her department. We don’t cover that. No. 

 

Ms. Draude:  We’d asked for a list of the trips that were 

taken last year, and I was wondering if you’d had the 

opportunity to compile that list. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I was going to hand this to you 

actually. I think this was also part of your package, but I don’t 

see why we wouldn’t give it to you. Oh yes, your question, 

strictly speaking, was mine. During part of this period, this 

portfolio was ably . . . the responsibilities were ably discharged 

by my colleague who in fact is here in the House today. And I 

will table the details of his travel as well. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. Mr. Minister. We’d also discussed 

about some work that was done by, I think it was the Executive 

Council, and you had indicated that they were trying to 

organize, prepare, and think their way through the response to 

the Quebec issue. And I’m wondering if some of this work was 

done for the Premier’s recent trip to Quebec. 

 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, as I think members understand, 

Executive Council is, as I think I said before, Executive Council 

does not have expertise in each of the areas. Thus if the Premier 

needs something in education, he would go to the department of 

. . . his staff would go to the Department of Education. 

Likewise we provided background material on the Quebec trip. 

 

Ms. Draude:  In our first round of estimates, you had said 

that the department had doubled its number of employees since 

1992. Can you tell me what accounts for this increase? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The increase in what this department 

is responsible for. The government as a whole is not doing more 

things, but more things have been transferred from other 

departments to this one, and thus this department has assumed 

responsibilities which have been transferred from other 

departments. And this process continues on. 

 

The nature of the times in which we find ourselves mean that 

our intergovernmental contacts, our intergovernmental 

problems, and our intergovernmental opportunities simply grow 

in number. And thus things like . . . indeed, things like 

intergovernmental relations and constitutional relations, these 

were not in this department back in 1991. Now they are a major 

source of time and effort. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Some of the increased staff that you have at 

this time probably came over from other departments, then. Am 

I correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, that’s correct. Yes. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Your department was once called the 

provincial secretariat. Can you explain why it was changed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It no longer really . . . Provincial 

Secretary has not described really the work of the department 

for decades. If you look at the pictures on the first floor, of 

early cabinets, from the very beginning one of them was 

Provincial Secretary. In fact the person sat in cabinet meetings, 

made notes, and he  it was always a “he” in those days  he 

was responsible for keeping notes of cabinet meetings. He was 

the secretariat. That responsibility hasn’t been discharged for 

decades, and the name does not describe the functions any 

more. 

 

And thus all other governments described the duties now as 

Intergovernmental Affairs; it’s the name used everywhere else. 

It describes our relations with other governments. So Provincial 

Secretary simply no longer describes the work that’s done by 

either the minister, whoever the occupant is, nor by the 

department. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Was it a large cost to make this change? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, the change was nil. We did not 

throw away any paper, letterhead, cards, or anything else. I say, 

I think it’s true that the cards which I’ve got in my pocket, I do 

believe still say Minister of Intergovernmental Relations and 

Provincial Secretary  and they do  and I will continue to 

use them until they’re gone. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Do you see a change in the size or scope of the 

department over the next three years? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It is very difficult to . . . that’s very 

difficult to predict. My view is that the process may well 

continue. My view is that it probably will continue and that as 

things continue to proceed with the whole question of Canadian 

unity, my guess is that this department will continue. 

Considerable demands will be placed on this department to 

meet those challenges. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Our province 

recently hosted a delegation from China. Do you have the total 

costs of this visit to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  They will hand that to me in a 

moment. Let me say the cost was really minimal because they 

were in and out in one day. They came in about 10 o’clock in 

the morning and were gone at 4 o’clock in the afternoon. 

 

There is a long-standing protocol when you receive foreign 

visitors that goes back centuries actually, and that is the host 

country is responsible for the food and lodging, for the 

arrangements  that’s a protocol which goes back many 

centuries. And the only reason this isn’t much higher was 

because they were only here for a few hours. Yes, I think the 

member is referring to the visit by Qiao Shi, and the total cost 

was $4,329 which included gifts, a luncheon, photography, and 

some translation. 

 

Ms. Draude:  As Intergovernmental Affairs minister, your 

department probably has the most contact with other 

government departments and agencies. Is your ministry then 

helping to coordinate the downsizing of the provincial civil 

service? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, that’s really beyond the scope of 

our department. That is handled as much by Executive Council 

as anyone. It’s everybody’s responsibility, but we really are not 

involved in the process of downsizing. In many ways that’s 

handled by Finance. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 

did you say that these were new cards or still had the . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, new cards. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Pardon me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, new cards. 

 

Mr. McLane:  These were the new cards? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  These are the new cards. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I should perhaps explain that they 

have the title, Intergovernmental Relations. The name of the 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

department is now Intergovernmental Affairs. I was, prior to a 

month ago, Minister of Intergovernmental Relations and 

Provincial Secretary. Since no one ever knew what the 

Provincial Secretary did, I just left it off the card, then used the 

title Intergovernmental Relations. It no longer is the name. The 

name is Intergovernmental Affairs but I’m going to continue to 

use these cards until they’re gone, even though the name is not 

correct. 

 

Ms. Draude:  So they were changed from when you were 

called provincial secretariat though? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, I never put Provincial Secretary 

on. I never was able to satisfactorily explain to anyone why and 

where the name Provincial Secretary came from. They had the 

notion I sat in cabinet and made notes of meetings, and it just 

was such a nuisance explaining it that I left it off the card. It 

never was on any card that I ever gave out. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How many contracted employees does your 

department employ and at what expenditures? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There is one currently working. His 

name is Kent Smith and he is acting as head of the information 

technology and transfer. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How many of these are long-term contracts, 

say over a year, versus short-term contracts? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, none of them are long-term 

contracts. That style of employing people is no longer utilized 

by this government. There may be some left around but we, as a 

general rule, do not enter into long-term contracts of 

employment any longer. 

 

Ms. Draude:  How many of the jobs or contract offerings are 

publicly tendered? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Well there is only one. We only have 

the one, and it was not publicly tendered. That was not the 

arrangement. He came to us from  and has done an excellent 

job, as a matter of interest  he came to us from SAHO 

(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations). I think 

that was his background  came here, had a background in 

information technology and transfer, and is still here. I should 

add that he’s on a month-to-month contract, so it wouldn’t 

really be appropriate to tender it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, last time the estimates were up, 

the protocol office budget was discussed and it indicated that 

the budget had fallen substantially this year because of the 90th 

anniversary celebrations that took place last year. How many 

people were actually hired to coordinate this celebration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We don’t actually have that 

information in writing, and if what I tell you turns out to be 

inaccurate, we will send you a letter which will correct the 

information. 

 

To the best of . . . what I’ve got is a statement of how much we 

spent, not how many people were there. To the best of their 

memory, there were four people on full time in this office. I 

may add just very quickly that it was a bare bones operation. It 

was run in a very lean fashion. But there appears to have been 

four full time. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, have those people left the 

government’s employ and how much was actually spent on the 

celebration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Some have, some haven’t. Some 

have left the government employ and some have not. Some 

have fitted into other positions which were vacant. The total 

expenditures here were . . . total budgeted was 1,077,600. The 

total spent was only 75 per cent of that; it was $784,225. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. When the Premier 

took his recent trip to Quebec, I’m wondering if the cost of his 

trip came out of your budget . . . of this department’s budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The Premier’s . . . as I explained, the 

cost of each minister’s travel is charged to his or her own 

department. There were two support staff which went with the 

Premier  the deputy minister who I introduced a little earlier, 

and another individual who I don’t think is present today, Mr. 

Ian Peach, the constitutional adviser. They went with him and 

those costs were paid for out of this department. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Under the information, technology and 

telecommunication section, Mr. Minister, can you tell me what 

actually the role of this department is, and its duties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  This is an area which is growing very 

rapidly in importance. There has been a telecommunications 

section around for a very long time. The very first responsibility 

which I had when I was appointed as a minister in 1975, I was 

minister in charge of a telecommunications secretariat. The 

responsibility has been around for a long time, and it has 

advised us on telecommunications policy. 

 

It has been the view of various governments, going back I think 

at least to the Ross Thatcher era in the ‘60s, that the 

government should have some advice on telecommunications 

separate and apart from the expertise of SaskTel. SaskTel is a 

player in the industry, and it has been felt by various 

governments that we should have advice which is independent 

of a company which has a major interest in it. And so we do. 

 

This has just exploded in importance recently with the whole 

growth of Internet and what one might call the democratization 

of the telecommunications system; everybody can use it. It’s 

like the streets in front of your house. Everybody uses it now. 

 

And that has grown in importance. Generally its advice is to 

advise government on telecommunications, on information 

technology, also generally on computer and computer services. 

We try as well for instance to coordinate purchase of computer 

services. You’ve no doubt heard of the problem that the year 

2000 is causing because computers do not recognize the change 

in the millennium. And this department is trying to coordinate 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 1996 

an overall government solution to this problem. 

 

So generally telecommunications, information technology, and 

coordination of approaches to technical and computer related 

problems. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, wouldn’t it cost the taxpayers of 

this province less money to have somebody that’s actually in 

SaskTel working with your department on this issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes. There was one person seconded 

from SaskTel, has been here for a period of time, and I 

understand is going to be leaving the seconded position 

relatively shortly. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Is SCN (Saskatchewan Communications 

Network) in any way connected to this office? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Certainly we work with SCN, but my 

colleague, the Minister of Education, is responsible for SCN. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Under the international relations, Mr. Minister, 

the operating budget has increased by nearly seven times this 

year. Do we have that many more international relations issues 

as compared to last year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Some of the additional money to 

which the member alluded is new money and I’ll explain where 

that’s going. A good part of it is additional money; it is money 

which has been taken from other departments. 

 

The new money is mostly to do with the Ukraine. I just want to 

say in passing that we are fortunate to have a real comparative 

advantage. The Ukraine is an area of particular interest to 

Canada under the international allotments which have been 

made. This is an area of particular interest to Canada, in part 

because we have a large Ukrainian population. Some members 

of your caucus can relate to that. Saskatchewan enjoys a real 

comparative advantage in this market because of the 

background of the Premier. There are not many jurisdictions 

which have not only a Ukrainian Premier, but someone who 

speaks the language relatively fluently. 

 

And when he was in the Ukraine very recently he was accorded 

the status of a head of state. And I’m told that the American 

ambassador phoned after he’d left and pointed out that the 

Premier of a relatively small province had been accorded the 

status of a head of state and wondered how he would get that 

for the governor of Colorado which was coming. The answer 

was, if he can speak Ukrainian fluently, we’ll consider it. 

 

So we do have a comparative advantage and we are making the 

most of it. And this money is in our budget to take advantage of 

that. 

 

Secondly  and this is an old policy that goes back to the days 

of the Conservatives  we have an agreement with Jilin 

province in what used to be called Manchuria, and we are 

renewing that. And that’s not new money; that’s money which 

has come to us, this department, from other areas. But we’re 

renegotiating that. Indeed I think we’re signing an agreement, 

an MOU (memorandum of understanding) on that. I think some 

time in the fall we’ll be signing that. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have a 

couple of questions around the translations of English to French 

on documents. You’ll recall that I raised the issue around a 

particular pin that had been presented by myself to students 

from Quebec. And I did see a copy of your letter that you sent 

to Forestville, Quebec, in terms of indicating that that correction 

had been made. 

 

My question would be, how can something like that occur 

within the department? Is it your responsibility, the 

responsibility of your department, Intergovernmental Affairs? Is 

it SPMC? Are the two connected, and will we be assured that 

something like that has little chance of occurring in the future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  No, our department wasn’t involved 

at all, except we were the poor rascals who had to tender the 

apology, because the pins were not handled by 

Intergovernmental Affairs but the resulting furore was. 

 

What we’re assured happened was it was a printing error. And 

it would appear that neither the printers nor those people at 

SPMC could at all read French. No one who printed the pins or 

who handled them had any idea of whether it was right or 

wrong. No one was actually fluent enough in the language to be 

able to tell. And so they now have a system for having someone 

who speaks the language read it over before they’re handed out. 

 

But it was just one of those systems which broke down, and I’m 

told there’s a check in place now. Someone who can speak 

French reads it over before the darn things are handed out. It 

wasn’t apparently the system; apparently they are all unilingual 

people who were handling it before. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Supplement. Just an additional comment 

there, Mr. Minister. When we look at what has already occurred 

in terms of errors  and I know that there are a number of pins 

that were recognized that are in the hands, I’m sure, of MLAs 

within this House  and I note that the SPMC is not making 

any attempt to circulate new cards that probably the individual 

people can replace before passing them out. 

 

And I’m wondering if you are concerned about that and 

whether you could encourage SPMC to indeed forward 

corrected cards to caucus offices to ensure that people who 

have those incorrect pins would indeed . . . or incorrect cards, 

would indeed replace them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  The pins, as I know the member 

knows, the pins are fine. It’s the cards which are offensive. 

 

The cards are relatively cheap to change. SPMC is attempting to 

make the changes, have contacted people whom they know 

have them. But you don’t always know in whose hands these 

are because you may give them out and they go on to someone 

else. They are attempting to track them down and replace them 

with proper cards. I’m sure they will miss one or two. 

 

But there are cards now which are printed properly. If any 



May 17, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

member or anyone who happens to be listening to this has those 

cards, those offensive cards, by all means check. We’ll check 

for nothing and make sure those are . . . they’re correct, and if 

not correct, we’ll give you the new cards. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you’ll 

probably be happy to know I just have a couple of questions 

left; perhaps just one, depending on the answer. I’m wondering 

if . . . I understand that you now have linguistic services now 

not only for French but also for Ukrainian. Is there any other 

languages that you are looking at at this time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, we have Norwegian, Mandarin, 

and . . . We have at the university . . . Let me just say this in 

passing. Yes, there are French services, Ukrainian, Mandarin. 

And let me just say that we are fortunate in Regina to have 

really quite a good language centre at the university, one with a 

growing national reputation. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, who is now gone, and I will be, in 

a month’s time or so, will be hosting a group from China, the 

name of which . . . it is the All China Federation of Agricultural 

Cooperatives. Their names, in difficulty, rival ours. 

 

But it’s a group which have a key importance. They are the 

group which distribute potash  key players in deciding 

whether it’s Saskatchewan potash or Russian potash. And we 

are fortunate . . . and they want to have a session with the 

ministers on distribution of potash. And we are anxious 

obviously to accommodate them for reasons that are too 

obvious to need to be said. 

 

We’re very fortunate to be able to go to the university and call 

upon translation services. We can get from this university 

people who can simultaneously translate Mandarin to English 

and back again. And in fact we will be doing that. 

 

We will be hosting a conference partially . . . which will be 

simultaneously translated so the Chinese people can follow it 

and so that it moves relatively quickly. We are very fortunate in 

this city to have the language centre at the university we do and 

the government makes considerable use of it. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’d like to thank 

all of your officials on behalf of the official opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Xie Xie  I think that’s how you say 

thank you in Mandarin  Xie Xie. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  While the Clerk and the chairman of 

the committees is finishing up, just let me thank the officials. In 

doing so, I want to thank all officials who helped us here today. 

This isn’t seen by the public, and not many members see it, but 

the hallway’s been full of officials all morning. These people 

have been waiting here, I think since about 11:30. 

 

And I want to say this department is just desperate with work, 

getting ready for one federal conference after another, and they 

will go back to the office and now spend another extra hour and 

a half on a Friday afternoon catching up with work they weren’t 

able to do because they were here. 

 

The officials make some very considerable sacrifices to aid and 

assist us, which isn’t always seen. I want to, on behalf of the 

ministers and I think on behalf of all members of the House, I 

want to thank the officials for the time they put in here and for 

the sacrifices they make to assist us so that we might better 

discharge public duty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Vote 30 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 

General Revenue Fund 

Budgetary Expense 

Intergovernmental Relations 

Vote 30 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 30 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Speaker:  It now being past the hour of 1 o’clock and 

just before adjourning the House, I want to wish to all members 

who are honeymooning this weekend, that their weekend will 

be filled with appropriate levels of romance. And to those 

members who may not be honeymooning this weekend, I hope 

too that you enjoy some romance, but a very pleasurable 

weekend and the long weekend in your constituencies and with 

your families for a happy Victoria Day long weekend. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1:07 p.m. 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1679 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1680 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1680 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1680 

  Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................1680 

  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1680 

  Sonntag ....................................................................................................................................................................................1680 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1689 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1696 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Sonntag-Wilkinson Wedding 

  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1680 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1682 

 Federal Task Force on Youth 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1681 

 Crown Life Report 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1681 

 Resignation of Melfort Mustangs Coach 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1681 

 Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Lorje .........................................................................................................................................................................................1681 

 Syttende Mai 

  Nilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................1682 

 Funding for Providence Place 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1682 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Highway Maintenance 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1682 

  Renaud .....................................................................................................................................................................................1683 

 Crown Corporations Review 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1683 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1683 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1684 

  Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................1684 

 Data Centre Closure 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1684 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1684 

 Patronage Appointments 

  D’Autremont ...........................................................................................................................................................................1685 

  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1685 

 Funding for Providence Place 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1686 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1686 

 Health Care Reform 

  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1686 

  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1686 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 



 

 Community Meetings Set for Crown Corporation Review 

  Wiens .......................................................................................................................................................................................1687 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1688 

  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1688 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker .............................................................................................................................................................................1689 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1690 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 87  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act (No. 2) 

  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1690 

  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1692 

  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1692 

  Koenker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1693 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

  Mitchell ....................................................................................................................................................................................1693 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1693 

 Bill No. 48  An Act to amend The Animal Identification Act 

  Upshall .....................................................................................................................................................................................1697 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1698 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1699 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Intergovernmental Affairs  Vote 30 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1699 

  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1699 

  McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................1700 

  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1702 

 Supplementary Estimates 1995-96 

 General Revenue Fund 

 Budgetary Expense 

 Intergovernmental Relations  Vote 30 .................................................................................................................................1703 
 

 


