













































June 3, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2083 

 June 3, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker . . . 

they’re Regina here. They’re also from Craven, from Sutton, 

from Regina Beach, from Cupar, and from all throughout 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The communities that the people that have signed the petition 

from are such places as Langenburg, Spy Hill, Gerald, and 

Churchbridge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Oungre, Indian Head, Mossbank, Milestone, and 

throughout the province. I so present. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. The petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Signatures on this petition are from rural Saskatchewan and 

mostly from the city of Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from people throughout  

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Radisson, 

from Bengough, Coronach. I guess the rest are all from 

Bengough. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 

petitions of names of Saskatchewan people regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

communities such as Moose Jaw, Weyburn, Estevan, Milestone, 

Yorkton, and a number from the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 

colleagues today in presenting petitions on behalf of those 

residents of Saskatchewan in their efforts to save the Plains 

Health Centre here in Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition . . . it 

appears to be all from Regina. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order petitions have been reviewed 

regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre, and pursuant 

to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and received. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Jess:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

all the members of this Assembly, four people in the west 

gallery. They’re visiting us from Winnipeg: my cousin, John 

Vail, a professor of physics at the University of Manitoba, and 

his wife, Audrey. With them are Murray and Fega Stern from 

Winnipeg. Fega is one of us, having been born and raised in 

Regina. 

 

And I ask all members to make them welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to introduce to you and through you, the class of grade 8 

and 9’s from Saltcoats School. I’d like to introduce to you also, 

their chaperon, Keri Mickle, who by the way was one of my 

ardent campaign workers, so you know what a great future  

  



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

she’s got in store. The three scholarly gentlemen up there are 

Brian Jones, Grant Bjornerud, who happens to also be my son, 

and their principal, Fred Nicholson. 

 

I would ask the Legislative Assembly to join with me in 

welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Occupational Health and Safety Week 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize this 

week’s designation as Occupational Health and Safety Week. 

 

Ensuring that employers maintain proper safety measures on all 

job sites should be a priority. On average, two Canadian 

workers die every day in a job-related accident. I find that 

figure to be absolutely astonishing, when most job-related 

accidents could be prevented. 

 

Just this weekend a tragic accident claimed the life of an 

Edmonton man working on the Cameco gold mine in 

Kyrgyzstan. I would like to extend condolences to the Lane 

family. 

 

I was reminded once again of occupational tragedy when some 

weekend media reports focused on several former construction 

workers on the Shand project and their families who are still 

suffering from a tragic accident on that work site six long years 

ago. 

I hope that by recognizing Occupational Health and Safety 

Week, employers and employees can each take time to think 

about how we can make the job more safely so that we can 

prevent heartache for other workers’ families. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agricultural Sciences Month 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan’s agricultural science industries are rapidly 

expanding. As a result, we see added promise in the economic 

development and growth of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recognition of the agricultural sciences sector in 

Saskatchewan agriculture and industry, June 1996 has been 

proclaimed Agricultural Sciences Month. June is particularly 

appropriate as agricultural sciences month and a number of 

important activities are scheduled. The activities include several 

important conferences in Saskatoon. 

 

For example, Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food is pleased to 

be a partner in sponsoring the agricultural biotechnology 

international conference June 11 to 14 in Saskatoon. 

Representatives from a number of countries, many on the 

leading edge of this technology, are expected to attend. 

 

On June 1 to 4 in Saskatoon the Canadian plant tissue culture 

and genetic engineering conference will bring industry 

representatives and experts together to discuss their latest 

progress in this fast-changing area. From July 30 to August 6 

the international oat conference and the international barley 

genetics symposium will bring together their experts and 

representatives. 

 

All of this activity in the agricultural sciences is happening in 

Saskatchewan and is further example of a changing face of 

agriculture in Saskatchewan. So we recognize this important 

element of agriculture by proclaiming June ’96 as Agricultural 

Sciences Month in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to recognize this week’s designation as Agricultural 

Sciences Week. As we all know, Saskatchewan farmers are 

some of the most creative and innovative people in the world. 

As a result of their dreams and ideas on how to farm better and 

more efficiently, Saskatchewan is on the leading edge of a 

developing agricultural technology. 

 

We are also widely recognized as quality educators in 

agricultural science, and anyone who has visited the new 

agriculture facility at the University of Saskatchewan can see 

why. 

 

I would like to commend all Saskatchewan people who are 

involved in the agricultural sciences. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

National Environment Week 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Why does National 

Environment Week matter? Why should I care? One person 

can’t do anything of any significance anyway. It’s too much 

trouble to care. Questions and statements that are all too 

common. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 1995 was the hottest year on earth in recorded 

history. Plant and animal species are disappearing at an 

alarming and accelerating rate. Five billion people on Earth are 

using many of Earth’s resources, and the trouble signs are 

everywhere: strange and changing weather systems including a 

very late, wet spring right here in Saskatchewan this year; 

ozone depletion and holes at the North and South Poles that are 

growing; cod and other fish stocks that are depleting. There’s 

much more problems. 

 

But I can help. I can reduce. I can reuse. I can recycle. I can 

recover. I can plant trees. I can walk more and drive less. I can 

install water-saving devices at home. I can install energy-saving 

devices. I can insulate my home properly. I can compost. How 

can we do this? One step at a time, Mr. Speaker. Take one and 

then build on that. 

 

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

National Environment Week is important to help us focus on 

our one Earth and our one environment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pinehouse’s Recent Accomplishments 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to pay 

tribute to the youth and community leaders in Pinehouse for 

some outstanding accomplishments recently. 

 

A young hockey team from Pinehouse has many very 

successful seasons, but what makes this so remarkable is that 

the young people of this community played without a coach for 

many years and play without a community rink. Some of these 

players braved the cold and windy conditions and practice out 

on a lake near Pinehouse while others travel to neighbouring 

communities at great cost and expense. 

 

As well another young man from Pinehouse, Gary Tinker, 

recently walked from La Ronge to Regina to raise awareness 

about people coming out of northern Saskatchewan who are 

coping with various disabilities. The funds and awareness that 

he raised are helping set up the Gary Tinker federation. 

 

Then again Pinehouse scored once more. Just this past weekend 

I was very fortunate to have been a guest at a very special 

graduation in Pinehouse: the first ever graduating class in 

Pinehouse Lake. Seven students were among the first ever, and 

I’d like to name the students, Mr. Speaker: Sandy Natomagan, 

Harold Smith, Cameron Boyd, Melvin B. Natomagan, Lisa 

Durocher, Betty Tinker, and Olivia McCallum. 

 

Their graduation is a tribute to the community, the staff, the 

parents, and the students, who are now successfully preparing 

themselves for the future. All of these achievements by the 

people in the small community of Pinehouse deserve 

recognition, and I ask all the members of this Assembly to join 

me in extending my congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

RRR Environmental Services Opens Recycling Plant 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it is 

appropriate that during National Environment Week I talk about 

a recycling plant in my constituency which was officially 

opened by the Minister of Economic Development just a few 

days ago. 

 

My colleague from Regina Wascana Plains and I were pleased 

to attend the opening of RRR Environmental Services which is 

an oil recycling plant just west of Regina. 

 

Nine people will be hired at this plant to recycle waste oil 

products into fuel oil and diesel fuel. It has a capacity to recycle 

up to 12 million litres of used oil a year, using a process that 

was designed in Canada and is currently used in a number of 

other provinces. 

 

While the company will be processing used oil, it will also  

extract oil from used oil filters, and it is working on a process to 

retrieve oil from plastic containers. This plant will go a long 

way in protecting our environment; it will double the amount of 

oil that can be properly disposed of in Saskatchewan. 

 

RRR Environmental Services saw a need, went out and 

developed a workable solution to the problem, and is creating 

jobs for Saskatchewan people in the process. There is a definite 

need for this type of operation in our province. 

 

I would like to congratulate Roland Schulz and all staff of this 

new business. At the opening we found out that RRR stands for 

Roland, Randy, and Ron. I also think the name of the company, 

RRR, is appropriate because in order to protect our environment 

we do need to recover, recycle and reuse. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Temple Gardens Mineral Spa 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on Saturday night, Moose Jaw rolled out the red carpet for the 

official opening of the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa. Mr. 

Speaker, those attending the gala event included Moose Jaw 

citizens  many of whom have been involved in the creation of 

bringing the spa to Moose Jaw  and representatives from 

local, provincial, and federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa project is 

important to Moose Jaw, and it’s important to Saskatchewan. It 

has already created over 80 full-time jobs and will help to 

enhance downtown Moose Jaw. We expect the spa will bring 

over a hundred thousand visitors to our city in the course of a 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the spa is a facility that will provide a relaxing, 

geothermal spa and a whole number of life-enhancement 

services. The spa is in the ultimate setting to get away from it 

all: right across from beautiful Crescent Park. Visitors can 

enjoy a meal in the restaurant or in the lounge, stay overnight in 

the hotel accommodation or in one of the 12 luxury hotel suites 

that will have private tubs for those wishing the complete spa 

experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the spa includes a large pool located on the upper 

deck overlooking the park and allows year-round indoor or 

outdoor enjoyment for visitors. The water temperature, we’re 

told, will be maintained at 40 degrees Celsius. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last several years, literally hundreds of 

people have been involved in making the spa a reality — 

congratulations to each of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Swift Current Old-fashioned Picnic 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the great south-west 

we do things on a grand scale, from 75-foot swathers to family 

farms measured in townships to brilliant blue horizons  

  



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

measured by infinity. Things are big in the Palliser Triangle. 

 

Yesterday was no exception. Over 4,000 citizens of Swift 

Current and district spent Sunday afternoon in beautiful 

Riverside Park attending an old-fashioned picnic sponsored by 

the Southwest Credit Union. This is an annual event in Swift 

Current, one enjoyed by the whole community. 

 

The picnic featured old-fashioned prices for hamburgers, ice 

cream cones, and soft drinks, free games for both kids and 

adults. On the portable stage provided by the Swift Current 

agricultural exhibition, local groups played throughout the 

afternoon. The day was a huge success. 

 

Thanks should go to Fred Townley-McKay, general manager; 

Pat Friesen, vice-president of marketing and development; and 

all the staff of Southwest Credit Union who worked so hard to 

make this event so enjoyable. Also a special thanks to Glenn 

Budd, president of the Southwest Credit Union, and all the 

directors, who took an active part in this event. 

 

During the year, our credit union works with our citizens to 

build our community; yesterday, it helped us to enjoy each 

other. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Agreement with Rural Health Coalition 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Friday I asked several questions of the Minister of Health 

regarding the rural health care coalition agreement and whether 

he believes his government has lived up to the terms of this 

deal. The minister, in typical fashion, denied any such charges. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as fate would have it, Radville, one of the 

52 communities which was a party to this agreement, today 

made the very same charge. A press release issued by a Radville 

group states that, and I quote: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan today is breaking its 

promise to Radville and to other communities in rural 

Saskatchewan by refusing to live up to its promise to 

sustain services guaranteed by the rural health care 

coalition agreement. 

 

This group charges that the government, the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government, is breaking its contract by 

refusing to provide adequate funding so that district boards can 

meet the commitments set out in the rural health care coalition 

agreement. 

 

Will the minister explain why, when 52 communities signed 

this agreement in good faith, this NDP government is 

demonstrating anything but good faith? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, I suspect that  

this is more of a political operation than anything else. 

 

I want to remind the House that it wasn’t so long ago when the 

administrators or the board of the Radville Marian Health 

Centre, aided and abetted by the member from Wood River, 

told the employees of that centre that they weren’t going to 

receive their pay cheques unless more money came from the 

district health board. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that kind of 

tactic was a despicable thing to do, and so did the nurses in their 

statement. 

 

But I want to say to the member that I’ve read what Mr. 

MacDonald said at his press conference this morning, and for 

the life of me I can’t understand the specifics of how he is 

saying the agreement is breached. Mr. Speaker, I have listened 

to the member. I have read what Mr. MacDonald said. I can’t 

see how the agreement is being breached based on what they 

even said. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Radville health centre is 

getting a $100,000 increase in their funding at a time when 

other institutions in the district are actually being cut back, Mr. 

Speaker. I think this is a political operation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, nothing . . . nothing, 

Mr. Speaker, would surprise the elderly people that were here in 

the legislature this morning trying to defend their health care 

services in their communities . . . that they are nothing but 

political opportunists. He should pass that comment on. 

 

What in fact they were doing and what I do on their behalf is 

express the fear of the people in those communities. Mr. 

Speaker, 52 rural communities signed this 1994 agreement so 

that they would not be at the mercy of this NDP government’s 

unilateral and ill-conceived funding decisions. But, Mr. 

Speaker, this agreement has not protected the sick and elderly in 

our rural communities. 

 

This government has further reduced funding this year, forcing 

the closure of long-term care facilities and the elimination of 

health services and the elimination of hundreds of front-line 

health care workers. As a result, a number of communities, 

including Radville, are on the verge of taking legal action to 

hold this government to its promise. 

 

Will the minister make a commitment in this House today to 

honour the terms of the rural health care coalition agreement, 

and will the Minister make a commitment to provide adequate 

funding for all health districts and our sick and our elderly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I have a letter here dated May 

28, 1996 from Loretta Thomas, the chairperson of the South 

Central District Health Board, to Mr. Roderick E. MacDonald, 

chairman of the Radville Marian Health Centre. And among 

other things, Ms. Thomas says: 

 

This support has been extended into the 1996/97 fiscal  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

year (this is support by the district of the Radville Marian 

Health Centre) with the $100,000 funding increase to 

Radville Marian Health Centre’s base budget; we believe 

the only increase given to an institutional sector in the 

Province. It should also be noted that other affiliated 

agencies in the Province are having to reduce their budgets. 

 

Now Ms. Thomas is saying in this letter that not only is 

Radville being funded, Mr. Speaker, but Radville is receiving 

an increase at a time when the district itself and other 

institutions are having to live with decreases. 

 

And I don’t know what it would take to satisfy the member 

opposite or Mr. MacDonald, but I believe that the province’s 

commitment through the district to the Radville Marian Health 

Centre is being met. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the minister has got to come 

clean with the answers. The fact of the matter is 19 rural health 

districts were being cut back this year as reported in the Regina 

Leader-Post. Where do you think, Mr. Minister, the rural health 

care coalition came from? It was from rural communities that 

you and your government continuously attack on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have all heard the minister blame Ottawa, the 

former Conservative government, and anyone else they can 

point a finger at, and of course now today everybody’s a 

political opportunist that would dare try and defend their 

communities. But the fact remains it is his duty as the minister 

to provide appropriate health care for all residents of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This government  not Ottawa, not the former Tory 

administration  this NDP government signed an agreement 

promising to fund health care services. Mr. Speaker, this 

appears to be yet another broken promise this government is 

attempting to break. And for the life of me I don’t understand 

why the New Democrat MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) back-benchers won’t defend the communities that 

they were here supposedly to represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what happened? We don’t know. But will the 

Minister of Health explain it  if it is his intention to break yet 

another promise or will he do the honourable thing and make 

good on the promises contained in the rural health care coalition 

agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already indicated to 

the member, those who are alleging the government is in breach 

of an agreement have an obligation to come forward with 

particulars as to how the agreement is being breached. I mean 

that is the minimum requirement that they have, Mr. Speaker. 

And of course they won’t do that. 

 

I’ve pointed out to the member in the House that in fact the 

Radville Marian Health Centre is receiving an increase this  

year. 

 

The member says, oh don’t blame Ottawa for this or that. I 

provided documentation to the member and the House last week 

which indicated that we had back-filled for Ottawa to the tune 

of some $28 million with respect to the districts, Mr. Speaker 

 about $47 million over all. 

 

And the fact is, as the member knows, that each of the districts 

in Saskatchewan would have received quite a substantial 

decrease in funding  about 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker  this 

year if the NDP government had not back-filled for the 

Liberals. The member knows that, Mr. Speaker. The member is 

playing politics, Mr. Speaker, as usual. And I remind the House 

the last time the member raised the Radville Marian Health 

Centre it was to say the employees wouldn’t be paid, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Health Care 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to again 

bring to the attention of the House an issue that demonstrates 

how residents of the North do not have appropriate or 

affordable access to health care. 

 

I recently received a phone call and a letter from an Angie 

Musyj who only days ago brought her six-week-old newborn 

son to the Uranium City Hospital for a check-up. She was 

informed that her son had a heart murmur. As a result, an 

appointment was made with the nearest heart specialist which 

was in Saskatoon. However when Angie Musyj inquired as to 

whether the substantial cost would be picked up by the 

Saskatchewan Health she was informed that only emergency 

patients, welfare recipients, or people with treaty status would 

be eligible for free-flight coverage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if a hospital does not have the facilities or 

expertise to meet the needs of a patient, that patient should not 

be penalized because of where they live. Will the Minister of 

Health explain why a six-week-old infant is being penalized for 

living in the North? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, if anybody needs to be 

transported to an institution for service, that person is 

transported by ambulance in the province of Saskatchewan. The 

cost of ambulance has never been fully subsidized by the 

province; the member knows that. 

 

But I want to say to the House that I sat down with the member 

the other day in the House, Mr. Speaker. The member had sent 

me a note about this case. I undertook to the member that I 

would look into this case. I’ve referred it to the departmental 

officials. Today the member stands up and asks the question 

knowing full well, Mr. Speaker, that he’s asked me to look into 

it, and I’ve agreed to look into it. I will look into it, and then I 

will sit down and talk to the member again, as I agreed I would, 

Mr. Speaker. 

  



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again concerned 

with her son’s condition and the lack of response, I again talked 

with her today, and she said that she did not get any response. 

But anyway Angie Musyj booked an immediate flight to 

Saskatoon to meet with the heart specialist. Upon returning 

home following an examination, Angie Musyj contacted 

different health agencies to determine whether any of the 

substantial costs could be covered. Again she was told that the 

only way her son would receive health care would be in the 

event of an emergency. In other words, he’d have to go into 

cardiac arrest or another form of life-and-death situation before 

he would have equal right to health care. 

 

Will the minister explain why someone has to be on their 

deathbed before they receive appropriate health care, and how 

quick the response would be to correct the situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the question of whether 

somebody needs emergency services is a medical question to be 

determined by medical personnel. It’s not a question that will be 

determined in this House. 

 

But as I said to the member when I sat down with him the other 

day, as I’ve now said to the House, the member raised this 

matter with me personally. I agreed to look into it, Mr. Speaker; 

I will look into it, and then I will be discussing the matter 

further with the member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Shand Construction Site Accident 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, it was more than six years ago 

that a crane toppled onto a trailer at the Shand power site killing 

two people and injuring eight others, and it has been six long 

years because this NDP government has refused to provide 

compensation to the victims or their families for the pain and 

suffering they have endured. Mr. Speaker, Clifford Sovdee had 

both of his legs crushed, but lived through the accident, and he 

is angry not because of the accident but because of the way he 

has been treated by this government. 

 

Will the Minister of Labour explain why he and his government 

refused to provide compensation to the victims of the Shand 

accident so they can put closure on this tragedy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I would first say, Mr. Speaker, in 

answer to the member’s question, that Workers’ Compensation 

has not refused to provide compensation to the workers and 

their families. 

 

This is a very tragic incident. The case is now being heard by 

the Supreme Court and we’ll have to await the outcome of the 

Supreme Court hearing the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, this being Occupational 

Health and Safety Week, I find it ironic that the Minister of 

Labour will stand in this House and spout this kind of rhetoric 

about the unfortunate victims of workplace accidents when the 

government fails to treat these people with any compassion and 

instead takes them to court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has demonstrated that it has 

absolutely none of the qualities of compassion that people are 

looking for. Instead they demonstrate that they’re not only 

politically but morally corrupt as well. Mr. Speaker, this 

government does whatever it wants with no regard to the 

victim, in this case, the families of those who were killed or 

seriously injured in the Shand accident. 

 

Will the Minister of Labour demonstrate that some compassion 

does remain with the government and, instead of taking these 

people to court, make a commitment to settle with these people 

promptly and fairly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I again repeat that the 

workers’ compensation system has been providing benefits to 

the workers and the families in this unfortunate incident. 

 

I would say though that the question as asked by the hon. 

member just shows his ignorance of how the workers’ 

compensation system works and has worked to serve the people 

of Saskatchewan very, very well. In fact the workers’ 

compensation system in Saskatchewan is recognized as the best 

workers’ compensation system in Canada. It’s a fully funded 

system. It provides benefits to injured workers. It is responsive 

to the needs of injured workers. Employers, for the most part, 

are pleased with the way the program works under a fully 

funded system. 

 

And I’d say the member should research his questions a bit 

more before he makes such serious allegations about the 

system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Agreement with Rural Health Coalition 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions as well are to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, 

you say often that your government doesn’t want a two-tiered 

health system in the province of Saskatchewan, but that’s 

exactly what we have today. Saskatchewan has one system for 

urban areas and one for rural areas. 

 

The Rural Health Coalition, made up of 51 communities across 

the province, had to threaten to take your government to court 

before you would sign an agreement guaranteeing basic services 

to rural communities. These communities now say you are not 

honouring the agreement you signed. Mr. Minister, is this the 

way you and your government are treating rural health services, 

in violation of this agreement, and have you lived up to your 

obligations? 

 

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say to the member 

that yes, we have lived up to our obligations. And if the 

member, and if the members of the Liberal Party, say that we 

have breached the agreement, Mr. Speaker, then I ask them to 

provide us with the particulars, the specifics, of how we 

breached the agreement — surely that’s only fair and 

reasonable, Mr. Speaker — instead of making general and 

vague allegations that the agreement has been breached. 

 

But I want to say to the member from Moosomin, Mr. Speaker, 

as I’ve said in the House before, that when he talks about the 

urban centres, I want to remind him that the hospitals in 

Saskatoon, Yorkton, Regina, and elsewhere provide services to 

all the people in the province. They provide services to the 

people from the member’s riding, where the member’s 

constituents cannot get those services where they reside. That’s 

always been the case; it always will be the case. 

 

And I’ll tell the member this, Mr. Speaker: that when his 

constituents go where they need to go in the province to get 

health care, this government is going to pay for their health 

care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  A further question to the minister. Mr. Minister, 

Mr. Rod MacDonald made reference this morning to the fact 

that many communities have sought legal counsel and are 

poised to launch cases against your government on the grounds 

that you have not lived up to your part of the agreement. 

 

Mr. Minister, how many such legal suits are there presently 

against your government regarding health care services in this 

province? How many people or communities are in the process 

of suing your government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t answer 

questions about speculative lawsuits any more than I can 

answer questions about speculative breaches of the agreement. 

But at least if somebody did start a lawsuit, they would have to 

provide particulars as to how the agreement was being 

breached. 

 

The member, like the member from Wood River, wants to get 

up in the House and make a vague allegation that the agreement 

has been breached without saying how it’s been breached, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I say to the member, if the member has some information 

about the agreement being breached, please come up with some 

specifics and we’d be happy to respond. 

 

If the member wants to ask me whether somebody has a 

speculative lawsuit in mind, I don’t know. I don’t know the 

answer to a speculative question any more than the member 

does. But let’s get serious, Mr. Speaker, and let’s get down to 

specifics. If somebody says the agreement has been breached, 

give us particulars as to how it’s been breached instead of 

making a vague and general allegation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, you 

are stating that you believe your government has lived up to its 

end of the bargain. Yet, Mr. Minister, there are rallies and 

public meetings and lawsuits across the province that are 

directed at your government’s cold-hearted and cruel handling 

of health care services, especially in rural Saskatchewan: 

hospital closures; cuts to nursing home beds; acute care beds; 

no more level 1 and 2 funding for seniors; a drug plan 

deductible that is no longer 125 but $1,700 a year; de-insuring 

of services; and the list goes on. 

 

Mr. Minister, when will this stop? When will your 

government’s hacking and slashing of health care services end? 

When will you at least live up to your rural health care 

agreement signed in February, 1994? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the member now 

throws in everything except the kitchen sink, about how we 

breached the agreement, citing things that have nothing to do 

with the agreement. But I want to say to the member, the 

province of Saskatchewan has maintained funding for health 

care this year notwithstanding a $50 million cut to health care 

that we received courtesy of the Liberals. 

 

And I want to say to the member, lest he think I’m just blaming 

the Liberals, we’re not going to do what the Conservatives have 

done in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. We’re not going to slash health 

care spending by the province by $37 million this year as the 

Conservatives did in Manitoba. And we’re not going to slash 

health care spending by about 15 per cent as the Conservatives 

have done in Alberta. 

 

We’re going to maintain health care spending because, unlike 

the Conservatives and unlike the Liberals, we are committed to 

a public medicare system. And despite their protestations about 

how they want to save medicare, Mr. Speaker, I just remind 

everyone that if it had been up to them, we never would have 

had a medicare system in the first place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Canadian Wheat Board 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to the minister 

for Agriculture and Food. Mr. Minister, the Farmers For Justice 

Coalition continues to fight for the end of the monopoly control 

of wheat exports through the Canadian Wheat Board. 

 

Your government made a commitment to eliminate red tape and 

other government barriers to trade and business in this province, 

and yet you persist in supporting the federal Liberals in 

dictating how farmers can or cannot market their products. 

Your own polling has shown that a majority of Saskatchewan 

farmers are in favour of opening up marketing choices. And 

indeed now milk producers are asking for similar opportunities. 

 

Mr. Minister, when will you start listening to farmers? When 

will you give our province’s most important industry the 

freedom it deserves? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

again I will say to the member . . . or ask the member a 

question. Why does the Tory Party consistently ask questions 

that could lead to the reduction of $500 million a year to 

farmers as proven by a recent study? Why would they even 

want to do that? They say they want freedom, they want 

freedom to market. 

 

I’ll tell you, as long as I’m sitting in this chair, Mr. Speaker, I 

will be fighting to support more dollars in farmers’ pockets. We 

support more dollars in farmers’ pockets by maintaining the 

strong Canadian Wheat Board, by not allowing dual marketing. 

Because we know that the studies that he talks about do not ask 

the fundamental question  if dual marketing means the end of 

the Wheat Board, do you still support it? The farmers say, 80 

percent, no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pork Marketing Monopoly 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Speaking of 

marketing boards, as the Minister of Agriculture is aware, his 

Manitoba counterpart has announced that on July 1 that 

province’s single-desk seller of hogs will lose its monopoly. 

Alberta appears headed in the same direction. In a recent 

plebiscite, 85 per cent of pork producers in that province voted 

for an open-market approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though many pork producers in this province 

claim that they can make an extra 10 per cent profit by selling 

directly to slaughterhouses, the Department of Agriculture’s 

assistant deputy minister says in the June 3 edition of Western 

Report that there are no plans to alter the provincially mandated 

monopoly system. 

 

Will the Minister of Agriculture explain what course of action 

this government is taking to ensure that Saskatchewan’s pork 

industry remains competitive with Alberta and Manitoba? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the member 

opposite that I have been, for the last six months in this chair, 

working relentlessly with the hog people in order to . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member says I went to 

China. Exactly. 

 

One of the key things over in Asia, just as a matter of fact, is 

that their income is going up dramatically. Consumption of 

pork is expected to go up 40 per cent in the next few years. And 

we’re working closely with farmers. We’ve got about 9,000 

sow units on the go right now, and there will be many more. 

 

As it comes to the marketing of these hogs, I have been talking 

to the marketing board people, to the large producers. They are 

going to be able to decide what kind of marketing system they 

want. They will decide that system in the best interests of their 

production. And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, instead of dictating like 

Manitoba and some others have, we’re going to be working 

with the industry to ensure it’s a strong industry. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, the Western Report indicated 

that the NDP government spent $25,000 to learn that SPI, the 

Saskatchewan Pork Industry Marketing Group, has been poorly 

run and is not serving its clientele efficiently. This review, 

conducted by Deloitte & Touche, has indicated that the dual 

marketing issue, and I quote, “must be resolved soon or it will 

remain an impediment to SPI moving forward in the future.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, SPI chairman Peter Volk says his agency can’t 

survive as the only monopoly on the Prairies if the farmers 

prosper . . . if other farmers prosper on the open market. He 

goes on to add, and I quote again: “Manitoba and Alberta have 

seen the light. Saskatchewan has to follow suit.” 

 

What commitment will the minister make today that will 

provide our pork industry with an indication that he has taken 

his head out of the sand and seen the light? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Minister, the member opposite tries 

to mislead the House by saying that somehow that the industry 

wants something to happen and that I’m stopping it. Well I’ll 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that is not the case, and the member 

opposite knows that. 

 

My commitment is to work for the hog producers of this 

province to fulfil a growing demand in Asia and other countries, 

to provide with them, work with them, to establish a marketing 

system that is desirable by that industry and that will be to the 

best advantage of that industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite should just bring up 

her credibility just a little bit. And when she talks about dual 

marketing, I think there’s a little bit of a twist here too. I know 

the federal Minister of Agriculture is strictly pushing for the 

Canadian Wheat Board. This member somehow seems to be 

wavering, as the Liberals do sometimes, on the marketing 

structures. And I think she should present their position on the 

Canadian Wheat Board and its marketing structure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Unfunded Pension Liabilities 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, it’s been weeks since the Public 

Accounts Committee voted in support of a pension review 

commission. The Provincial Auditor and the Public Accounts 

Committee, including members of the NDP government, feel 

that this is an issue that needs to be addressed immediately. 

 

I was amazed to hear the minister state in this House on April 

29, and I’ll quote: “This is not a problem of any magnitude in 

the next four-year period. Beyond that, it depends exactly what 

choices people make in terms of their retirement.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan remain concerned 

about the province’s finances over the long term, not merely 

four years. Will the Minister of Finance explain why the  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2091 

unfunded pension obligations of this government, now at a level 

exceeding $3 billion and having ballooned by a half a billion 

dollars in the past three years, is not a concern, much less a 

priority? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

member opposite, first of all, when you get a question from the 

Liberals you have to clarify the facts. This government has 

never said that the unfunded pension liability is not a concern 

 of course it’s a concern, as is the debt of the province a 

concern. 

 

What we have said again and again is, we are absolutely open 

and accountable about this liability. It is included in the 

summary financial statements and updated each and every year 

with the concurrence of the auditor. 

 

What we’ve also said is that we’ve laid before the people of the 

province a four-year financial plan in which we take into 

account all of the pension obligations for the next four years. 

 

And finally, what we said is that the key decision has been 

made. That is, in 1978 the Blakeney administration changed the 

pension plan so that it is fully funded and taxpayer friendly. 

That’s what this government has said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Site for Synchrotron Light Source Research 

Facility in Saskatoon 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to express 

pleasure with the news that the Canadian Institute for 

Synchrotron Radiation is recommending Saskatoon as the site 

for Canada’s first synchrotron light source research facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this is not a final step, it is very definitely a 

major step towards Saskatoon being confirmed for this 

important research facility. This project would immediately 

provide up to 85 scientific and high tech job in addition to 

construction jobs that would result from a multimillion dollar 

project. 

 

Over the long term it offers possibility for many more new jobs 

by attracting researchers and related industry technicians to 

Saskatchewan and Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the institute’s recommendation is another 

indication that Saskatchewan offers critical advantages for the 

high tech sector. It has a strong ag biotech presence. It has 

natural industries in forestry, agriculture, and mining, and it is 

already doing a tremendous research in many of these areas 

throughout the province. This investment is very much like the 

investment we supported in the ag biotech sector a few years 

ago so that we could have a solid infrastructure in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the line, “If you build it, they will  

come” is certainly true in this case. We built the facility and 

they did come, and they came from around the world. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I met yesterday with the board 

of directors of Groupe Limagrain from France in Saskatoon to 

discuss the work they are now doing on canola research here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Groupe Limagrain is an international cooperative, 

the third largest in the world when it comes to sale of seeds. 

And they were attracted to this province because of our ag 

biotech infrastructure and the reputation of our farmers as being 

world class. 

 

Saskatchewan residents are now reaping the benefit of our 

earlier investment in ag biotech. Hundreds of new jobs, — in 

fact 1,400 people now work in this industry in Saskatoon, and 

it’s projected that sales will be $250 million by the year 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the synchrotron is a highly sophisticated facility 

that uses extremely bright radiation beams of light to examine 

and change molecular structure. It has many scientific and 

industrial research applications, and there are currently no 

synchrotron facilities here in the country and in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a synchrotron facility in Saskatoon will build on 

our existing strength which is very much part of our 

Partnership for Growth economic plan. And by investing and 

building on our strengths, we increase our capacity and 

opportunities for economic growth. And that is what the $10.5 

million commitment that our provincial government has made 

to this project is all about: strategic investment in key growth 

sectors of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan is an important 

player in this area, and the university is doing excellent work in 

creating these links between industry and the research areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is therefore my pleasure to congratulate all 

members of the Assembly  and I know a number of members 

from the opposition, the federal government, have been 

involved in the negotiations  the city of Saskatoon, the 

university, and members of the government, as well as members 

of the Department of Economic Development on the good work 

that they have done and wish them the best in landing this 

important project in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted for the 

second day running to respond to a statement about progress in 

this province. The University of Saskatchewan has a reputation 

for which we all can be proud. This is an exciting opportunity 

for people in the whole province to show our ingenuity and our 

vision. Our caucus is confident that the federal Natural Science 

and Engineering Research Council will see the advantage of 

building in this province, and we wish all involved the best in 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

  



2092 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I would want 

to join with the opposition and the government in recognizing 

this as an important step for the city of Saskatoon and certainly 

all players involved in this important announcement here today. 

Saskatchewan can and, I do believe, is becoming a very strong 

leader in the high tech field right across Canada, certainly 

across even North America, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We would hope that this will lead to other announcements in 

the future of future job growth for the province. It is certainly a 

very important thing, and we would want to offer 

congratulations to all involved, including the minister and the 

Department of Economic Development, for this very important 

and good announcement for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I do have something 

entitled ministerial statement, but I’m not sure it falls under the 

strict rules of what would be a ministerial statement, so I’d ask 

for leave of the Assembly to make a statement on Occupational 

Health and Safety Week. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Occupational Health and Safety Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, this week marks 

Occupational Health and Safety Week. The week is a national 

promotion of the Canadian Society of Safety Engineering. It is 

designed to increase our awareness of occupational health and 

safety. It is a time for all of us, employers and employees alike, 

to renew our commitment to health and safety in the workplace. 

 

This year the theme is, “Don’t Learn by Accident: Set a Goal 

for Zero Accidents in the Workplace”. 

 

The challenge we face is to better occupational health and 

safety practices here in Saskatchewan and all across Canada. 

Two and a half years ago we took a major step forward in this 

province by the passage of The Occupational Health and Safety 

Act, 1993. The Act enhances the prevention of workplace 

accidents by strengthening the framework for both employers 

and employees to jointly address health and safety issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I want to encourage everyone, wherever 

they work, to support activities which improve working 

conditions and make workplaces safer. Getting involved in an 

occupational health and safety committee is just one such 

activity. There is more then can be done by both companies and 

communities. Industry might, for example, make use of this 

week to feature special in-house displays or demonstrations of 

safety. Employees and work units with accident-free records 

should be recognized. Those workplaces that have not already 

done so might consider carrying out a safety audit. 

 

Similarly, communities might undertake joint safety activities 

such as tours and displays with local companies. Perhaps there 

are volunteers that could speak to local groups and schools 

about safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health and safety in the workplace is everyone’s 

responsibility and that safety pays big dividends by avoiding the 

individual trauma, pain, and suffering, accidents bring, by 

avoiding the loss of productivity and down time resulting from 

personal injuries, by avoiding health and rehabilitation costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Society of Safety Engineering is to 

be commended for this week promoting occupational health and 

safety. We must strive to make safety an everyday priority in 

the workplace and not just one week of the year. 

 

Just over a month ago I stood in this Assembly and entered the 

names of all those who had died in workplace accidents in 

Saskatchewan over the past year into the record. That day of 

mourning for workers killed or injured on the job was a solemn 

occasion. It served to remind us that when a life is lost, nothing 

can ever make it right again. 

 

Today, as we begin Canadian Occupational Health and Safety 

Week, we can perhaps be more optimistic about the future. By 

working together, we can all play a role in preventing 

workplace accidents and reducing the human toll that accidents 

take. That’s the challenge we face today and it’s the challenge 

we must take up, because even one injury or death on the job is 

too many. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, to reply to the 

minister’s statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

very much join with the minister in expressing his concerns and 

appreciation for Occupational Health and Safety Week. 

 

I noticed in the minister’s statement that the theme of zero 

accidents in the workplace is particularly appropriate. This 

opposition will support all reasonable initiatives that can be 

taken by business and labour to work together to reduce the 

accident level to zero. 

 

We join in congratulating the Canadian Society of Safety 

Engineering professionals for the promotion of this event. 

 

We particularly join in the statement by the minister that he 

said, and I quote, “even one injury or death on the job is (one) 

too many.” 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Boyd:  To respond to the ministerial statement as well, 

please. 

 

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2093 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we would 

want to join with the minister and the government in 

recognizing Occupational Health and Safety Week. It certainly 

is in everyone’s best interests, Mr. Speaker, to have a safe work 

environment. The employee, the employer, certainly the 

business community, and the government as a whole, benefits 

from a safe workplace. 

 

I note the excellent theme that this week has been designated, 

“Don’t Learn by Accident: Set a Goal for Zero Accidents in the 

Workplace” certainly is an appropriate theme. 

 

And I do reflect back on the ministerial statement of a few 

weeks ago, when he read into the record the names of people 

who had been killed in the workplace. And I think it caused all 

of us to pause and reflect and certainly offer our thoughts and 

condolences to the families of those killed in the workplace, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

All of us must  all of us, I say  must continue to be very 

vigilant to make the workplace a safer environment. One 

accident is one accident too many when it comes to the 

workplace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an accident in the workplace unfortunately 

happens in many respects, and it’s an ongoing thing. And as 

you see in an economy like the economy of Saskatchewan, 

continuing to grow, we have to all recognize and understand the 

risks associated with an economic . . . the community growing 

in one respect. 

 

I certainly remain, however, optimistic that we can continue to 

have that type of growing economy and still have a safe 

workplace, Mr. Speaker. So I certainly want to recognize this 

week as well and offer up the view as well that a safe workplace 

is in the best interests of everyone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 118  An Act to amend 

The Trust and Loan Corporations Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Trust and Loan Corporations Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well of course 

the other day we made several points regarding the extended 

hours motion. And I think today I just have a few more 

comments to make in regards to the motion that the government 

chose to put before the House. And I know that other members, 

many other members, are going to want to speak in regards to 

what some of the government gamesmanship and tricks are in 

this legislative sitting. 

 

And the first thing that I’d like to touch on for just awhile will 

be . . . and it relates to, Mr. Speaker, it relates to why in fact 

we’re saying, let’s get a lot of the other government business 

out of the way so that in fact we can deal with things that are of 

a greater importance to the majority of people that we represent 

or of the constituents throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

One of those problems that showed itself quite clearly here 

today was in fact done in a news scrum this morning, 10 

o’clock in the rotunda of the legislature. And what was here this 

morning was Mr. Rod MacDonald, who headed up the rural 

health care coalition and was a signatory to the rural health care 

coalition agreement on behalf of some 52 communities. 

 

And you recall that debate, Mr. Speaker, where in fact in the 

first round of health care cuts in this province made by the 

minister of Health at that time, the member from, I believe it 

was Hillsdale, those cuts closed the door, slammed the door 

shut, on 52 rural communities. And they were done not because 

. . . well without regard to distance, demographics, some of the 

geographical problems that are faced by the people in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1430) 

 

In fact they took a look at bed numbers  how many beds on 

an average daily count were being used to supply acute care 

health . . . or acute health care services. And the number that 

they came up with said, anything that falls below that number, 

we’re just going to close them down. 

 

Later of course they decided to call them health centres, which 

even to this day people are still uncertain exactly what happens 

at a health centre, other than for many communities it became 

one large building to house a pay phone. And people thought 

this was quite unacceptable. 

 

So in fact what happened during that debate is that the 

communities rallied, initially one a time  they were 

absolutely in shock, taken aback  and they formed a coalition 

to impress upon the government the enormity of what would 

happen in rural Saskatchewan when you just go ahead and 

unilaterally close the doors of that many hospitals. We recall the 

number of rallies that happened around the province at that 

time. 

 

Of course there were eight of the facilities in my own area of 

the province that were closed. And I recall some of the debates. 

Rally after rally, they were almost every night for some time. 

And places like Ponteix where in fact they would completely  

  



2094 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

fill . . . There was standing room only in the gym in Ponteix. 

And places like Mankota. I think it was probably three times 

that Mankota themselves had meetings in regards to their health 

care. And what happened from that, Mr. Speaker, was an 

amount of pressure . . . the government came under a great 

amount of pressure to in fact come to its senses. And if there 

was going to be some rationalization of health care in 

Saskatchewan, to do it with the people knowing it had to 

happen to some extent, but having them onside, having them be 

part of the process and having them be part of making it all 

work. 

 

And initially they sent out all the right signals to have that 

happen. They approached communities and requested that each 

community look at its facilities, look at sort of the community 

needs. And even though they didn’t have the professional 

expertise that the Department of Health could have offered and 

made easy to them; they chose instead to have the communities 

attempt this on their own. 

 

And I recall some of the communities putting in hundreds and 

hundreds of man-hours, person-hours I guess it’s called now, in 

coming to terms and coming up with a plan as to what is the 

health care that would be most appropriate, or the least amount 

of health care that they could ensure that their people, when in 

need, would have a safe and reliable health care service. 

 

And so these plans were put. I recall so many communities 

sending them in and waiting sort of on the edge of their seats, 

so to speak, to see what in fact the government would end up 

doing. And when in fact or if in fact they would look at the 

plans, have the department officials come out to those 

communities that did all of the work, and see if in fact they 

couldn’t come to some common sense understanding and work 

together with the government. And it was the communities that 

were showing that amount of cooperation, and showing a good 

amount of spirit in having this work on behalf of the province. 

 

Because keep in mind, it’s really not the New Democrat 

government that were the ones, you know, needing to deal with 

debt. It belongs to everyone in this province. And for the New 

Democrat government to let on like they’re the only ones that 

really understand economics or really only understand the debt 

situation or in fact have the sense to try and wrestle those debt 

monsters to it’s knees  well that’s just not the case. The 

people want to be part of that and were more than willing. 

 

And they were more than prepared to say listen, if we have 10 

beds — and you know, pick a community whether it’s Ponteix 

or Climax, I know those ones best — but if we have 10 beds in 

a community such as those, and in fact we’re really only using 

two or three or four for acute care services, and services that I 

guess in rural Saskatchewan we would refer to as a more acute 

care service, then in fact they would readjust the amount of 

beds in the communities. So in fact we would have, you know, 

the three acute care beds, but there would be some for respite 

care; there’d be beds for convalescent care. And of course one 

of the problems that is really starting to surface is the long-term 

care problem in the province. 

 

And these communities were very much willing to help out in  

this regard, to utilize the facilities, because that’s really how the 

whole debate started, is the NDP government of the day stating 

publicly that we don’t use that many rural hospitals or we don’t 

need that many acute care beds in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Well they’re right in one sense  we weren’t. But to go out and 

close the doors  that wasn’t an alternative. And they were 

more than willing to say, you know, but we do need facilities. 

We do need to have long-term care beds and these other beds 

that I spoke of. 

 

So they could have utilized the facilities fully, Mr. Speaker. 

They could have had them so that all the beds were filled and 

we wouldn’t have the waiting-list that we have today at some of 

the health care facilities. Swift Current is an example where you 

see now they’re still closing beds, yet they have waiting-lists 

and line-ups at all of the other facilities. And these smaller 

facilities could have and should have taken the place of some of 

these beds that are being closed, and of course needed. 

 

Initially the communities thought that the government was in a 

position or had to be in a position where they would accept, 

through common sense, they would accept the plans put 

forward by the government. And I guess it was quite a surprise 

to everyone to see that the government chose not to look at 

those plans. In fact many communities that I’ve . . . you know, 

talked to people in the communities, the community leaders, 

they felt  and probably rightly so  that those plans were 

never opened when they were sent in. The packets were never 

opened, they were never followed through, they were never 

looked at. 

 

And also, I guess, this was frustrating because the communities 

felt that they were never really . . . they never had the 

representation. They never had their day in court as to whether 

this was fair or whether it wasn’t. And it was really rammed 

down their throats. 

 

So this is where the rural health care coalition came into play 

and this, Mr. Speaker, is why these communities banded 

together, held meetings around the province  rallies. And I 

was saying earlier, some of these rallies . . . I spoke at many of 

them. We had health professionals. Very few government 

members were out to see the anger in the rural areas. But they 

would hear speakers, and surprisingly enough, you would watch 

people in these communities who were truly, really and truly, 

concerned about their health care and their long-term care and 

their aunts and uncles and mothers and fathers and grandfathers 

and grandmothers, knowing full well they needed the care and 

needed the beds and there would be . . . you know, they’d pass 

the hat. 

 

And 15, $20,000 in 10, 15 minutes was nothing. These people 

were prepared to pay whatever it took, sorry to say . . . the 

government to court to defend their health care. Perhaps the 

government should have asked the question, which now is 

coming to their mind, whether or not they could in fact put 

another charge on to these people. It would have been an 

interesting debate, I think, at that time when you see what 

people were prepared to do to save their health care. 

 

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2095 

But now that they have had their health care ripped from them, 

taken from them, taken from their communities, would in fact 

they accept further charges? Well I expect not. I think the 

government would have to come to the forefront and say this is 

exactly what we intend to restore or retain or do for you out in 

these rural communities before that discussion ever comes 

about. 

 

So it’s really in the government’s court and everyone in the 

province knows this; that they’re going to have to come to the 

forefront with a public policy and some assurance to people in 

this province what they are going to expect for their dollar. 

 

So that was the interesting . . . just the amount of money that 

could be raised in short order. It showed that people, not only 

financially, but they were breaking their daily commitments, 

their work habits, everything. I recall one meeting in Climax, 

Mr. Speaker, where in fact a meeting was called late afternoon 

and by evening they had I think it was 250, 260 people in a hall. 

It was tough to get in and even count the crowd  the hall was 

so packed, the small country hall. 

 

So of course, as I said earlier, they felt they were right up 

against it  and they were right up against it. So out of that 

came the rural health care coalition group, and basically it was 

members from each affected community. And from that I guess 

they elected or chose through some consensus to have a body 

represent them with the government. And they entered into 

some negotiations with the government. 

 

And I have in fact a copy of that rural health care coalition 

agreement. And what the government was offering up to the 

rural . . . Well not so much what the government offered up, but 

what they reached through negotiation with the rural health care 

coalition group, and the minister and deputy minister and their 

department of the day reached in negotiating with one another, 

to find out exactly what sort of health care . . . or where this 

could go really for the communities in rural Saskatchewan and 

what would come out of it; what in fact were acceptable or 

unacceptable limits to cross or not. 

 

And in fact many of the physicians around the province took a 

very active role in helping to determine what in fact was that 

line that can’t be crossed before you start to really put people’s 

lives in jeopardy, to have an element of danger involved if in 

fact it goes too far, which in many cases it eventually did. But at 

the time that this agreement was brought about, they in fact felt 

that everything was on the right track. 

 

(1445) 

 

And when I look at some of the things that they had fought for 

during the day . . . And I see here the statement by the Rural 

Health Coalition and the Saskatchewan Department of Health: 

 

In general, the Rural Health Coalition and the Department 

of Health have in the past few weeks had in-depth 

discussions on a number of issues related to current and 

future health services in rural Saskatchewan. There have 

been significant changes that have taken place in the health 

sector over the past few months  rural hospital  

conversion, creation of health districts, and the formation 

of district boards. 

 

They’re basically setting out in the rural health care coalition 

agreement exactly how this has come to be. It goes on: 

 

Our discussions have been invaluable in clarifying some 

important concerns. In these discussions, we have focused 

on three key areas. 

 

And those areas . . . And they made a lot of sense to the people, 

Mr. Speaker. The first was physician services. Now as we all 

know, this is quite a concern because if in fact you don’t have 

facilities and the equipment for physicians to aid the people in 

need in the rural areas, you eventually will find that you don’t 

have the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  To make a point of order. 

 

The Speaker:  What is the member’s point of order? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, I have had the misfortune of 

listening to the member opposite for the past 15 minutes and I 

believe that pursuant to rule 31(2) of this House’s rules that the 

member is in fact off topic and making an irrelevant series of 

comments. It’s my understanding the motion before us is, 

proposed by the Government House Leader, concerning the 

hours of debate in this Assembly and not in fact concerning the 

issue of health care in rural health districts, which in fact will be 

called later this day. 

 

The Speaker:  I have  order  I have listened to the hon. 

member’s point of order and I have been listening carefully to 

the debate presented by the hon. member for Wood River. The 

hon. member for Wood River has introduced this portion of his 

address by making reference to the reason that he holds the 

position that he does related to the motion. Although I do note 

he has not tied his remarks to the intent of the motion for some 

time, and I would remind the hon. member that it is appropriate 

in debate to do that on occasion for the clarification of those 

who are listening to the debate. I find that the point of order is 

not well taken. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, as soon as the noise calms down a bit over there . . . 

The point is well taken. The member from Regina Albert South 

 and that’s the member who was going to defend the Plains 

Health Centre and chose not to at the end of the day  makes 

that point. So we already find out that he chooses not to defend 

health care services in the province. 

 

But the point about such things as the Rural Health Coalition 

Agreement and why it plays such an important role in today’s 

discussions are very relevant to this motion. Because what 

happens with a motion like this, when you have so many health 

care topics coming up at present with four health care Bills, and 

especially four Bills that the government chose not to bring up 

until the end of session . . . or what everyone thought might be 

the end of session at one time. 

  



2096 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

And they leave them to the very last and load up the workload 

on the government’s plate on the orders of the day. Then people 

that are out there trying to defend health care, such as the rural 

health care coalition group which, as I mentioned in question 

period and earlier today are having to once again resurface to 

try and defend their communities . . . and feel that their best 

avenue of defence is in fact to have it raised in the legislative 

sitting and not to be rammed and jammed with these kind of 

hours and other Bills coming forward. It all makes sense why 

this is such a relevant topic to the motion because this is all 

coming true. 

 

This morning at 10 o’clock in the rotunda of the legislature, we 

had the rural health care coalition group, and they were 

members in this case from Radville and people from 

communities all around Radville. Now the member from . . . 

where it’s called Bengough or wherever, she should have been 

there today to defend the people that are from her area, but she 

chose not to be. 

 

Now it’s one thing to choose not to be part of defending health 

care, especially in your own constituency, but to be part of a 

government that chooses rather to jam in legislation and ram the 

extended hours at the official opposition and the third party so 

that in fact we can’t defend the people that you should be 

representing in a full and fair way in this legislation session, I 

think that’s shameful. 

 

I have no idea why that member in particular would support the 

government’s motion in doing what is not fair, well, to her own 

constituents. Mr. Speaker, who will these people rely on in the 

future for any of their concerns to be dealt with? Who will they 

rely on if they have a concern as a community? Are they going 

to go forward to the member from  where she’s from? Is it 

Bengough?  Bengough-Milestone? Do you think that these 

people from that constituency are actually going to go and see 

her in her constituency office or come in here to the Legislative 

Building and say, you know we’ve got this serious concern and 

will you take care of it for us? Well I suspect not. Why would 

they? 

 

This is a member that’s basically saying to these people, your 

concern is not my concern. My only concern is to help the 

Government House Leader pull off a political agenda and try 

and get this session to come to an immediate close so we don’t 

have to be embarrassed by the people coming out from Radville 

and all the other communities in that area to say listen, you’re 

doing us wrong and we’ve got to have this fairly dealt with. 

 

So that member should be ashamed of herself. She really should 

be. And those people . . . I feel sorry for those constituents of 

hers, Mr. Speaker, because they’re on their own. If it wasn’t for 

the official opposition, they’re on their own. 

 

You, Madam Member, are going to go down in history at the 

next election. And your actions won’t be forgotten. I will assure 

the people in your constituency that you’re the one that was 

there supporting a motion on the very same day that your 

people from your communities were in this legislature trying to 

stick up for health care. And you know what? They’re doing it 

without you. Why do you suppose they’re doing it without you,  

Madam Member? 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I do want to remind the 

hon. member that the rules of the Assembly do require that 

debate be directed through the Chair. And I think all hon. 

members will find that it serves your purposes as well as the 

institution most effectively if debate is directed through the 

Chair. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will in fact 

address it through the Chair, because Mr. Speaker is always 

attentive and listening, unlike the members across the way. 

They should be attentive and they should be listening about 

what their constituents are saying, and they’re not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I truly . . . I really truly do believe that they will pay that price 

at the next election. And I find that it’s regardless of what 

political stripe. And if in fact at the end of the day you’re not 

prepared to defend those people that put you in place, regardless 

of politics  take politics right out of this equation  you will 

pay a price. 

 

And so that member from Bengough-Milestone, in my view, is 

going to be dealt with by her own constituents. I refuse to stand 

here in my place today and debate with her any longer or 

chastise her. She will be dealt with. And that gives me enough 

comfort to just move on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, moving on with this rural health care coalition 

agreement. The very fact that this became such a heated issue 

last Friday, again today, and how these people must feel inside 

of themselves, inside of themselves, especially for those people 

that aren’t being represented by their own MLAs . . . Well 

they’re here to talk about physician services. Now physician 

services in many of these communities . . . You know you take 

the health district, I think it’s Rolling Hills, and you take a look 

at how those facilities in Rolling Hills and some of these health 

district boards . . . the amount of dollars they’ve had cut back, 

the amount of cuts they’ve had in facilities  and the ability to 

operate facilities and what they can and can’t do in those 

facilities has had such a cut-back that it starts to affect the 

services that the physicians themselves can offer. 

 

And this becomes a real problem. In fact I think there’s 

something like three of four physicians at present in the Rolling 

Hills Health District. It’s a huge expanse of land, Mr. Speaker, 

and even though it’s not the population of the Reginas or 

Saskatoons, it does have a lot of unique features, geographical 

features, that still even with the government saying please 

everyone rationalize their needs to the larger centres, it’s not 

going to happen. 

 

And I found and, you know, many people before me have found 

that the best way to operate with the government is to have the 

people onside and don’t try and jam things down their throat 

because they start to find it unacceptable. And rightly so  

they should. People should not have to drive four or five hours 

in search of health care needs, in search of long-term care beds 

for their family members. They shouldn’t have to do that. 

 

Now those members from Regina or Saskatoon may well feel  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2097 

that that is appropriate. In fact the member from Yorkton, the 

minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation), I believe he is, was at a public rally in his own 

area not so many days ago and in fact made the comments that 

people are going to have to be prepared to seek out not only 

health care services in other communities or in other districts, 

but he broadened it to say a lot of services, a lot of government 

services. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what people are doing today is they’re 

drawing a line in the sand. If in fact, if in fact you’re not 

prepared as a government to say enough is enough . . . or not as 

a government but as a people  enough is enough, they can’t 

cut us back any further, this is what we find that we could live 

with in rural Saskatchewan and below that it puts my family or 

my neighbours or whomever at risk in some form or fashion. 

And if we’re talking long-term care, it puts a family in a 

situation where elderly who have raised families, who have 

pioneered this province, have spent their entire adult lives in a 

community, supporting that community, they all of a sudden 

find that they’re being moved 200 or 300 miles away. 

 

You know as well as I do, Mr. Speaker, that when you start to 

move elderly people in and out of what they consider to be their 

lifelong homes and when you start to move them in and out of 

institutions on a regular basis, you’re going to shorten their 

lives. I recall last session  was it last session or two sessions 

ago in fact?  when the elderly lady . . . We have raised so 

many cases on behalf of the people that they seem to run 

together after awhile, Mr. Speaker. But I recall one elderly lady, 

88 years of age, and I recall standing right here in this House 

and talking about this lady. She had been moved 13 times in 2 

years or a year and a half, and at the time we raised the issue 

she had been moved again and had not survived the move. 

 

And her family, Mr. Speaker, was blaming the New Democratic 

government, and they were saying, enough is enough. Thirteen 

times . . . I mean, should anybody, should any . . . would any of 

your relatives . . . is a better way of putting it . . . Any of the 

cabinet ministers, have you had your grandmother or mother or 

grandfather or father or aunts or uncles be moved 13 times at 88 

years of age in a year and a half or two years? What would you 

think? You wouldn’t tolerate it. I know you wouldn’t. But you 

have access to the Minister of Health. You have access to the 

appropriate people to put a stop to that. I know you do. And it’s 

not fair that other people can’t have the kind of service that the 

cabinet members’ families should have, and they deserve it. 

Everybody in this province deserves to have the same kind of 

health care. 

 

(1500) 

 

This is what we found interesting about the rural health care 

coalition agreement. It’s not that they were really saying, let’s 

have the identical sort of health service as they have in 

Saskatoon. Nobody was saying that. Nobody was asking for an 

MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) in Weyburn or Radville or 

Coronach. They weren’t. We’ve always accepted the fact that 

when certain services and certain medical procedures were 

needed that in fact we would, as rural residents, go into the 

larger centres where we had the professionals. We just have  

accepted that. 

 

This is where the government could never really get their minds 

around what people in rural Saskatchewan referred to as acute 

care services, and what people in this community would call 

acute care services. It is quite different, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

where in fact there was some, I guess from the rural health care 

coalition perspective and the communities they represented 

perspective . . . there had to be some realignment of government 

thinking and what in fact governments should or shouldn’t do 

for the people. 

 

I’ll move on. I guess we’ve really only touched on the first item 

in this agreement, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the deal with 

physician services. The second was the need for a mechanism to 

promote effective discussion, problem solving, and consensus 

building between district health boards and particular 

communities. And further, to provide dispute resolution 

alternatives. 

 

That was an interesting bullet in the rural health care coalition 

agreement. That was interesting to me, Mr. Speaker. Because at 

the time that this agreement was struck we had many 

communities that were still being . . . that were still having their 

services taken from them. A couple in particular — well Climax 

and Ponteix. 

 

But I’ll use Ponteix as the example of how the government at 

one point, with the reps of rural communities, struck an 

agreement to, you know, as it says right here, promote effective 

discussion, problem solving, consensus building, between all of 

the players. 

 

But what we saw was in fact just the opposite. What we saw 

was a community of Ponteix losing its health care services 

altogether and we’re talking about a community of oh, 6, 

700, mostly elderly people, mostly francophone. I mean they 

have spent years working and living in harmony in that 

community with each other. All of a sudden they’re having all 

of their health care services taken away. And where would you 

go if you live in the community of Ponteix for your health care 

services? 

 

So over and above, over and above what in fact they thought 

they were going to get from the rural health care coalition 

agreement was in fact . . . it was just the opposite. You had a 

government that went in, and initially they sent out all the right 

signals that they were going to help the community, keep 

certain things going, that they would perhaps go over and above 

the agreement and do things for the community, you know, as 

an individual. 

 

Because the government has always worked on the premiss that 

if this community doesn’t know what that community’s doing 

or knowing or getting, we will win because we can always pit 

those against one another. And we will start a bidding war. The 

people of the province . . . I mean that’s not a secret. The people 

of the province are on to that, and they don’t play into it. They 

really and truly are only after the same thing after all. They 

want to ensure that their citizens all have the same benefits as 

the people down the road and the ones down the 

  



2098 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

 road should have. They should have safe and reliable health 

care, and they should have equal access to education, and they 

should have the, well, the government services. 

 

We all pay taxes at the same level. It’s not that the people in the 

cities pay more tax. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to talk 

about tax after a while because that is a significant part of this 

whole problem and why in fact the people want, want and 

demand, the opposition parties to deal with some of these 

concerns in this legislative sitting and do it in a timely fashion, 

one where they have time to respond to the government and 

deal with it and not have it rammed and jammed in long sitting 

days. 

 

So that’s where this all becomes relevant again. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when I think about some of the concerns that came out 

of the Ponteix problem, was that, even though there was an 

agreement struck, the government didn’t live up to it. You see, 

the agreement is only good . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, 

we’ll get into the agreement. 

 

But the agreement is only good if in fact it’s funded because 

that’s what health care has become for some reason. It’s sad, 

but the government has made health care a financial issue. It’s 

not whether you’re sick; that’s irrelevant. That’s not health care 

any longer. It’s not whether you need the long-term care bed. 

Well that’s not relevant any longer either. It’s whether the 

government wants to spend the money. That’s what we’ve 

brought health care to. 

 

So what happened in the case of Ponteix was that they 

proceeded with court action. And I recall many communities at 

the time where . . . I won’t name them today. And you know 

why I won’t raise them today, Mr. Speaker, is because many of 

the communities that were considering court action at that time 

probably are the same communities that were referred to this 

morning by the head of the rural health care coalition 

agreement, that in fact once again individual communities are 

looking at taking the government to court. 

 

I don’t know if the government’s afraid of that. I can’t answer 

for government. They seem to want to take everybody to court. 

So maybe they feel more at home there. And they may well 

because half of that caucus is lawyers  not to say that the 

legal profession, you know, isn’t something to be proud of. I 

hope my own boys have legal degrees when they grow older, 

and I can only hope that they go beyond that. But to say that 

there is only one perspective in this world and it must be a legal 

one, well I only hope that they broaden their mind as I keep 

asking the government to broaden their view. 

 

You know, I guess to cut to the chase, we shouldn’t always 

have an urban lawyer as a Health minister. Not that they are 

good or bad people, that’s not my case, but perhaps they view 

the world differently. Perhaps they view the world as a lawyer 

looking down from, you know, a 10-story building in Regina or 

Saskatoon . . . would view it differently than if you in fact you 

had to drive for your health care services and go two or three 

hours to get them. I think you would view health care a little bit 

differently than that lawyer. And that’s the only point I make. 

 

But in the case of Ponteix, what happens is that they take the 

government to court. I guess there would be not just hundreds 

but thousands of work hours put in to, firstly, whether or not 

they had a legitimate case. And I recall many public meetings. 

They were inviting me to their public meetings. They wanted to 

know in their own hearts and minds if they were doing the right 

thing. And I used to sit at the back of the halls and the back of 

the gym and listen to them debate whether they’re being fair. 

Are they being harsh on the government? But you know it 

always came to the same conclusion; well no, they’re not. 

Government is there not to be served, but to serve. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is really what it all comes down to. 

When you have residents of the province that pay the same tax, 

in fact more tax than many of their urban counterparts, they 

should have at least a level of service, whether it be half or 

one-third or . . . you know, I don’t know; you’d have to actually 

figure out the professional personnel and specialists that we 

have in the city and work all that out. But clearly they weren’t 

asking for as much, but they were asking for a level that would 

keep them safe and give them the comfort that they so deserve. 

 

So moving on, Mr. Speaker, they in fact took the government to 

court, and I sat in on those court proceedings and listened. And 

you know, when it was all over with, when all was said and 

done, the judge did not . . . and I have the ruling in my office 

here at the legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I could get it and refer 

to it because it really does relate with today and the way that 

people are demanding that their issues get dealt with this sitting 

in normal hours. So the judge’s ruling in fact was one where 

they said, you know, he can’t determine what kind of health 

they should have. He can only determine if in fact an agreement 

has been lived up to, if there was one struck. 

 

And I recall that judgement. It was a clear, yes. And was the 

agreement lived up to? Well he was very clear on that one also 

in saying that he didn’t think so. In his mind it isn’t, otherwise 

you wouldn’t have people taking court action. But what could 

he do about it? This was the dilemma that the judge was in. 

What was he to do about it? Because you see what happened, 

Mr. Speaker, was that the government entered into an 

agreement with affected communities, but at the same time they 

brought forward, you know, in the legislation they gave the 

ability to set up health districts and health district boards. 

 

So in one sense they’re taking the control of health out of the 

hands of day-to-day government operations  that was their 

line, that’s not ours; I’m only telling what at that time was their 

argument  and they were supposedly giving it to the health 

district boards. But if they weren’t going to fund  and this is 

the dilemma for the judge  if they weren’t going to fund the 

health districts to the level that the agreement required the 

funding to be at, then we were in the dilemma because then it 

was only by good faith that such an agreement could be adhered 

to. 

 

You see there is no law, Mr. Speaker, there is no law forcing 

the health district boards to live up to the agreement but of 

course common sense will dictate, common sense is going to 

say, well they will live up to the agreement because what are 

they  they’re local people; they’re people that live out there  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2099 

and they supposedly represent or should represent those people 

out in those districts. 

 

So it’s not in their hearts and minds to not live up to the 

agreement. No. I mean they would far sooner live up to the 

agreement. 

 

But if in fact the funding isn’t there, if in fact the government 

just refuses to put forward the dollars to make this agreement 

workable, then you’re in that situation that the judge in Swift 

Current was and he couldn’t come up with a ruling, even 

though . . . my own view of it is that he really felt that these 

communities were between a rock and a hard place. He couldn’t 

rule on it. The courts couldn’t play a role in forcing this 

agreement. It had to come back to funding, and the province is 

strongly of the view that they were going to control everything 

through funds and they have proven that to everybody that in 

fact that is the case. 

 

And speaking of funds, there was an interesting point made this 

morning when I was listening to the scrum where Rod 

MacDonald, he’s heading up the rural health care coalition 

agreement, he made the point to the media that in fact the 

province agreed; it negotiated this agreement at a time when 

there were less funds, when the future was less bright, when in 

fact we were financially in more of a strait-jacket than we are 

today. 

 

So if you could negotiate the agreement at a time when you 

don’t have the bucks, today, when you have Standard and 

Poor’s now moving their credit rating up, when you have 

surplus budgets, when you have monies coming in  huge 

windfalls from Cameco shares  when you have land lease 

sales, the oil companies drilling all over, when you have all this 

activity, shouldn’t things be better? Which relates then, Mr. 

Speaker, as to why we got some of the federal cut-backs. 

 

It wasn’t because these are mean-spirited people, it’s because 

the province was doing so much better. So here it should be 

much, much easier. 

 

(1515) 

 

An Hon. Member:  The hypocrisy of their health care. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well sure, hypocrisy of their health care. It 

should be much easier, Mr. Speaker, for the government to live 

up to the agreements today. 

 

Now the minister in question period is saying, well they are 

living up to it. What’s the problem  we are living up to it. 

 

But if you are living up to agreements, Mr. Speaker, let’s be 

serious. What would bring rural people who would rather be 

seeding, getting the sprayers ready, doing things that rural 

people do, which I’m sure that very few members opposite 

would have any idea what that is any longer . . . They would 

rather be doing that. 

 

Rural people, especially rural people in Saskatchewan, are not 

the kind of people, they’re not . . . It’s not in their nature, it’s  

not in their blood, to be holding protests, to be driving into 

Regina every few days. It’s not that they’re here for fun; it’s 

here because they felt that something isn’t right. Something’s 

rotten in Denmark or whatever the line is. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Something’s rotten in the state of 

Denmark. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Yes, in the state of Denmark. 

 

Well the . . . I can only assume that the constituents that the 

member from Bengough-Milestone should be representing but 

isn’t, I can only assume that those people are being truthful. I 

mean I would not dare think anything other. 

 

When I looked into their eyes this morning and saw some of the 

hurt that they were going through by even being here to 

question their own government, well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps 

those members from Bengough-Milestone or Weyburn-Big 

Muddy or wherever it be, should have been there to look into 

those eyes of those people. They’re elderly people, Mr. 

Speaker, and all they’re demanding is justice and fairness. 

 

So this is where it’s at now. And listening to that case put 

forward by Mr. Rod MacDonald, I thought it was a very good 

point about funding, the availability of funding being a lot 

better today than it was, you know, when was that, four or five 

years ago? Well 1994. That’s when it was, when the agreement 

was drawn up, agreed to, and completed. 

 

So there’s sort of where we have this problem on behalf of 

these communities and why this is once again starting to 

resurface. And it’s only one . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, we 

can’t view it as speaking for rural health care either. That’s 

something else that the members opposite have got to get their 

minds around. 

 

When we’re talking about the rural health care coalition 

becoming active once again, we’re talking about a certain 

number of communities and facilities that were affected. We’re 

not talking about all of rural Saskatchewan. What happens here, 

day after day after day, is we come in and we raise other 

facilities, other constituencies, and other communities that are 

suffering at the hands of this government. 

 

I don’t know how many times we’re raised, what was it, 

Kamsack, in your constituency? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Kelvington. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Kelvington? Central Butte  it just seems 

like every day there’s a different community that’s having a 

rally. There’s places  and larger ones — communities that 

weren’t affected by things that the rural health care coalition 

agreement in the first round of health care cuts were affected 

by. 

 

Take the community of Swift Current. That agreement didn’t 

impact Swift Current. But where was I at the other day with the 

member from Arm River, the deputy Health critic . . . was in 

Swift Current, watching . . .And the member from Swift  

  



2100 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

Current is in the House today. He was in the House the day of 

that protest also. He wasn’t there on the lines with the elderly 

people in the wheelchairs, some I think, 10 people in 

wheelchairs. He wasn’t there that day. He was in here. I can 

only assume he was in here because he was getting paid per 

diems to be in here. 

 

Would health care come to that level where in fact . . . Well 

now he’s turned around in his chair and he’s facing the other 

way. Well it’s probably just as well. Enjoy your short stay here. 

That’s all I can say to him, and I’m saying it on behalf of the 

people in those wheelchairs. Enjoy your short stay, because 

people are not tolerating that from their members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to touch on a few things that these 

people in Swift Current . . . and then I’ll get back to this rural 

health care coalition agreement and how it affects what we’re 

doing here today and how it is affected by this motion. 

 

But these people ask a few favours and a few questions, a few 

favours, and I of course said I would pass it on. They asked that 

firstly the Premier come out to visit with them. So I’m passing 

that on to the Premier, should he ever be here in the House, to 

consider coming out to rural Saskatchewan; consider coming 

out to the community of Swift Current and hearing what these 

people are saying. Because some of them, in fact well a number 

of them were saying, and rightly so . . . I guess they got a New 

Democrat MLA and I know they’d like to revisit that. 

 

But anyways, they were saying, you know we voted for this 

government and now look at what they’re doing to us. You 

know, Mr. . . . I guess I could say my own name in here; I’m 

not referring . . . Is it questionable? All right  well they didn’t 

say, Mr. Member, they said my name  would you please go 

back to the legislature and see if you can’t impress upon  they 

didn’t say the Premier either, but we’ll keep it at the Premier; 

that’s who they were referring to  would you please go back 

and try and impress upon this Premier exactly the situation 

we’re in if they close down the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 

don’t know where the Premier is. 

 

An Hon. Member:  The Romanow road show. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well the Romanow road show, as the 

member behind me has spoken of. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the disappointing part is, I don’t think 

in my heart and mind that we would ever get the Premier, I 

don’t think we’d ever get him to leave sort of the dome or the 

hut or the bunker that this place has become for many of his 

cabinet colleagues and himself. They view this as protection. If 

in fact they can put together, by way of gerrymandering the 

boundaries, less rural seats, do more for some of their large 

urban friends, their union friends, those that are going to help 

them regardless, because it’s kind of hold one another’s hand at 

election time. All they have to do in their mind is enough of that 

to ensure a victory. And I think . . .pardon me? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Buying votes. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Buying votes, exactly. The member from  

Saltcoats . . . well nobody has seen it better than the people of 

our caucus and the third party caucus, and we watched that 

government out there trying to buy votes while they’re 

completely, completely ignoring what’s happening out there to 

the people that they should be representing. 

 

But I put that to the Premier, that in fact these people in Swift 

Current do want him to get out there and give an explanation as 

to how he could do this to them. I recall the question put by the 

one elderly lady in her wheelchair that day when she asked, 

could I please make the Premier come out to Swift Current and 

tell him why he’s doing this to me. I supported him, but I won’t 

any longer. She also meant that about the member from Swift 

Current, the New Democrat member that should have been in 

that line-up that day with myself and with the member from 

Arm River, there speaking once again on behalf of that 

member’s constituents. He should have been there. I make that 

case strongly for those people. 

 

Others put the case forward that they know the Premier. 

They’ve known him for some time. They don’t think they’ll get 

anywhere in trying to deal with the Premier. He just views 

things differently. His priorities are not their priorities. So they 

were saying, well what about the Health minister? Is there any 

way we can get the Health minister involved in this? You can’t 

just kick us out on the street. 

 

I assured them, by the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they 

won’t be kicked out on the street. And our caucus, and no doubt 

the third party, will live up to that commitment. These people 

will not be kicked out on the street. We’re kicking you people 

out on the street first. That’s what we’re going to do. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you go and you attend rallies, as 

the people in Kelvington or Kamsack or Central Butte or so 

many of the other communities have had, you start to wonder, 

you have to wonder, about the Health minister’s comments 

Friday, and again today, when he’s standing up in the House 

and he’s claiming: I have no idea what’s going on. Well nobody 

disagreed with him at that point. 

 

But he’s saying, I have no idea what’s going on; the 

agreement’s being lived up to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Because he’s not here, that why. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well if he were here, he would know what 

the problems are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If he was in this House, 

he would know that in fact there are those serious concerns. 

 

If he wouldn’t have walked out of here today, he would’ve 

known that these kind of concerns that are being brought 

forward by these constituents of some of theirs, by these 

communities that some of those people represent. he would 

know what is really coming down from this rural health care 

coalition. 

 

He would realize the seriousness of where this whole health 

care debate is going, and they would stand up and admit to the 

people of the province, firstly, that perhaps they made a mistake 

in the first round but that they would try to correct some of their  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2101 

errors and some of the things that they’ve done in the past. 

 

Instead, what you have is a government headed up by the 

Government House Leader who has decided to ram forward 

with legislation, dealing sort of the other smack in the face that 

they’re going to give to rural Saskatchewan in how they’re dealt 

with in health care. 

 

This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why such a Bill . . . or such a 

motion, I should say, dealing with the extended hours, why it 

becomes so important. 

 

And I’m just going to make a few more points on the 

importance of this rural health care coalition agreement  and I 

know other members will want to jump in here soon  and we 

look at point no. 3 . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to introduce 

a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Seated, I 

just noticed, in the east gallery here this afternoon is a young 

lady who I’ve known for, I guess it would be about three years 

now, Heather Wiles. She has been a good friend, a great 

volunteer in terms of supporting our activities. 

 

She’s also just recently  and I must congratulate her  

obtained employment at Kalium Chemicals in my constituency 

where she will be undertaking a rather, from the brief 

description I heard of the job, a rather challenging career in 

terms of traffic work so to speak, coordinating shipments from 

the Kalium Chemicals mine to final customers, predominately 

of U.S. (United States) destinations. 

 

And it would be, I think, a rather rewarding career as time goes 

on that she’ll find herself in. And I’m sure she’s up for the 

challenge because I do know that she’s a very capable and 

hardworking individual. 

 

So I would just ask the House here this afternoon to join in 

welcoming her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

like to join with the member from Thunder Creek in welcoming 

the guests here today. 

 

And I hope you enjoy the proceedings. As often they may 

appear to be dull on the surface, there is . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Oh that brought them to life. But in fact . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew:  I have a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Trew:  My point of order is that, according to the rules 

of the Legislative Assembly, members are not to include guests 

in debate. And I observed the member for Wood River 

engaging a guest that was just introduced in the proceedings of 

the legislature, and it’s clearly not in order. 

 

(1530) 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  The point of order is well taken and 

the member does not have leave to introduce guests . . . or to 

bring guests into the debate, and I would ask him to get on with 

. . . keep the debate relevant. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

would thank the member from, wherever he’s from in Regina 

here, in raising the issue. And I can only thank that member for 

. . . They sure filled these glasses up. 

 

I want to thank that member for in fact paying close enough 

attention to some of the discussion here today. Because you see 

the people that the member represents in Regina, Regina 

Coronation Park, those people don’t have the same concerns 

when it comes to health care as the people in almost every other 

area of this province. They’re not the ones, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they’re not the ones that are trying to get the 

government . . . they’re not the constituents that are trying to get 

the government to not ram through extended hours motion on 

issues that affect them, their families, their loved ones, their 

health care, their social care. 

 

The social and security blanket  I don’t even like to refer to it 

as that because they’ll probably misconstrue what we’re trying 

to do here. But they’re not the ones that are affected when you 

try and put an end to debate on issues that are as important as 

the ones before us in this legislative sitting. And they’re not the 

ones that are saying, please don’t try . . . try to stop the 

government from ramming this through in a matter of a few 

hours. 

 

So the very fact that the member from Regina Coronation Park 

is paying attention today at least is a step in the right direction, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I know so many of the members 

across aren’t really with it. And I spoke on one earlier, the 

member from Bengough or Bengough-Milestone or whatever 

the constituency is, who chose not to represent her constituents 

this morning. Perhaps she should have paid the kind of attention 

that the member from Regina was paying today. 

 

One other point I wanted to make about what the people  not 

ourselves but the people  have picked up in these last few 

days in what’s happened here at the legislature. And we’re  

  



2102 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

including in that, last Friday, the remarks by the Minister of 

Health and again today. And that is especially today, but it was 

especially apparent today, Mr. Deputy Speaker because when 

these people . . . 

 

And let’s keep in mind who we’re talking about: a lot of elderly 

people, people that came from far away, came on their own 

dollar, came in their own vehicles. They weren’t riding in 

government cabinet cars, and they weren’t using Exec Air, and 

they didn’t get per diems, and they didn’t work on the kind of 

salaries that the people in here get. They came in on their own 

dollar to try and save their communities and the future of their 

communities, okay. Let’s be very clear about who we’re talking 

about today because the people that did that, the people that 

said to their spouses, to their children . . . and drove in here 

today to impress upon this government to live up to their deal 

did it at their cost. 

 

And what did they get for it? You had a Minister of Health 

stand in this House today and made the comment that  I’ll 

paraphrase for him  that they are political opportunists. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m not going to involve you in the debate but 

I can only imagine that you wouldn’t think those people to be 

political opportunists. 

 

Firstly, when I looked at some of those people  70, 75 years 

of age some of them  tell me what political future they’re 

hoping to have? None. 

 

An Hon. Member:  They just want a healthy future. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  All they want is a healthy future. It’s a 

very good point that the member from Thunder Creek just 

made. All they want is a future, it doesn’t have to be a political 

one. They’re not striving for a political future; they’re striving 

for a future, period. They’re striving to keep their communities 

alive, and they’re striving to keep . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . isn’t that a good point now. They’re just here for the benefit 

of their friends and neighbours. That’s what they’re here for. 

 

I will make a request at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that 

Minister of Health  that that Minister of Health — send an 

apology out to those communities, the people of those 

communities that were represented by these people today, and 

apologize firstly for calling them political opportunists, and 

secondly for insulting, insulting rural Saskatchewan once again. 

And I would ask, I put that request forward, and well we’ll just 

see if the government will, in fact, respect that. I think they 

should. My colleagues think they should. 

 

So moving along in this rural health care coalition agreement. 

I’m sorry, I guess we’re only a few paragraphs into the 

agreement. It states on no. 3 . . . because we had just talked 

about the problem solving, consensus building, dispute 

resolution alternatives, we just talked about that clause and that 

bullet in this agreement. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we’ve laid out a very good 

case as to how in fact that isn’t happening, and in fact that it 

should be. You know I would like to move on, but I got to take 

a moment just to talk about governments as I think they should  

be operating. 

 

In my view, in my view, as government representatives, if 

we’re not prepared, if we’re not prepared to stand up for the 

people we represent, but more importantly if we can’t be trusted 

enough as government representatives to strike a deal and live 

up to it, what good are you as a representative to your 

constituency or to society as a whole. You wonder why 

politicians are held in such low esteem. Well I really and truly 

do believe not all politicians are. Some are, and I think I can see 

lots of them right from here, and they’re straight across. You 

don’t have to look anywhere but straight across. 

 

So no. 3, the next bullet, the extent of health centre services in 

particular communities, and that bullet . . . I’ll have to go up to 

the top here because it’s talking about the discussions are being 

focused on in three key areas, you see. There was physician 

services, the dispute mechanisms, and the extent of health 

centre services in particular communities. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Or lack thereof. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Or lack thereof — in fact that’s a better 

way of looking at it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not the services 

that are provided; it’s the lack of services that are provided. 

 

See, people don’t come forward and make an argument that in 

fact if things are rather well or working well or agreements 

lived up to, they’re not going to come in here and say, you 

know just because why . . . you know, it’s June. They have 

nothing to do . . . and say hey, you know, we’re going to be 

rabble-rousers. Well that’s not what it’s all about. It’s just . . . 

that’s irresponsible to even think that, as it was for that minister 

the other day to be saying, you know, well they’re political 

protesters. I didn’t see political protesters in Swift Current the 

other day; I saw elderly people in wheelchairs. 

 

So I guess it’s all in how you view the world, isn’t it? I guess 

it’s all in what you really think of the people that you 

supposedly represent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Good 

point. It’s your philosophy in life, and it’s how you view your 

neighbours, your friends, your communities. That’s what it’s 

about. You know that’s a very good point that the member from 

Humboldt makes about . . . I can never remember constituency 

names — mind you, they keep saying that I’m the member from 

Shaunavon; it’s Wood River, by the way. 

 

But having no principle, and that’s really what this is all about, 

is it not? Is it not what this is all about? No principle. Tell me, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Tell me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where’s 

that guy from, that member that won’t shut up? Where’s he 

from? Prince Albert-Carlton. Now is that not the member that 

should be . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  I want to caution the member that 

you would direct your comments through the Speaker. The 

comments are to go through the Speaker, not across the floor to 

the other. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  You’re right then, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And through the Chair, I will refer through the Chair about that  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2103 

member that won’t shut up. So the whole situation that we have 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the whole situation that we have here 

is in fact a government that is unprincipled; otherwise they 

don’t do this kind of stuff. That’s a government that is 

unprincipled, otherwise they wouldn’t say that people that were 

in here today are political opportunists. You see, that is the 

problem that we’re having here today. 

 

Moving right along, Mr. Speaker, because I’ve got so many 

people that want to enter the debate . . . And I mean we only 

have so many weeks so we must continue . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Oh, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask that you 

address the member that is hollering and calling names. 

 

Is it fair that a member has to stand in this House and have 

those kind of insults continuously being hollered at? That is not 

fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not fair. I don’t mind the 

heckling, but those kind of insults and being called names is not 

what this place is all about. 

 

But you know when that happens, when that happens . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . that’s a very good point. The 

member from Humboldt hit it right on the head. This reflects 

the character; this reflects how they govern. This is exactly 

what the problem that the people that are here on the rural 

health care coalition agreement are having. Right? 

 

Because if you dare stick up for any people you represent, well 

that member from  where is that member from?  Saskatoon 

constituency anyway. She was shut down in the House here the 

other day when I was speaking, for calling me a liar twice, and 

made to apologize to the House, and should have had to again 

today  Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

Anyways, moving right along, you can really see, you can 

really see the problems that come about when in fact, if we’re 

being shown that kind of . . . that lack of respect when we’re 

trying to speak on behalf of the people, then should have I . . . 

See, maybe I’m out of synch, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Maybe I 

shouldn’t be surprised when in fact I raise, you know, the 

concerns of those people that drive in here today, who are called 

the political opportunists. They’re probably more hurt than I. 

Because it’s becoming obvious  you attack this government, 

you’re going to get attacked. And that’s how it’s been, hasn’t it? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Intimidation. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Yes, intimidation. A reflection of how 

they govern. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Co-opt and intimidate. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Co-opting. There. You know, that is a 

good point that you raised, because this is a government that is 

successful at a few things. They are successful; they are among 

the best that I’ve ever seen at co-opting; co-opting for all the 

wrong reasons. 

 

Are you still hollering hear, hear, hear? Because I’m just telling 

you what the people hear out there. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not what I . . . You know, if I were 

sitting on those front benches, if I were the Premier, I wouldn’t 

want to have a government that is remembered for all those 

wrong reasons. 

 

So they can heckle all they want and I guess I won’t comment 

any longer about it because it really shows the point I was 

making in regards to how these people that drive in for two-, 

three-, four-, five-hour drives to try and get the government to 

only stick up to their word. They’re not here saying, give us 

more; give us something that nobody else has. They’re saying, 

just live up to an agreement that we had with you that was 

negotiated in good faith, bargained for in good faith, and 

bargained for at a time when it was less affordable than today. 

So that’s really what’s happening here. 

 

Now no. 3, in the general terms of this rural health care 

coalition agreement, no. 3 states, for the purposes of this 

statement only, community means the geographical area of a 

former hospital district as at April 1, 1993. 

 

And I guess, you know, that to me says a lot too about rural 

Saskatchewan because that’s how they view community. They 

don’t look . . . 

 

(1545) 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Order, order. I have been listening for 

quite some time to the member in his deliberations and he has 

really not related to the motion at hand here in the last several 

minutes, and I would ask him to keep the debate relevant to the 

motion that is on the table here now. So I would ask him to 

make some either ties to the motion or . . . but to keep the 

debate relevant. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll go right, once 

again, to the relevancy of the health care topics, to the abuse of 

the government on health care issues as it is in regards to a 

motion that would have the opposition trying to defend the 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan in extended sitting 

hours. 

 

And just to make it very relevant so we can once again show the 

problem as seen through the eyes of the people of this province, 

this is a government that said we’re bringing in 70 pieces of 

legislation; we’re now up to 116 pieces of legislation, most of 

which was brought in in the final days of the legislative sitting. 

 

The day that they brought forward this motion, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the same day that they were still having introduction 

of new Bills, and this sort of practice, this ramming and 

jamming and push that they have on to wrap this thing up 

before they have any more trouble with the people in rural 

Saskatchewan over health care, it’s very relevant. That’s what 

makes this whole thing relevant . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

118 pieces of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And this is a government whose argument for putting forward 

extended hours legislation, their argument is, we must have 

extended hours legislation because there’s too much work on  

  



2104 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

the order paper. You see it doesn’t make any sense to the 

people. We’re still trying to come to grips with what kind of 

bullying tactics that Government House Leader has promised 

the Premier. We’re trying to come to grips with, firstly, what he 

must have promised, and then once he realized the complete 

and utter foolish mistake he has made, how we’re trying to 

work to see if we can’t pull him along into sort of the new 

political century that they let on that they are part of. 

 

The fact of the matter is these are old political guys. They are 

back-room boys doing the back-room tricks right there. And the 

question is, who are they doing the back-room tricks to? The 

relevancy, Mr. Deputy Speaker — people such as the rural 

health care coalition, people that this group represents, the 

communities that are represented by these people, the people 

that live in them, and those people that need the services that 

are provided in these communities. 

 

That’s why this is so relevant, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because the 

topic of the day  the topic of the day — is whether or not 

communities involved with the rural health care coalition, and 

that once had an agreement, are having the amount of time 

allowed in this legislative sitting to have their cases heard and 

to be dealt with in a fair and open manner. And this 

government, the government that claims to be open and 

accountable, now when the cards are before them we find out 

that they’re not either open or accountable. In fact they’re 

sitting there, they call names to not only the opposition and 

third party members if we so should raise issues that they don’t 

like to deal with, but now they’re into the games of calling 

everybody, everybody who raises an issue, a political 

opportunist. 

 

People don’t have to be political opportunists, Mr. Health 

Minister. All you have to do is continue to be operating in the 

manner you are, and they don’t have to be opportunists because 

you’re going to get the boot. You are going to get the boot at 

the next election. People don’t have to tolerate and nor will they 

tolerate that kind of abuse from you and your government. 

That’s why this agreement is so relevant. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was the lead-off question today, and 

we’re questioning its relevancy in today’s proceedings? Oh, 

how would we? How would we question its relevancy? It’s the 

topic of the day. We’ve got people coming in from rural 

Saskatchewan to discuss whether or not their communities have 

any future. And we’re trying to get the government to move 

along and do the business at hand so that it would allow some 

of these communities affected to be heard, to be dealt with in a 

fair manner. So of course it’s relevant. 

 

What isn’t relevant, what isn’t relevant to anything, is when you 

have members opposite hollering names. What’s that relevant 

to? That’s relevant to nothing, only abuse. People aren’t going 

to tolerate it. 

 

So when we look at point no. 3 in this rural health care coalition 

agreement with the Saskatchewan Department of Health, and 

they refer to community as in fact something bigger than the 5 

or the 6 or the 700 people in the community or the 1,500 . . . it 

means bigger than that. It means all their friends and  

neighbours in the larger district. It always has. 

 

Thus, that’s why we had the union hospital district Act. This is 

the Act, by the way, that I see if we weren’t doing this motion, 

the government could have moved to the Bill repealing the 

union hospital district Act. You see that’s community. That’s 

community getting repealed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Right on. Right on. We could have moved on to brass tacks, but 

instead we’re dealing with these kind of tactless games. 

 

So when you take a look at community and what it means . . . 

and in fact they’re referring to it in a geographical sense. It 

really was the first step in taking the pride for one thing, the 

pride away from the people that work. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how some of these 

communities had their facilities built and how they got X-ray 

equipment and equipment in these facilities? It was because 

they had organizations and groups holding raffles or making 

quilts, or bingos, bake sales. And it was done at that community 

with that community spirit at that community level to . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well exactly. As the member from 

Humboldt has said, this government’s got to come to grips. 

They’ve got to try to get an understanding of what community 

means as the people in rural Saskatchewan understand 

community. It means working together. It doesn’t matter what 

the political stripe or the religion or where they live or the 

colour of skin. It doesn’t matter. Any of those things, they just 

don’t matter. What matters is, can we all work together for a 

common goal and a common good. That’s what they’re trying 

to say. And they had it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the rural health 

care coalition agreement. 

 

So this is why, when these people start to see their community 

ripped apart further, this is why they’re coming in here today. 

And I can only say once again that we’re only talking about a 

specific number of Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But as you recall, we’ve raised community after 

community that weren’t involved in this rural health care 

coalition agreement. 

 

No. 4, point no. 4 in this agreement, the coalition and the 

department have acknowledged the need to provide a sense of 

security for particular communities at the present time, while 

encouraging people to work with their district health boards in 

the development of even better alternatives that address the 

unique needs of these communities. 

 

You see, that’s really what I had touched on earlier, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and why . . . and you can see, as we discussed this 

issue today, how it does become so relevant to a motion to 

extend the hours, so as not to allow this kind of discussion to 

occur on behalf of the people in rural Saskatchewan. That’s 

why it became so relevant because here we have the department 

acknowledging . . . You see they can’t say, well now anybody’s 

putting words in their mouth. They can’t say that because we 

have the deputy minister. We have the deputy Health minister 

who was a signatory to this agreement, so they can’t say that 

they don’t have a good handle on what’s in here. I mean, they 

of course went through this with a fine-tooth comb to ensure 

that firstly it sort of met what they felt were government needs. 

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2105 

I mean I can only assume that they wouldn’t have agreed unless 

there was some give and take on both sides but that it was 

affordable. It was costed out. You wouldn’t have a Deputy 

Health minister come up with a plan without having it costed. I 

mean that’s part of government. So they can’t use the argument, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this is unaffordable. It had to be. They 

can’t sign these agreements unless they are. 

 

And in fact to even make that point in a better way, you recall, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when this government took over the 

reigns of power, one of the first orders of business that were 

dealt with was to move to accrual accounting. And when you 

move to accrual accounting, it really had quite an impact on the 

futures  is that the futures? — that RMs (rural municipality) 

could buy into. They couldn’t bank up their amount of roads 

that they could work on in a particular year . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Right. 

 

So really, as the member from Saltcoats I’m sure would agree, 

this is affected much in the same way as RMs in their futures. If 

you agree to something in an agreement under accrual 

accounting it must be costed and paid for in that given year. 

That’s how accrual accounting works from a provincial 

government’s point of view. 

 

So we can’t come along and say, well now we’re finding this is 

just out of reach. That isn’t the case, that isn’t the case; it was 

paid for, okay. We just have to accept that because that’s the 

way that the government works. They set the rules. They priced 

it out. They had to allocate the monies for it or should have. 

 

So what do we have? Well it says here, in response to these 

concerns and the first  as we dealt with earlier  physician 

services, the Department of Health . . . and I’ve got to quote 

from this because that’s why it shows the relevancy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of how when you strike an agreement . . . and 

now it’s becoming relevant because it’s back up today, as is this 

motion, and not having enough time to deal with the real issue 

of the day rather than dealing with the issue put forward by the 

Government House Leader in his political games. That’s how it 

becomes relevant. 

 

Physician services: the Department of Health supports the 

principle that primary physician services should be 

provided as close to home as possible. 

 

That very first sentence, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . and that 

sentence has got to be correct otherwise Duane Adams, the 

deputy Health minister, would not have been a signatory to this 

agreement. It wouldn’t have been agreed to by the government. 

He was representing government and they accept that to this 

point because the Minister of Health is even saying, well as far 

as he knows the agreement is being lived up to in spirit and 

every other whatever. 

 

So when we take a look at physician services and that first line, 

that first, opening line under physician services supports the 

principle that primary physician services should be provided as 

close to home as possible. Really that’s what the people of rural 

Saskatchewan, when you live out in rural Saskatchewan, that’s 

what you would expect. 

Now they’re not saying, they’re not saying, let’s have, you 

know, CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans and MRIs 

as close as possible to a community, say of Coronach. They’re 

not saying that. But physician services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

you see what . . . It gets back to what is an acute care service in 

rural Saskatchewan versus an acute care service in the large 

urbans. Because they don’t have the little walk-in clinics. 

 

If you cut your hand open on a swather or get your arm 

squeezed by a rock picker or whatever, you know if you’re in 

town and you got 24-hour walk-in clinics, at least there’s a 

medical professional that you can take your injury to and they 

can have a look at it. And they can do what needs to be done, or 

they have emergency services at the three hospitals. Well they 

do until this government slams the door shut on the Plains 

Health Centre. Then of course that’ll change. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what these people are asking for is 

just to have services as close as possible to home. But even the 

type of services to have, where in fact, you know, perhaps to get 

some stitches. You know, if in fact there’s a heart attack. You 

know . . . 

 

(1600) 

 

An Hon. Member:  . . . time to travel . . . 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Exactly. Time from the point of the 

problem. 

 

You know that’s a very good point that the member from 

Thunder Creek raises. Because their concern is not just whether 

or not they have a service in . . . We’ll use Mankota as an 

example. It’s not just that they have a service in Mankota, but 

do you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people . . . It’s not 

like they’re all within a mile or two of Mankota. You see, and 

this has never been taken into consideration properly. 

 

We have people that drive 40 or 50 miles to get to Mankota. Or 

40 or 50 . . . You know, and I recall when Climax, the 

community of Climax, was going to take the government to 

court. We have not only farmers, but we have oil workers, we 

have pipeline workers, that had an hour to an hour and a half 

drive to get to Climax. You see, and then when you don’t have 

that facility to offer the services, even if it were minor services 

. . . 

 

But you know, we also have to think about some sort of 

emergency out in these communities. If, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what you have is a heart attack and you can make it 30 or 40 

miles, as some of these people have got to travel to just get to a 

place such as Coronach or Kincaid or . . . I won’t go through the 

whole list of communities. I could, I guess, I could probably 

name all 52. 

 

But is it not fair that at least there should be some medical 

attention where they could give emergency care to keep people 

alive long enough, if in fact the government is only giving . . . 

the only solution that the government can have is to keep them 

alive long enough to get them into Regina or get them into 

Saskatoon, just as long as they don’t show up DOA (dead on  

  



2106 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

arrival), as these members behind me have just discussed. Now 

that’s one of the problems that other members in the House 

raised not so many weeks ago . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

That’s right. It’s a challenge about stats. Now the real problem 

here is that if in fact these people can’t get their agreement lived 

up to, then we’re going to see a lot more DOAs, dead on 

arrivals. 

 

That’s not what we’re all about in Saskatchewan. I keep telling 

the people that. When they’re posing these questions, when will 

this end, when will the government come to its senses, I keep 

telling them, you know, it’s not us that have got to come to our 

senses as rural people. And if you’re talking about anything 

ending, it will be the government’s career that ends. It will be 

the New Democrat government that finally ends. And the 

people, the people will be the ones to once again get control of 

their lives, to once again determine what they feel is safe and 

reliable. That’s where this is going. 

 

But what we find interesting is in fact it states right in here, the 

Department of Health. It doesn’t say communities, and it 

doesn’t say rural health care coalition. It says the Department of 

Health supports the principle that primary physician services 

should be as close to home . . . So they’re already on record as 

really stating that they can or they do believe in something. I 

mean for heaven’s sakes, we’ve got to believe in something out 

there. 

 

Let me read on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Let me quote from this 

document that is of such concern and such relevancy today 

because of what has happened even as little as 1:30 today in 

question period. 

 

Districts are being encouraged to work toward this 

principle objective when planning medical services and 

coverage within their districts. 

 

Well that only makes sense. If the Department of Health  the 

way I’m reading this, as it’s unfolding  if the Department of 

Health has or supports the principle of primary services being 

as close to home . . . And really then what they’re saying is that 

we would support districts working towards this principal 

objective when they’re doing their planning. 

 

So that makes perfect sense. I’ll quote on: 

 

It is the department’s stated policy that (department 

meaning the Department of Health, Mr. Deputy Speaker), 

in cooperation with the college of physicians and surgeons, 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association, and the College of 

Medicine, it wants to attract more Canadian, and 

specifically Saskatchewan-trained, physicians to practise in 

rural Saskatchewan to address the long-standing problem 

of physician supplying. 

 

You see that — now the Department of Health is clearly taking 

a position from this document that I see that they don’t feel that 

there are enough physicians in rural Saskatchewan. Well I think 

everyone in rural Saskatchewan would agree to that. 

 

But is it really and truly the problem that we can’t get  

physicians in rural Saskatchewan? You see there wouldn’t . . . 

you know you could use this same analogy, that there wouldn’t 

be enough mechanics in rural Saskatchewan if you didn’t allow 

them to have a garage. Right? If the government come out and 

said no, you can’t have any garages in rural Saskatchewan, then 

I can assure you that some department is going to have to take 

the position that they don’t feel there’s enough mechanics. 

That’s basically what they’re saying. 

 

On the other hand, what they were also getting at in this whole 

Rural Health Coalition Agreement, or at least the coalition 

themselves  if the government now feels that they are going 

to find a way to circumvent the agreement or ignore it 

completely, is it fair that what you would have in rural 

Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, is the ability for a doctor to 

diagnose, but not the ability or not the services to do something 

in regards to the diagnosis? You see that was another problem 

with what the government created. 

 

And we’ll use the mechanic analogy again because the 

members across the way I’m sure would at least be able to 

understand mechanics in garages, even if they don’t have a grip 

on what happens in health care in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

But it would the same as being able to take your car to one 

garage and having a mechanic look under the hood and go all 

through it and say, this is what I find; it’s a problem in this or 

that. Then taking and closing your hood, and telling you that he 

can make an appointment at another garage, where they actually 

fix those kinds of problems. 

 

You see now, do you think people find that fair? No. Well the 

people on this side of the House don’t find that fair, but I’m not 

so sure when I look at the people . . . the NDP government. 

Perhaps you need, like a lawyer’s briefing or something on that, 

to see if you can, you know, have this so it relates. I’m not so 

sure it does for them. I mean all we can do is endeavour to have 

them understand how the people view this out in our rural 

constituencies and why it is, why it is. 

 

And we don’t . . . Not only do we not mind the people getting 

hold of us, but we encourage it to the point where I’ve told 

many, if at the end of the day you feel the only way you can 

receive health care in this province  the province that 

pioneered health care  is to have the official opposition raise 

it in the Legislative Assembly, then so be it. 

 

We would rather not do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We would 

rather they had the services that they deserve. But one must do 

what one must do and I guess that’s the way they look at it in 

rural Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right on. 

Desperate measures, desperate times, in dealing with a 

desperate government. So when we . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Desperadoes. 

 

Anyway, so when you see the relevancy of where this is all 

going, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here we have . . . you know, it’s 

really headed up by the Department of Health saying, well we 

don’t have enough physicians; however, we don’t want to 

discuss the fact that we’ve closed down hospitals, locked them 

and bolted a phone booth to . . . and bolted a phone booth to the  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2107 

side of some of these hospitals. It makes no sense. 

 

And often it’s raised by people out in these communities too. 

You know, they ask me to explain it to them and I do the best I 

can in trying to understand why the government would think 

it’s okay to close the facilities; not have the equipment to do 

certain tests and procedures; and yet stand up and say, well the 

problem you have is you don’t have physicians. 

 

If, you know, if any of the members opposite would like to chat 

at that, I would sure be willing to hear them, and pass on any 

comments that they might have for the people that, as I said 

earlier, continuously  and luckily so  continuously contact 

us to try and get the health that they deserve in Saskatchewan, 

to get the health that they deserve and have it debated in a 

timely fashion and to not have it rammed at them. 

 

And I say “at them”, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because who’s 

speaking for people in rural Saskatchewan today in health care? 

Well it’s clearly, it’s clearly not them. And they know that. 

They know that. Reading old Hansards, as the member opposite 

was saying, well I will tell this to the member. If you 

understood health care 10 per cent of what I did or do, then you 

would have the right to stand in this House, you would have the 

right to stand in this House and make comments. But obviously 

you have no idea what you’re talking about. That is very clear 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well they don’t phone you any 

longer, do they? 

 

So number two: 

 

The department indicated that it supports the development 

of viable group medical practices. In some cases these 

practices may be a group of physicians resident in one 

community, while in other cases physicians may reside in 

different communities and still enjoy the supportive 

benefits of an affiliated practice. The department does not 

have a policy to eliminate single-practice locations. Some 

physicians still prefer to work in this fashion, having done 

so for many years, and this will continue. 

 

This is the most interesting point in this rural health care 

coalition agreement, Mr. Speaker. And what makes it of interest 

is the fact that it wasn’t the government that came up with the 

idea of doctors not in the same community or operating out of 

the same facilities to work together. In fact one of the projects 

 maybe the first project  actually occurred in my part of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And it was the doctors in the 

communities of Shaunavon, Climax, and Eastend had an 

agreement to have a . . . it was a working relationship, Mr. 

Speaker, in which they would cover for one another, that they 

had agreements where they could go in and do what needed to 

be done on behalf of the people in each or any of the facilities. 

 

I guess, what you would call it . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  A real made-in-Saskatchewan solution. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Oh isn’t that the truth. As the member 

from Thunder Creek has said, a real made-in-Saskatchewan 

solution to some of the problems and it’s not New Zealand  

health care; it’s not New Zealand-style health care. I mean it’s 

fine. You know, we don’t want to try and drag the Minister of 

Finance into a health care debate; or maybe we do, because 

maybe that’s what it’s all about. 

 

(1615) 

 

I remember, as do many of the people in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, how the government of the day tried to convince 

people that certain changes had to occur. Why? Well because of 

what happened in New Zealand. I was never able to put that 

together as well as some of the members opposite because I just 

thought that what happens in Saskatchewan should be dealt 

with in Saskatchewan and in a Saskatchewan way and in a 

Saskatchewan manner. 

 

But I guess that doesn’t fit and so I won’t stress that. I still 

believe in that principle. I still believe that what happens in 

New Zealand should be dealt with in New Zealand. Right? I 

mean if they have mad-cow disease in Britain, then so be it. I 

can only wish them well but I don’t want to go kill my cows  

right?  in Canada. I just think that we would have a different 

solution and they should have their solution. But to have a 

solution that was arrived at because of what was happening in 

another country, I thought was ridiculous. And that’s all I’ll say 

on that matter. 

 

No. 3, on page 2 in this rural health care coalition agreement, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

The coalition is pleased to have received the cooperation of 

the department in clarifying the policy on physician service 

and fully endorses this policy as stated. 

 

And you see, this is most interesting because here you have, 

here you have a government that finally, after being grabbed by 

the tie and dragged to the bargaining table, finally came up with 

some policies. They had decided that they weren’t going to in 

fact just ram and jam  that they weren’t just going to ram and 

jam down people’s throats  things. They actually came up 

with a policy. 

 

And you see how grateful, you see how grateful the coalition, 

which is really the representative body of the people in rural 

Saskatchewan, the people in rural Saskatchewan . . . oh I’m 

sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  I think perhaps the member would like to 

do that again. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests, I 

would like to ask again. 

  



2108 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

The Speaker:  It is somewhat extraordinary, but the hon. 

member for Thunder Creek has requested leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won’t take too 

much time seeing as the members opposite are rather impatient 

in this regard. But I would like, at this point in time, to point the 

members of the Assembly in the direction of the Speaker’s 

gallery where Mr. Al Zabinski, a friend of mine and a 

successful realtor here in the city of Regina . . . and also an 

active member in the Liberal Party and has been rather involved 

in terms of executive level functions in the party over the years, 

and has been a very good supporter and volunteer as well, I 

might add, and a good deal of energy and advice and 

enthusiasm that he always brings to whatever task is put before 

him. So I would just like the members of the Assembly here to 

recognize him this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Extended Hours 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

will move on. As I said earlier today, there are so many that 

want to, you know, get into this debate on the extended hours 

and whether or not these extended hours are fair or not, not to 

the opposition and third party but whether or not they’re fair to 

the people of this province. 

 

And so I won’t take much more time, although I think another 

three or four days could be filled from myself alone in dealing 

with this. And I appreciate the member from Battleford 

weighing heavily on each and every word, because I’m sure he 

has heard many of the same health care concerns and health 

care complaints that I have raised here today. 

 

An Hon. Member:  One of the few members opposite 

listening. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Well that is a very good point. He’s one of 

the few members opposite that is listening to the debate today 

and I think he should be congratulated for that. He’s heard 

hours and hours of debate in this House before and in fact has 

been part of hours and hours of debate, Mr. Speaker, and the 

fact that he’s still, at this point, paying close attention, when 

other members who, in fact, represent rural constituencies and 

have members coming into to this House today, as the member 

from Bengough-Milestone did, and not . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well what is it? Big Muddy? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  One of those. In fact those are the kind of 

people that refuse to listen to their constituents. At least some of 

them are attentive. But as I said earlier, those constituents will 

also deal with them at election time. 

 

Moving right along at a rapid pace, and I see I got pages and 

pages left to go, so I want to at least cover off some of the 

topics that I think are of most concern today to the people that 

in fact need their issues raised in a fashion in this Assembly 

where thorough and thoughtful debate can occur around the 

issues and not around this sort of a timetable, time schedule, 

that was set forward by the Government House Leader. 

 

I’ll be very honest. What I’m hearing from some of the 

members opposite as they pass in the hallways, the Government 

House Leader did not share this sort of a devious plan with his 

caucus and cabinet. And I hope it doesn’t come back to haunt 

him and cause hard feelings in his own caucus. But I do hope, I 

do hope he comes to his senses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And moving along in this rural health care coalition agreement, 

there is the part where it’s talking about promoting effective 

discussion, problem solving, consensus building, and a 

resolution of disputes. I’ve dealt with this at a fair length at the 

beginning of my remarks this afternoon, so I’m going to skip 

rather quickly through here. 

 

But I said earlier, as I said earlier, it deals a lot with how a 

government should actually treat the communities that they 

represent. You know, even in fact, even if you have 

constituencies that aren’t represented by government members, 

if they’re represented by opposition members, of third party 

member or independent members, still at the end of the day, it’s 

the government — it’s the government — that is responsible for 

their actions in how it relates to public policy, and it affects the 

people in everyone’s constituency. 

 

And this is why this one section in this rural health care 

coalition agreement was firstly necessary. It really hit it on the 

head and was agreed to by the government. And so I’m just 

going to let that whole, entire section pass because I think it 

really speaks loud and clear about what a government’s all 

about. And we dealt with it extensively at the beginning of my 

remarks, as I had said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also with health centre services and in fact the kinds of services 

that are provided and agreed upon by both coalition and 

Department of Health and all the players . . . and keep in mind 

we’re talking about the players that were affected by the cuts to 

those 52 rural communities. We’re still at this point not talking 

about all the communities in Saskatchewan, rural 

Saskatchewan, that had health facilities, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

only talking about those that were in that first set of cuts or the 

blood bath or whatever. I’ve heard it called so many things. 

Actually I don’t recall it being called anything nice, but . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  The health care holocaust. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  The health holocaust. It’s referred to a 

great deal. You know what it shows is the fear. 

 

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2109 

You know, it’s not that the people of rural Saskatchewan just 

have a lot of disrespect for the urban government members. 

That’s not the case. In all truthfulness, you know, you go out 

and talk to these people in rural Saskatchewan, basically they 

don’t care what those people do. You know, I mean they don’t 

want to affect their lives. It’s not like they’re coming in here 

and saying, well let’s try and disrupt Regina. I mean they just 

want to be out on their farms and villages and work in their 

gardens and live a very peaceful, tranquil life. They don’t want 

to be disruptive to rest of the province. 

 

But you know what continuously gets raised? Is they’re saying, 

this is how we want to live, so what gives these people the right 

to do it to us? I don’t know that. 

 

But I’m sure that some of the members . . . surely one or two of 

the members opposite . . . even though they think this is a 

filibuster, it’s not. You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not. What it 

really and truly is is people having and asking that their points 

of view get across to some of those members across that way 

who don’t seem to have come to grips with what this is all 

about. 

 

An Hon. Member:  GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program). 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Oh. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, I should 

never have mentioned the word GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) because I see now my caucus colleagues want to talk 

about the fiasco in the agriculture debate. 

 

And I may well have to get into that. And you recall, Mr. 

Speaker, how severe the debate was when in fact the  I keep 

on wanting to say the caucus full of lawyers  the New 

Democrat caucus, how severe it was, when in fact they used 

retroactive legislation. I’m going to have to make a note here, 

Mr. Speaker, because now I’ve got too many topics on the go, 

which are all relevant as you well know, all relevant to this 

motion today. But I’ll have to revisit this one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact, it may just have to come up for a couple-day debate 

here in a few days. It just warrants that kind of concern because 

I’m surprised at how often, Mr. Speaker, this issue keeps 

coming back. Just when I think they have put this thing to rest 

 they have accepted that they’re dealing with a government 

that has no compassion, no concern about agriculture  then 

you have a group of farmers saying no, we demand, we demand 

a certain level of treatment. Right. 

 

So I’m just going to have to set that aside, and I’ll finish the 

rural health care coalition agreement, and I think let others 

speak. And perhaps in a few days I’ll join back in the 

discussion, if you would so permit, Mr. Speaker, and discuss 

. . . and I know you would like to have me back to discuss my 

views on agriculture, as you have enjoyed my views on health 

care. And really those are the views of the people of this 

province. 

 

When we take a look at some of the health care services . . . and 

I’m just going to quickly run right through. It’s really just to 

have an assurance that you’re going to have respite care,  

palliative care, convalescence care, long-term care, and a form 

of acute care that would provide that safety and reliability that 

these people worked hard for. These are the people that built 

this province. Let’s not forget who we’re talking about. It’s the 

pioneers that built the infrastructures, that built the grid road 

systems, the highway infrastructures, the water and sewer 

infrastructures, the educational system, and the health care 

system in rural Saskatchewan, among many other things. Those 

are the people we’re talking about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just think that it’s incumbent upon a government 

to live up to what they promised the people. And it’s one thing; 

you come back and you say, well, you know, that was at 

election time, and now we can’t afford it because the federal 

government cut us back, right. Every argument is the federal 

government. We can’t do this or that because of the federal 

government. 

 

Well, you know, people just don’t buy that any longer. You’re 

taking some cuts from the federal government because the 

province is doing so much better, and equalization payments are 

cut back because it’s adjusted as to how you’re situated 

financially against other provinces. And it was a global cut. Just 

to set the record straight, it was a global cut. It was this 

government that could decide how in fact to distribute a $114 

million cut. 

 

When you think about that, what does 114 million mean on  

what?  a $6 billion budget? Not a lot, does it? You know, 1 

per cent, one and a half per cent of the budget and they’re trying 

to let on like the sky is falling in. Well people just aren’t buying 

into that. They aren’t. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I think as far as the health care 

debate goes, I will take my place, let others join in, although I 

have . . . 

 

(1630) 

 

An Hon. Member:  Much more of the same. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  I have hours. I have hours of things that I 

would like to talk about and will enjoy getting back into the 

discussion. But I think at this point, it’s only fair that some of 

the other members get into the debate. 

 

But as I asked earlier, and I will just ask one more time, if we 

could have the Health minister show enough respect for the 

people of this province to please, please, Mr. Minister, stop 

calling them political opportunists. Stop calling them names. 

You can call us names, and we’ll accept that because we know 

you better than they do. But please stop calling them names. 

They’re only trying to protect their communities. 

 

Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me the time to 

say as much as I did on rural health care and keeping it so 

relevant to this motion today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon and  

  



2110 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

later on this evening, I’d like to deal with a number of the issues 

that are very important to my constituency, things that I think 

we need to spend time on in this House to discuss. And I think 

when we start pushing things through in a very short period of 

time, a lot of these issues that are important to my constituents 

do not have an opportunity to come out. And I’d like to very 

briefly outline some of the topics that I intend to deal with as 

we go through this dissertation of mine. 

 

I think we need to have a bit of a discussion on service districts, 

and I know that has been pulled, but I think there are things that 

need to be said on the directions that it’s still going. Definitely I 

would like to say quite a number of things on education because 

it’s something that’s very important to me. As the past mayor of 

a community, what’s been happening with towns and RMs is 

important, and I think hospital districts is always an overriding 

one in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Those of you know where the Rosthern constituency is situated 

. . . will realize that highways is also an important aspect 

because we have had some very serious and ongoing sets of 

accidents on some of those highways. And they want to address 

some of those overriding things as well along with possibly a 

little bit on union tendering and maybe some directions on gun 

control as well. So those are basically the areas that I intend to 

cover this afternoon and this evening. 

 

I think the reason that it’s important that we take the time to 

discuss these various issues and take time to discuss them to the 

fullest possible extent as is requested and desired by the 

members is that this particular sitting of the House started fairly 

late. And it also started after an election, so there were a lot of 

new directions that needed to be put in place, new directions by 

the party that won the election and also new directions by the 

third party and the party in opposition. And I think that those 

positions need to be worked out very carefully because that, to 

some extent, is going to set the direction of government over 

the next numbers of years. 

 

The amount of work that was put in front of the House this year 

I found quite amazing. I have on my window-sill a stack of all 

the pieces of paper, the Acts that we’re supposed to go through, 

and I think we’re at about 118 by now. Some of them are fairly 

small, they’re a page or two. And some of them are just very 

thick stacks of papers, and it takes a long time just to read those, 

much less to comprehend them, to discuss them, to debate them, 

and to develop those into a system of law that is most 

meaningful and significant and useful to our province and to 

this particular population. And so when we have those items 

there, 118 or so of those, it will take a lot of time to go through 

those. 

 

Also quite a number of those have arrived at our desks in the 

last couple of weeks. And if the length of time we’re allowed to 

debate those, if we find that’s fairly short, then a number of 

those pieces of legislation we’ll have to go through very 

quickly. And they do take a lot of research. They do take a fair 

bit of thinking and even just discussing back home with some of 

our constituents that are there. 

 

And that’s one of the things that I’ve noticed. Being home this  

weekend, I had quite a number of people come up and say, well 

what’s happening in the House. And I would mention some of 

the things we’re discussing. They would pass on to me their 

particular ideas. And my constituency is rather unique in that 

quite a number of the people who live just north of my 

constituency, in the Duck Lake-MacDowall area, sort of have 

adopted my constituency as well. So I sort of have to work on a 

little larger part than just my own constituency. 

 

If we look at education, which was the first one that I rather 

mentioned that I’d like to say something about . . . The minister 

has mentioned that we will probably have quite a number of 

situations throughout the province where these will be 

discussed. And I would like to say, in support of those 

directions, that the number of locations where these will be 

debated  and the public will have the opportunity to have 

some input in  that number of locations has been increased 

drastically. And I think that’s good. 

 

The first time around there were very few of those, and I said, 

well people are not going to drive 100 or 150 miles to voice 

their opinions even though they may have some very strong 

opinions and some very good opinions. But they just aren’t 

going to put that kind of time into it because they don’t have 

that kind of time. With the increase of the number of locations, 

I think we’ll have a better input from the public. 

 

But there are so many things that need to be looked at. The 

minister had four or five possible options that are there, and I 

think we need to also discuss these in the House. Basically I 

guess one of the things that I’ve always been very strong on, 

and I think my constituency is as well, is the need for the local 

control on education, and we now call those the district boards. 

They used to be called the local boards when we had the unit 

system, but now that we’ve gone to a division system, we have 

the division boards and the district boards. 

 

Those district boards are really the very first responders to any 

kinds of misdirections that happen to be taking place in 

education because it happens to be their kids that are in their 

own schools, the schools that are just down the street. They live 

across the road from the teachers, and they see the school buses 

go by. And whether we’re talking bussing, condition of the 

school yard, or what happens in the classroom, it’s the district 

boards that are so key in that. 

 

And I think it’s important that, as we go through this process for 

the public input and our input as elected people, we have to 

make very sure that those district boards maintain the authority, 

maintain the power, and the assurance that their positions aren’t 

in jeopardy, and that district boards aren’t there at the whim of 

someone in government but that they’re established by law. 

And I think we need to maintain that. 

 

According to The Education Act, there’s an opportunity for 

division boards to give some taxing powers to district boards. 

Some division boards have used that. And I think probably one 

of the star examples of that in Saskatchewan would be the Sask 

Valley School Division where they have given to the district 

boards . . . they have given the district boards the right to raise 

up to a certain mill rate. And those monies that they raise can  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2111 

be used in their communities for their local schools. 

 

And that just does marvels for the school, for the school system, 

for the whole attitude of what’s happening in the schools 

because it gives the teachers some feeling, the staff, that the 

community is prepared to put some dollars into programs that 

the staff feels has some value for the community and for the 

children. That mill rate that they’re allowed to tap . . . they can 

tap all of it or any portion of it that they wish. And that’s a very 

effective means because immediately they become responsible 

to their taxpayers. 

 

And it’s those sorts of things that we need to keep on discussing 

in this House and make sure that those don’t come through in a 

real hurry, and we say a month later, we should have talked 

about that a bit more because we didn’t pay enough attention to 

this one component, and it’s gone. 

 

The other aspect, and it’s been mentioned in question period in 

the House and in some other of the debates, is exactly how does 

the funding for the bussing in rural areas . . . Exactly who 

covers that? And we’re heard statements and situations where 

the funding doesn’t totally pay for the bussing. We’ve also had 

situations where the funding possibly covers more than the cost 

of bussing, and school boards could actually make some money 

on it. That’s a rather unique situation. 

 

I think we need to, as people who are responsible for tax 

dollars, go through that very carefully and make sure that the 

formulas that we put in place in this House are formulas that 

provide the transportation and at the same time take good care 

of our tax dollars. 

 

In much of the educational system in rural and urban  and 

there’s no difference here, I believe  the buildings by and 

large are fairly old buildings. A lot of our cities, those are old 

schools. They’ve been around for a long time. In the rural areas, 

it is the same thing. A few communities have been fortunate 

enough over the years to have had fairly recent additions or in 

some cases even new buildings built. But by and large, the 

buildings are old, and the cost of updating those facilities is 

very, very high partly because it’s a fairly sophisticated 

structure. 

 

The other part that brings up the cost of that is that there are, of 

necessity, many regulations that need to be put in place when 

you build an educational facility. And that’s basically safety 

kinds of things. We cannot turn our children into buildings that 

we say, well we built these at an unbelievably low cost and then 

find out that there are fire hazards, and there are safety hazards 

of all sorts that are there. So those need to be followed. But then 

again it comes back to the amount of tax dollars we’re prepared 

to put into that. 

 

There is another issue which I think . . . and education needs to 

have a lot of discussion in this House . . . and that is with the 

cut-backs in education. And right at this point, I’m not to 

discuss the validity of the cut-backs themselves. But how much 

latitude are we going to give to the various school boards to 

meet the critical situations they find themselves in, where they 

have a group of students they want the best education for? They  

have curriculum requirements. They have the desires of the 

parents, and they have a certain amount of funding. And if the 

funding isn’t quite there, then the needs and requirements that 

are out there just aren’t adequate. 

 

So then the school boards need to be creative to the maximum 

to go ahead and meet those needs, and there are times they can 

do that. And I think people who read their newspapers will find 

that there are a lot of great ideas in those newspapers. And if 

they apply those ideas to some of the problems, they will come 

up with the solutions. And I know that many of the school 

boards are well read. They’ve educated themselves well, and 

they do have unique solutions. 

 

And I think the kind of thing that I’m discussing in specific is 

the Scenic Valley situation where the school board said, here is 

a way in which we feel we can meet the needs of our 

community, and it did get the full support of the community or 

90-plus per cent. And then the government has decided that 

they’re not going to let that concept go through. 

 

Now fair enough, I guess the government has the authority to 

do that. But somewheres we need to discuss in this House how 

much authority we’re going to give back to the school boards to 

be creative, to find these solutions. If we’re not going to give 

them that opportunity, then we only have the other 

responsibility, and that’s to provide the funding. And if in fact 

there is not . . . there are not enough funds around, then we need 

to give them that latitude. 

 

Now admittedly, the Scenic Valley board was told that this 

might be a possibility for next year. Unfortunately, their 

funding shortfall occurs this year. So that’s something else that 

we need to continue to work through in this Assembly. And that 

is why, one of the reasons, we need that extra time, so that as 

we work through those kinds of situations, we can go back to 

the school boards, for example, and say, okay, when some 

budgetary constraints come down and when you come up with 

whatever creative solution it is  and I’m sure we’ll have as 

many creative solutions in Saskatchewan as we have school 

boards  when those creative solutions come down, how rigid 

are we going to be about saying they have to fit our criteria as 

far as time lines and things are concerned. Sometimes we may 

need to go ahead and say, there is a problem out there. You 

have a solution for it. It doesn’t quite fit our criteria for time 

lines, but because of what you’re accomplishing, we need to 

give you the okay to do that. 

 

(1645) 

 

One other thing that may need to be discussed, and I think that 

the House has to look at this, because it probably affects to 

some extent all of our jurisdictions, some more than others. And 

that is the situation of associate schools. 

 

We had a school visit the Assembly last week  it was VCA 

(Valley Christian Academy)  that is an associate school. That 

particular school created a very unique situation and they got 

together with their school division, which is Sask Valley, and 

they did something that is very unique in the province. And it 

has been a major success if you can measure success in the  

  



2112 Saskatchewan Hansard June 3, 1996 

kinds of academic achievement that the students are having, the 

kind of athletic achievements that that school is having, the 

kinds of achievements in the various arts that that school is 

having. And that shows in the fact that they usually have to turn 

away between 100 to 200 students in any academic year who 

want to enrol but their space doesn’t allow it. 

 

And I think these kinds of things are being looked at in many of 

the jurisdictions in Saskatchewan. And we need to decide how 

we’re going to do that, because when we allow things such as 

associate schools to happen, there’s always a concern that it is 

going to fragment education. I think for the benefit of our 

children in Saskatchewan, we need to look at that because VCA 

has shown that it provides an excellent educational system. And 

maybe we need to look at the situations where you can have a 

good educational system with some divergence in the system. 

 

Moving on to one of the other areas that I had mentioned I 

would say something about, and that is the health care situation. 

And I must say at this point, in my constituency we’ve been 

more fortunate than some in that we haven’t closed down the 

senior citizens’ homes and we haven’t lost our hospitals to date. 

But I can assure we’re very awake to the possibilities of those 

sorts of things happening. And we need in this House to look at 

those situations very closely. 

 

The Gabriel Springs Health District, which is the one that 

covers the rural part of my constituency, has some very strange 

things in it, in that when the people were allowed to select their 

areas, the ones that were closer to Saskatoon went with the city. 

And about half of my constituency, the south half, joined the 

Saskatoon city group, and the north half went with the Gabriel 

Springs . . . and then across the river toward the 

Wakaw-Cudworth area. 

 

And there’s a real interesting situation — that there’s a very 

narrow little part of that health region or that health district that, 

if you look on a map, it’s just a narrow strip, and it runs up. 

And they had their reasons for joining, and those reasons are 

probably valid. But when you look at actually supplying 

services for some of these areas, it gets a little awkward. And 

maybe in that whole process, I think The Health Districts Act 

was flawed to some extent, and some of the shapes of those 

districts do not seem to make a whole lot of sense. 

 

The boards that were appointed, when we traced some of the 

history in the health districts, I think had a real problem in 

knowing who they really served because they had received the 

appointment from Regina. And the way it was set up, there was 

no other one to appoint them, so I guess that may have been a 

valid situation, that the appointment came out of Regina. But 

then, who do they serve? 

 

And so I think in many cases they saw themselves as being 

there to take care of what Regina wanted them to do, instead of 

saying, our job here is now to make sure that the health care 

meets the needs of the people that we’re serving. So they didn’t 

see themselves elected, and that’s the flawed part in the 

appointment structure. 

 

The phase 2 of that is where part of the board is now appointed  

and part is elected. And that in itself creates a continuation of 

the same difficulties because these appointed people again tend 

to say, well I’ve been put here by someone else to make sure 

what someone else wants to have happen is happening. And 

what’s not in that formula is the statement that I’m here to make 

sure that the people in my district get the best health care. And I 

think that again are the unfortunate part of the appointments, 

but that part is still there with the boards now being made up of 

a mix of both. 

 

Then you have the other portion that are elected. Now the odd 

thing happens in that the elected thing . . . you would think that 

on average, politically, they’ll be about an even split according 

to party representation in the House, and that’s fair enough. But 

when you add to that the fact that the appointments will be, by 

and large, somewhat political, you have a very political 

component to the health boards when you add into that the 

union effort to try and have their people represented there as 

well. And that was valid because they’re the employees. But 

when you put that mix together you tend to get a board that may 

be very political on the government side. And again we’re . . . 

have a board then that is not as sensitive to the local needs as it 

possibly could be. 

 

I guess, as I said at the start of this section on the hospitals, that 

in my constituency we’re fortunate in that we haven’t had the 

closures that we’ve had in some of the other areas. But a week 

or two ago I and two of my colleagues went down to the Swift 

Current situation where there were a number of seniors who 

were somewhat concerned about what was going to happen to 

them. 

 

I guess I took that one fairly seriously because I had lived 

personally in the city of Swift Current for some eight years and 

really enjoyed that time  it was a great community. Two of 

my children were born there so health care obviously is very 

important to me because that’s where they were born. And my 

mother came to spend some of her last years with us at that time 

as well. 

 

So while we were in Swift Current both the youngest in our 

family and the oldest in our family were all affected by the 

health care and the seniors’ care that Swift Current provided, 

and it was excellent care that we were given there. 

 

And so when I had that picture of that community, which has 

some very rural values, the kinds of things that we say 

Saskatchewan is famous for  the caring, the sharing, the 

helping one another in need is very much a part of the Swift 

Current mentality . . . And so when I went there  and I didn’t 

get up and make any kind of a speech, I just listened  and I 

saw those people who were now the seniors in that community, 

because it was some 20 years ago when I lived there, being 

really quite concerned about what was going to happen, it was a 

fairly painful situation. I felt very sorry and sympathetic for 

those individuals. 

 

And that brought me back to a discussion I had about two and a 

half, three weeks ago when I was invited to a volunteers’ 

thank-you supper for the work that’s being done in the hospital 

in Rosthern. An individual came to me and was talking about  

  



June 3, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2113 

the health plan and we talked about some of the concerns, and 

this individual said one of the key concerns they had is that 

people weren’t quite sure what the long-term plan of health 

was. Like when the plan came down, the final results weren’t 

there. 

 

So the feeling that this person gave me  and this person sits 

on the board  is that possibly when we had the 52 hospitals 

closed people said okay, now we’ve down-sized. This is the end 

of it  this is health care from now on, for ever more in 

Saskatchewan. And then suddenly something happens and cuts 

it back a bit more. Now we had the situation with the seniors — 

cut it back a bit more. 

 

And the idea that, what is the final plan. If  and this is again 

where we need the extra time to discuss some of these things  

if that plan was in place so that the people of Saskatchewan 

could be told, okay the plan is 52 less hospitals, so many less 

beds for this, so many less residence for seniors, and when are 

those are full there going to have to be in the homes . . . When 

those situations are all filled, that’s the way health care is going 

to be. And go through every aspect of it, so that the thing isn’t 

changed and worked on through, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan would feel much more secure in what’s 

happening. 

 

At present they tend to feel more and more insecure because 

they’re wondering what is the next thing that’s going to happen, 

either at the government level where they may make a change, 

or at the health district level where a change in government 

funding forces that district to make some more cut-backs. And I 

think that’s a fairly important thing that this House needs to 

work through, is to make sure that that final plan for health is 

there. 

 

I think for 10, 15, 20 years, health in Saskatchewan, health care, 

was fairly static. It didn’t change much, and people felt 

comfortable knowing that in Saskatchewan this is the way we 

take care of our seniors, this is the way we take care of 

emergency situations. 

 

And change isn’t bad and change is necessary. No doubt about 

it. But if we’re going to change something as important as 

health care, I think we should have looked at all aspects and so 

the whole plan would have been laid out at the very start. And 

people could say okay, this is now the plan and we’re going to 

work with this plan for a number of years. And maybe after five 

or ten years, we’ll have to make some other changes because 

we’ll see things could be done better, more economically, more 

charitably. Those are some of the things that I think we should 

have looked at in the areas of health care. 

 

One of the other topics I was going to say something . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I’ve been listening to the debate by the 

hon. member for Rosthern for some time. And — order — and I 

haven’t heard reference for the topic that he’s dealing with, to 

the motion that’s before us, and I’m sure that the hon. member 

will want to make his remarks relevant to the motion which is 

before the House, and to tie that in. So I will remind the hon. 

member of his requirement to make his debate relevant to the  

motion before us. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. The motion deals with the 

amount of time that we’re going to allot for debate, and the 

issues that I’ve been bringing up deal with issues that are 

immediate in Saskatchewan, that this House needs to deal with. 

The education one was more of a general one. The hospital one, 

we’ve had some very immediate ones happen. I mentioned the 

one situation and the Swift Current situation. Also referred back 

to the some of the people that have spoken to me in my 

constituency in the last number of days, and so I think we need 

that time in this House to present those sorts of issues. 

 

And that takes me to something which in my constituency is 

very important, and that’s highways. And this one will not have 

anything to do with potholes. In my constituency the key 

problem is not a pothole problem, it’s a safety problem even 

though potholes and safety can be related. 

 

We have had, in the last month or so, a number of fatal 

accidents on the highways in my constituency. And I have a 

letter on my desk from an individual from the Duck Lake area, 

which is not in my constituency, but they sent the letter to me 

anyway. So those things are front and centre in my constituency 

right now  the fatal accidents. I have the letters of concerns 

that are written there and so that’s why I’m addressing that at 

this time with the emphasis on the time that’s needed in the 

House. 

 

The Highway 11, a number of years ago, had a real series of 

fatal accidents, and when we met with the Department of 

Highways they said, well this is a glitch in the statistics. You 

had a lot of tragedies this year. It’ll even out and it won’t be so 

bad. Well I’m not sure that you can ever say that a fatal accident 

is not so bad. I don’t think you can do that. 

 

But they were somewhat correct in that it may have been a 

statistical glitch because it did tend to even out a little bit and 

for a year or two we didn’t have very many fatal accidents. This 

last year we’ve had a large number again and I’m going to refer 

back to the letter that I just received on my desk very recently 

from someone else’s constituency from the town of Duck Lake. 

And that was that that particular Highway 11 does not allow for 

deceleration and acceleration. There are no deceleration lanes; 

there are no acceleration lanes. 

 

There are unique little things that are painted onto the highway 

at intersections to various towns. But those are just there that in 

case someone’s making a turn and you want to pull by them, it 

gives you the arrows. They are not deceleration, acceleration 

lanes. I though at one time they were, but when I checked with 

the Department of Highways, I was told they weren’t. We need 

those sorts of things. 

 

I will give full credit to the Department of Highways for the 

twinning that’s happening between Saskatoon and the 

Warman-Osler area. This is going to be . . . take a lot of 

pressure off the highway, especially morning and late afternoon 

times. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2083 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2083 
  Julé ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2083 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2083 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2083 
  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2083 
  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2083 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2083 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Jess ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2083 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2083 
  Aldridge ......................................................................................................................................................................... 2101, 2108 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Occupational Health and Safety Week 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2084 
 Agricultural Sciences Month 
  Jess ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2084 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2084 
 National Environment Week 
  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2084 
 Pinehouse’s Recent Accomplishments 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2085 
 RRR Environmental Services Opens Recycling Plant 
  Murray ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2085 
 Temple Gardens Mineral Spa 
  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2085 
 Swift Current Old Fashioned Picnic 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2085 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Agreement with Rural Health Coalition 
  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2086 
  Cline ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2086, 2089 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2088 
 Northern Health Care 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2087 
  Cline ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2087 
 Shand Construction Site Accident 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2088 
  Anguish .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2088 
 Canadian Wheat Board 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2089 
  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2090 
 Pork Marketing Monopoly 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2090 
  Upshall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2090 
 Unfunded Pension Liabilities 
  Aldridge ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2090 
  MacKinnon .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2091 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Site for Synchrotron Light Source Research Facility in Saskatoon 
  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2091 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2091 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2092 
 Occupational Health and Safety Week 
  Anguish .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2092 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2092 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2092 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 118  An Act to amend The Trust and Loan Corporations Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2093 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTIONS 
Extended Hours 
  McPherson ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2093 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2109 
 
 


