













































March 18, 1996 Hansard


   LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 327 

   March 18, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 

behalf of concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, 

concerning the closure of the Plains Health Centre, who pray: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And they’re signed by people from Regina, Craven, Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Edgeley, Avonlea, Avonhurst, and virtually all of 

southern Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre also. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

numerous communities throughout southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 

names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Wilcox, mostly from Wilcox, and throughout Saskatchewan. I 

so present. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I rise also today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The pages that I have before me today, Mr. Speaker, are signed 

by people all from Grenfell. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

regard to the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to: (1) rescind the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement and especially its  

mandatory union hall hiring formula; (2) prohibit the 

expansion of this Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement or other like agreements to other Saskatchewan 

Crown corporations; and (3) to prohibit the expansion of 

this agreement or other like agreements to other 

government-funded construction projects with local health 

districts, school boards, municipal councils, or other joint 

venture partners with the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

mostly from Moose Jaw, Regina, and North Battleford. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise again 

today to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People signing this are mainly from Francis, Balgonie, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Moose Jaw, Assiniboia, and Mortlach. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I again rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Regina; they are from all throughout Saskatchewan, a 

number of addresses here, and I’d like to present this to the 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1996 328 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 

behalf of tens of thousands of people throughout the province 

that have signed petitions regarding saving the Plains Health 

Centre, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 

Regina mainly, in fact many from Regina Albert South 

constituency. Also Weyburn, Mossbank, and some from 

Assiniboia, but definitely all throughout southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to immediately repeal 

the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reconsider closure 

of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 

Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to halt the closure of 

the Cypress Lodge kitchen services. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly, a teacher and four 

students from 33 Central which is really Fillmore School and 

they’re seated in the west gallery. 

 

The school is known in the area as 33 Central because the town 

is on Highway 33 between Regina and Stoughton. 

 

And I would ask the guests to please rise. Mr. Leo Carteri is a 

science teacher, and he’s here today with Steven Schultz, grade 

12 student, Anders Foss, grade 12 student, Carrie Lind, grade 

12 student, and Janelle Smith, grade 11 student. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Carteri has taught in Fillmore for 22 years, 

during which time his professional dedication to science and 

technology has been outstanding. The best proof of Mr. 

Carteri’s involvement and motivation as a teacher are shown by 

his students. He has a high percentage of enrolments by all 

students in his science classes, consistent medal performances 

at local, regional, and national science fairs, and a high 

percentage of student enrolments in post-secondary studies of 

science and technology. 

 

Mr. Carteri believes that competitions like the Canada-wide 

science fair not only broaden the students’ academic horizons  

but also expose them to the corporate world through business 

sponsorships. As a teacher, Mr. Carteri is encouraging, creative, 

interesting, and flexible. He works to individual student needs, 

and he is extremely knowledgeable of his subject. 

 

Mr. Carteri’s leadership and professional dedication to science 

and technology has earned him the 1995 Prime Minister’s 

Award for Teaching Excellence in Science, Technology, and 

Mathematics. And because of his motivation and influence on 

his students, one of his students here today has also won 

awards: Steven Schultz. 

 

Steven Schultz in 1994 attended the Canada-wide science fair 

in Guelph, Ontario, where he won a bronze medal for his 

project and a communication award. In 1995 he won the silver 

medal for his project in Whitehorse, Yukon. Stephen is in grade 

12 and plans to take engineering. 

 

Anders Foss, Carrie Lind, and Janelle Smith are all exceptional 

students at Fillmore School and excel academically with 

averages in excess of 90 per cent. Mr. Speaker, I think this 

speaks well to the quality of teaching that’s occurring in this 

province, and the quality of teaching and the quality of 

excellence that’s occurring in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome Mr. Carteri and his 

students to the legislature this afternoon because it is the 

beginning of Education Week, and I would ask all members of 

the Assembly to join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to join with the Minister of Education in welcoming 

our special guests in the west gallery. Fillmore is in the Indian 

Head-Milestone riding and I’m very proud to have such a 

distinguished teacher and students in the constituency. And 

again congratulations on behalf of the Assembly and we look 

forward to many more opportunities from the education system 

out of Fillmore. Thank you for coming here. And I ask members 

to join me in welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

RCMP Discusses Race Relations 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring to 

the attention of fellow members of this House a very important 

meeting that took place in Regina this past weekend. Over 50 

police officers gathered in the city to discuss ways to improve 

race relations in our country, particularly as our police forces 

relate to different races in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a subject that needs much discussion in our 

province and our country. And it’s a subject very close to my 

heart as it was something I dealt with extensively during my 

career with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. As a member 

of the force, I was fortunate to be involved in the first cross-

cultural training program instituted by the RCMP (Royal  



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

Canadian Mounted Police) in the late ‘70s, working with 

Professor D. Bruce Sealy at the University of Manitoba. 

 

This program was to promote cultural awareness pertaining 

specifically to aboriginal Canadians. Uniformed and civilian 

personnel were included in this program; Indian peoples played 

a major role in this program as well. And it’s since then that the 

program has greatly expanded across the country’s police forces 

and includes various ethnic groups and cultures. Today it’s 

more important than ever that all races in our country are 

treated in a fair manner by the police. 

 

And I’m proud to say my constituency is the home of one of the 

first on-reserve RCMP detachments in our province. The 

detachment located on the Okanese Reserve serves the four File 

Hills reserves near Balcarres, Saskatchewan. I know the 

Government House Leader, as well as the Minister of the 

Environment who also has an on-reserve detachment in his 

riding, were on hand at Peepeekisis School last year when the 

on-reserve detachments were officially opened and know what 

an important step this was in racial diversification of the 

RCMP. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Week 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, March 

18 to 24, has been proclaimed Education Week. And during this 

week students, teachers, and parents across the province will be 

involved in activities which reinforce a historical truth — that 

with knowledge all things are possible, and without it, all things 

stop. 

 

The theme of Education week is “Learning: Because Wonders 

Never Cease.” Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we put a high 

value on wonder and on learning. In Saskatchewan we direct a 

considerable portion of our incomes to our public education 

system. Our educational success is proof enough that it is wise 

to do so. We should continue with the high level of public 

support for education. 

 

Our success as educators is built on partnerships. First, there is 

a partnership between teachers and parents. Second, there is the 

partnership of local, provincial, and federal governments. Third, 

there is the intergenerational partnership where we all 

contribute to education, regardless of age. The challenge for the 

21st century is to learn, adapt, and innovate within our system 

to keep Saskatchewan the best place in which to live. 

 

There can be no greater satisfaction than for us to be able to say 

to future generations, education in Saskatchewan is the best 

because we made the adjustments necessary to keep it that way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

too would like to recognize the start of Education Week in 

Saskatchewan. The subject is near and dear to me, having been 

a former teacher and former president of the Saskatchewan 

School Trustees Association. My wife still teaches in Invermay  

and I have two children in school. 

 

We must commend all the teachers and instructors, non-

professional staff, students, parents, and trustees for their 

dedication and ongoing commitment to education. 

 

The theme of this year’s Education Week is “Learning: Because 

Wonders Never Cease.” I find it very appropriate because these 

days our children face a rapidly changing environment. They 

must adapt to swiftly developing technology and an evolving 

job market. 

 

Our education system must equip our children with tools they 

will need to survive in the future. This is a critical time for 

education and we must work through past funding cut-backs so 

that quality education continues for our children. 

 

I hope that as the government prepares its upcoming budget it 

does take the time to consult with all stakeholders so that our 

children can get the high quality education they deserve. We 

must ensure that future education reforms are the best choices 

for our children. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Onion Lake First Nation -Wascana Energy Agreement 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday, we had 

a treaty land entitlement announcement from the south-east part 

of the province. 

 

While that announcement was being made, the Minister of 

SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Affairs Secretariat) 

and myself were in Onion Lake in my constituency taking part 

in the announcement of another equally important agreement. 

 

Onion Lake First Nation and Wascana Energy have reached an 

agreement to jointly develop land selected by Onion Lake under 

the Treaty Land Entitlement Framework Agreement. A 

memorandum of understanding was signed on Friday by Chief 

Wallace Fox, President Frank Proto of Wascana Energy, and all 

band councillors. 

 

Wascana Energy will provide expertise in several areas related 

to selection, exploration, development, and mineral extraction 

of the lands under the agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is good news for the Onion Lake First Nations 

and for north-west Saskatchewan in general because the activity 

generated by this agreement will lead to jobs and economic 

development. 

 

I was happy to be present at the signing and, as always, to 

witness the accompanying ceremonies. 

 

I congratulate Chief Wallace Fox and the Onion Lake First 

Nation members, and I encourage other companies to follow the 

lead of Wascana Energy in working with all first nation bands 

for their mutual economic benefit. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1996 330 

Education Week 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 

rise in recognition of Education Week in Saskatchewan. The 

role of education has changed throughout the years. We have 

gone from one-room classrooms teaching grades 1 through to 9 

or 10  and it’s one of those schools that gave me a good start 

in education  to state-of-the-art institutions using modern 

technology. 

 

However, not all students and teachers are fortunate enough to 

have the most modern benefits. Teachers in some areas of our 

province are struggling with fewer resources, a shortage of 

staff, and at times deteriorating facilities  all told, a 

crumbling infrastructure. Although many teachers, school 

boards, and administrators are faced with such challenges, our 

children continue to receive a good education. 

 

The theme of this year’s Education Week deals with the 

wonders never ceasing. Indeed as an educator myself I can 

attest that this is always an appropriate theme for the process of 

education. The most rewarding part of education is the look of 

wonder in a student’s face when a new concept or idea is 

discovered. Seeing young people strive for and attain their best 

through our education system is constantly a wonderful 

experience to behold. It is all the more wonderful in these times 

when technological advances, through computers and Internet, 

have propelled us into a whole new area of information and 

learning. 

 

There are accomplished individuals whose successes can in part 

be attributed to Saskatchewan’s top-notch educational system. 

On behalf of the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus, I would 

like to acknowledge Education Week and offer our profound 

thanks to all the hard-working people and groups in our 

education system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

E.C. Leslie Provincial Debating 

Tournament in Lloydminster 

 

Ms. Stanger:  Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the Education 

Week theme, it was my pleasure to attend the 1996 E.C. Leslie 

provincial debating tournament in Lloydminster on the 

weekend. 

 

The students who participated in this debate came from all over 

Saskatchewan. The schools from my constituency which were 

represented at this event included H. Hardcastle School from 

Edam, Lloydminster Comprehensive High School, and 

Turtleford School. 

 

In 1979, the provincial tournament of the Saskatchewan 

Elocution and Debate Association was named the E.C. Leslie 

tournament in honour of one of Saskatchewan’s best-known 

lawyers, Everett Clayton Leslie, who died in 1978. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was also pleased to be involved in the 

presentation of awards at the tournament. I extend my 

congratulations to all the students who won awards and would  

like to mention the winners from my constituency: Robin 

Brown, Jasmin Brown, Nicole Hughes, and Bonnie Hughes, all 

from the Turtleford School; Taran King, Russ Piffer, Ryan 

Pierce, and Michelle Charles from Lloydminster 

Comprehensive School. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the teachers who coached the 

students and thanks to the Lloydminster Comprehensive High 

School for organizing the event. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Wendel Clark a Maple Leaf Again 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

welcome one of my most famous former constituents back to 

Canada. Wendel Clark grew up and started his hockey career in 

Kelvington. Even from a very young age, he showed his 

winning combination of talent, grit, and determination when he 

stepped on the ice. He quickly became a fan favourite for the 

Saskatoon Blades and in the mid-‘80s he broke into the NHL 

(National Hockey League). 

 

As captain of the Toronto Maple Leafs, Wendel Clark became 

one of hockey’s most prominent figures. His tough checking 

style and scoring touch brought many proud moments home to 

his family and friends in Kelvington. His parents, Les and Alma 

Clark, frequently left their Kelvington farm to watch their son at 

Maple Leaf Gardens. 

 

But many people at home in Kelvington and Toronto were 

terribly disappointed when Wendel Clark made his home south 

of the border as a member of the Colorado Avalanche. This 

season he was traded to the New York Islanders; then just last 

week he captured the headlines once again when he was 

re-acquired by the Toronto Maple Leafs. 

 

I would like to welcome Kelvington’s hockey hero back to 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

L’il Red Bus Line 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last spring I 

announced to the Assembly the formation of a bus line 

connecting the communities of Bengough, Ogema, Pangman, 

Ceylon, and Radville to Regina. Unfortunately, the founder of 

this very worthwhile service died and it looked for a while as if 

it would flounder. 

 

This year I am happy to announce that the L’il Red Bus Line, as 

it has been christened, is alive and well; in fact, Mr. Speaker, it 

had its inaugural run this morning and I was one of its first 

passengers. We left Pangman at 7:30, stopped in Ogema, and 

did a ribbon-cutting ceremony in Bengough at the seniors’ 

centre. The bus then continued on to Ceylon; Radville, where a 

second inaugural ceremony took place, and then into Regina 

before noon. It will be leaving Regina this afternoon at 5:30 

p.m. 

 



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

It will repeat this journey five days a week, bringing people into 

the city for appointments and visits and delivering goods back 

and forth to the local businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an example of several small communities 

expanding into one large community to meet the interests of all 

because all recognized the need; $35,000 was raised to get the 

operation going. As Chairman Peter Sotropa said, it is good to 

see people not thinking strictly from the point of view of their 

own town. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all the shareholders who recognized 

the need of this important service to their communities: the 

seniors from Bengough, and the community and business 

people from Ogema, Pangman, and Radville. The L’il Red Bus 

Line, Mr. Speaker, proves once again that people in rural 

Saskatchewan are quite capable of facing challenge through 

cooperation and initiative. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Rural Road System 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

federal government is committed to spending almost $85 

million over the next few years to upgrade Saskatchewan’s rural 

road system. They realize the decision should not be based 

solely on finances and they understand that safety and 

dependability must also be part of the equation, unlike the 

provincial government. 

 

Will the Minister of Municipal Government indicate if this 

government is prepared to match the commitment by the federal 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the member for the 

question, Mr. Speaker. And the news to the SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) delegates 

was news to us. We still haven’t had any indication from the 

federal government as to what kind of agreement he wants. 

 

But I want to tell the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that on 

one hand the federal government takes $320 million away from 

our farmers in Saskatchewan and the next minute they offer 20 

million back. It sounds a lot like the transfer payments and the 

Crow buy-out  $7.2 billion reduced to $1.6 billion. 

 

It’s always the same story, Mr. Speaker. And the opposition 

members sit there and defend the federal government over and 

above the Saskatchewan people. I can’t understand that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, this government can say what 

it wants about being committed to our highways, but the facts 

speak otherwise. The Highways department budget has fallen 

from 177 million, from 212 million when the government came  

to power. 

 

NDP (New Democratic Party) offloading has provided our 

towns and RMs (rural municipality) with an eighteen and a half 

per cent less in revenue-sharing grants to maintain our roads. In 

last year’s Highways budget, of the 70 people who lost their 

job, all of those were . . . maintain our roads and highways and 

keep them safe for travel. 

 

This is not a commitment to our rural road system or the people 

of rural Saskatchewan. Can the minister explain why the federal 

government can make an $85 million commitment to our rural 

people yet this government will not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 

opposite, it’s pretty easy to make an $85 million contribution to 

the roads in Saskatchewan when you pull out 320 million. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that any money coming into our 

roads is very important. But I want to tell the member that $20 

million will affect about 150 kilometres of rural roads in this 

province  roads that we can fix. Because of the new truck 

traffic and the grain elevator consolidation and railway 

abandonment, there are going to be 60,000 kilometres of roads 

affected by this decision, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t know which 

150 kilometres he would like us to spend the $20 million on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rabbit Processing Plant Failure 

 

Ms. Draude:  My question today is for the Minister of 

Economic Development. Another day in NDP Saskatchewan 

and again another bad day news for business people. 

 

Today’s edition of the Leader-Post tells us sadly about the story 

of another failure — of CanRa Processors Inc. The reason 

stated for this failure was poor management and government 

bungling. I guess the minister can chalk this up to another 

failure of his government policy in business. Seventy more jobs 

lost and $500,000 in government-managed investment funds. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is this: how much of 

the $500,000 lost was Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars? And I 

want to know the cost including administration, the original 

offering memorandum, the prospectus, and the cost of acquiring 

the funds from Asian investors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to respond to 

the member’s question about the rabbit kill plant in Swift 

Current or the slaughtering plant that has announced recently 

that it’s going to cease slaughtering rabbits. I want to say to the 

member opposite that having been opened in 1980, this is a 

plant that has had a troubled past, going into bankruptcy a 

number of times. I think the former administration, if I 

remember correctly, put money into the plant. 

 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1996 332 

As you know, there’s been immigrant money put into the plant, 

and it just hasn’t been able to survive. 

 

Now the interesting thing, I think, Mr. Speaker, is that in Swift 

Current there are many exciting, positive things happening: the 

expansion of Rem Manufacturing; Spar industries, a great 

company; the whole tourism aspect where many jobs are being 

created. 

 

But obviously what the opposition will bring to the House every 

day are the doom-and-gloom stories. And that’s . . . maybe they 

see that as their role. But if the member is indicating that she 

would expect taxpayers to put more money into that project, 

then be honest. Stand in your place and say that we should have 

more taxes to bail out the . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Next question. 

 

Ms. Draude:  The failure of this project is another clear 

example of how the government is killing economic 

development. The Saskatchewan growth fund tried to sell the 

plant, and it did have a potential buyer until the government had 

to have their piece of the pie. The government would only 

accept an offer if the growth fund could have voting shares in 

the company. The offer was made by a Calgary businessman, 

Del Fisher, but he withdrew the offer knowing what the result 

of the government involvement would be. He said, and I quote, 

“If it had government involvement, it would go broke again.” 

 

Will the minister admit that this loss will affect our ability to 

attract other immigrant investor funds? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No, Mr. Speaker. I want to say to 

the member opposite that the immigrant investor fund here in 

Saskatchewan, by many people’s admission, the Saskatchewan 

Government Growth Fund is in fact one of the best in Canada. 

And recently the business magazine  and I’ll get the actual 

quote for you  has indicated that the SGGF (Saskatchewan 

Government Growth Fund Ltd.) fund is one of the best funds in 

Canada. And obviously any fund that takes in the amount of 

money that the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund has 

will not have its success on every investment. You know that as 

a business person; I know that. This is one of the challenges 

that immigrant investor funds have; they’re high risk. This is 

one of the risks that didn’t work. 

 

But I can point out to you many, many projects  and you will 

know them because we’ve had this discussion before  of 

where SGGF has invested money and many hundreds of jobs 

have been created. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, not only do we have businessmen 

questioning the wisdom of government officials but this failure 

puts into question the government’s economic development 

strategy. Mr. Speaker, this industry has potential for double 

digit growth and export opportunities to developing countries 

and Europe. Other exotic meats are being produced in  

Saskatchewan in even higher volumes, but we’re losing our 

slaughtering facilities. 

 

Will the minister commit to fixing his flawed economic strategy 

to ensure that we take advantage of these opportunities, so we 

can have jobs instead of bankruptcies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say 

to the member opposite that the plan that we have for economic 

development, which is known as Partnership for Growth is 

worked on by, I say again, many hundreds of business people 

from across the province, the unions. 

 

In fact she herself came to our office and had input into the 

document. It was a good interview, as I understand, and she had 

some ideas. I didn’t hear anything new or exciting that isn’t in 

the document. If you’ve got some new thoughts that you didn’t 

have when we consulted, I would be very interested in knowing 

what they now are. But obviously you can come to the House 

every day and point out where companies have failed or farmers 

have gone broke. And in any economy, anyone can do that. 

 

But what I would urge you to do is to look at some of the 

positive things that are happening even in your own area  the 

expansion in the grain collecting system, the operations where 

value added is happening. There are many positive things 

happening. But they’re, as your leader indicated the other day, 

burning tires; obviously that may be his idea. This is . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Next question. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

McDowell Report 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Premier or his designate. Mr. Premier, we 

have now received a response back from the Clerk, and the 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) pay increase is not 

6 to $800 as you were suggesting last week. In fact it’s nearly 

$4,000 for Regina MLAs and nearly $4,400 for non-Regina 

MLAs. 

 

This is a significant increase at a time when you are telling 

taxpayers that they have to take and make even further 

sacrifices. Mr. Premier, will you give back this increase? Will 

you now implement the McDowell report retroactive to January 

1 as originally recommended? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will make 

another attempt to explain this whole procedure to the member 

opposite, even though he has sat through all the meetings and 

read all the materials. And it concerns me a little the way he 

keeps sliding back and forth between gross and net. 

 

Now I assume that your concern is the cost to the taxpayer. And 

the cost to the taxpayer is a net decrease in every year that  



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

McDowell is implemented of 2,000 per member and a net 

decrease to the legislature of $350,000 over the term of the 

government. 

 

And in fact if you look at the figures even for this year, if the 

House sits a full 70 days, there will be a gross difference to the 

taxpayer of around $500 for an out-of-Regina member and 

about $150 for an in-Regina member. If the House sits longer, 

in fact the cost of McDowell gets more expensive than the 

current system. 

 

This is a complicated change in pay and rations, and most of 

it’s centred around the principles of accountability and 

transparency, of which this member seems to continue to avoid 

that particular issue. 

 

So I suggest you revisit the purposes and the long-term . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, one 

month ago the Premier spent 30,000 taxpayers’ dollars to go on 

TV and tell us cuts would start at the top. You’re the only one 

that isn’t showing leadership in this area, Madam Minister. 

 

However if you’re not prepared to act, we are. Tomorrow our 

caucus will be making an announcement about giving up the 

increase. But today I want to give you the chance to show some 

leadership and give up the increase as well. I want to give you 

one more chance to get out of the trough, Madam Minister. Will 

you take that opportunity, or do you still think it’s okay for 

taxpayers to be forced to give you a raise? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

remind the member that the system we’ve been paid under ever 

since ’91 was a system designed by his government, and since 

then our cabinet has taken a pay decrease of 5 per cent. MLAs’ 

salaries have been frozen since 1991. And also due to the 

redistribution that we initiated, there’s eight fewer MLAs. 

 

Now if you’re not prepared to ’fess up that a net decrease in pay 

is what McDowell accomplishes with the July 1 implementation 

that you keep forgetting you voted for, then I don’t know what 

else I can do with you. That’s just the way it is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Addiction Services Funding 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Gaming minister. Madam Minister, the casino agreement 

between FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) and 

the government states that 25 per cent of casino profits from 

Indian-run casinos will go directly towards addiction services. 

 

I commend FSIN for recognizing this very important issue and 

for setting aside a large percentage of casino profits for the 

purpose of treating those individuals and families who suffer  

because of gambling addictions. 

 

However the same isn’t true for the casino in Regina. Madam 

Minister, your government is taking the largest take-out 

percentage of any casino in North America, and yet zero 

percentage of the profits of the Regina casino is dedicated for 

addiction services. Why is this, and what percentage of your 

government’s casino profits are going towards addiction 

services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Yes, I’d like to thank the member for 

his question. This is just a little more complicated than it would 

appear on the surface, partly because the government is a 

regulator of a wide range of gaming. Casinos are not the only 

thing we’re involved in. 

 

Now the first nations saw part of these revenues as an ability for 

them to deal with a range of addiction services, so they don’t 

plan to deal with only gaming addictions. They’ll be taking a 

very holistic approach, and they’ll be dealing with alcohol 

addiction, solvent addiction, a wide range of addictions issues 

in their community. 

 

And so you would not be able to directly compare the figures. 

You’d have to look at what we also spend on alcohol and drug 

addiction and those kinds of things in our government. 

 

The other part of the answer is that we have 1.5 million that 

isn’t taken — again because of the range of gaming that the 

government’s responsible for — it’s not taken directly out of 

the Casino Regina. It’s taken out of the General Revenue Fund 

of government. So that accounts for the difference in the 

figures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

allocating one and a half million dollars for addiction services 

isn’t a whole lot when the government rakes in hundreds of 

millions each year. Your government won’t listen to 

Saskatchewan people who want a say in expanding gambling. 

You won’t listen to your own advisory committee’s 

recommendations. 

 

One such recommendation is that there be no instant cash 

machines located in casinos in order to make gamblers think 

twice about the amount of money they are spending. But you 

installed an ATM (automated teller machine) inside Casino 

Regina anyway. It’s easy to see that this was done in order to 

make more money for your government without any care about 

those addicted individuals or their suffering families. 

 

Madam Minister, why did you allow your government’s greed 

to take precedence over your own advisory committee’s 

recommendations? Why did you place an ATM in the Regina 

casino? 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just again 

revisit the question of the amount and indicate that this  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1996 334 

government actually contributes more towards prevention, 

education, information, and counselling per capita than any 

government in Canada. So you may say it’s not enough, but it’s 

certainly much more that is being done. 

 

And I add again, to make it relevant to the point you raised, 

you’d have to also add in alcohol and other things because 

that’s the portion that’s in the FSIN portion. 

 

On the issue of the ATMs, ATMs are only a problem for a 

person with an addiction, and for a person with an addiction, 

our information is that you’d have to be . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . You either want the answer or you don’t. The 

issue would be that unless it’s further than a 20-minute radius 

from the casino to the addicted person, it would not make a 

difference. So I guess we could put the ATM somewhere out 

near Southey, but it’s really not a rational solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

High-risk Offender Identification 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatoon Greystone gained one new resident recently. He is a 

convicted pedophile released from prison despite being high 

risk to re-offend. 

 

Now the police have done their best within the law to alert 

parents as to the danger that this man poses to their children. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the parents who have called my office  and 

I’m sure the offices of government members as well  are truly 

worried about the security of their children. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Justice: will you, Mr. 

Minister, explain why you have not taken a stand on this and 

why you do not speak out in defence of the defenceless? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the hon. 

member for the question. The position of the government is that 

our greatest concern is for the families and the children in the 

communities and all of that. What we’re doing is having the 

protection of those people in mind. 

 

Now the whole question here involves many, many difficult 

issues and I think the hon. member knows that. 

 

We have a committee that’s an intergovernmental committee 

headed by somebody within the Justice department who has 

been . . . they’ve been working with this and with some of the 

police officers. They are very carefully reviewing the Manitoba 

protocol which has been in use for approximately nine or ten 

months. They also are looking at some of the suggestions that 

come out of Alberta. And we understand now over the last 

couple of days that Alberta is just getting ready to release some 

kind of an official proposal based on a draft protocol that they 

set out last year. We’re looking very carefully. We have a plan 

and we’re working at it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, with  

all due respect the answers that you’ve given me are politically 

safe answers but they most certainly are not solutions. While 

the wheels of justice may grind very slowly, the pedophile acts 

on impulse — in other words, without warning. He doesn’t give 

people a lot of time and a lot of notice. 

 

Statutes and debates and loopholes are the domains of 

legislators and lawyers, but they are of absolutely no comfort 

whatsoever to the parents in Saskatoon Greystone trying to 

pacify their very frightened children. Children all over our 

province have been terrified by what happened in a Scottish 

town just days ago. And the children in my constituency also 

fear now every single male who is a stranger that fits a vague 

description of this convicted pedophile. 

 

Mr. Minister, why is it that Manitoba has taken action to deal 

with this? And why is it that Alberta is taking action to deal 

with this, but Saskatchewan most definitely is showing 

evidence of still dragging its feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the hon. 

member for the question. Again I would say that she has not 

understood my answer. We are extremely concerned about this. 

We are working carefully with the police, with Department of 

Justice officials, the Department of Health, mental health 

professionals. We’re also listening very carefully to parents in 

the community. 

 

I was actually in Saskatoon on Friday afternoon talking with 

some people about some of these issues. We are also in a 

situation where we are looking very carefully at the Manitoba 

protocol and the Alberta protocol. We do not want a situation 

where children are afraid to be on the streets, and we need to be 

very careful how we do this. 

 

I think the discussion that takes place in this place, this 

legislature, is probably not the right place to have the discussion 

and I’d be very happy to meet with the member so that we can 

talk about some suggestions that she might have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Minister, we are the legislators of the 

province of Saskatchewan. The primary responsibility of 

government is law and order for its citizens. And the policies of 

your government, sir, demonstrate very poor priorities. 

 

It is no accident that people looking for an easy ride in a system 

come to Saskatchewan in droves. Ten pedophiles, sir, have been 

released into Saskatoon alone  ten within this year. And it is 

no accident that ordinary people are truly fed up with paying a 

price for your government’s lack of policies. 

 

Now you, sir, have 100 pieces of legislation before this very 

Assembly this session alone. Will you make the children of 

Saskatchewan your top priority and get a piece of legislation in 

this House immediately to deal with this issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the hon.  



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

member for the third question. 

 

I think the first point I would like to make is that to deal with 

this problem does not necessarily require legislation, because 

when I talk about protocols, it’s not legislation. 

 

The other point is that part of the difficulty within the 

Saskatoon region is that they do have the regional psychiatric 

centre, which our federal Liberal counterparts have just 

announced that they are going to double the size of that. 

 

And one of the factors that you might wish to look at and 

discuss with the Liberals with an I or the Liberals with a Y  

I’m not sure which Liberals  is that you look at the whole 

question of the role of the regional psychiatric centre within 

Saskatchewan. That is the magnet for Saskatchewan of the 

people who need help from Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 

Alberta. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Minister, while you continue to say 

the same things day after day on this issue, all it does is to 

demonstrate your government’s misplaced priorities. 

 

Now the laws of your government, sir, put the safety of the 

most vulnerable at risk to protect the privacy of a dangerous 

individual. I suggest you read the Constitution of Canada about 

the rights of individuals over the rights of society. 

 

This pedophile has no real sense at all of what it means to 

respect the privacy of young children, and he is known to be 

capable of violence and is very likely, as has been stated, to 

repeat his pattern of sexual assault on little girls. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have simply one question which I’ve now asked 

three times. Will you, sir, please tell us how long will the 

children of our province have to wait until your government 

makes their safety a priority? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank the hon. member for the 

fourth question. I think there’s no question that our government 

holds the safety of families and children as the utmost priority. 

 

I think there should be some recognition . . . and I’m surprised 

at the hon. member’s understanding of the constitution. A lot of 

this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . or lack thereof, that’s 

correct. 

 

This matter relates to the criminal law. That’s a federal area of 

responsibility. There are some things that we can do in 

conjunction with the criminal law, and we are actually working 

together with some of the federal people on this as well. But 

practically, we are sitting with a situation where we need to 

balance many, many interests, but obviously the most important 

interest is the safety of the community. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Telecommunications Enhancement Fund 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to call the attention of the Assembly to the 

announcement that my colleague, the Minister of 

Post-secondary Education and Skills Training, and myself made 

last Friday at St. Angela’s Elementary School in Saskatoon 

regarding the telecommunications enhancement fund and the 

Internet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these initiatives are part of our department’s 

multi-media learning strategy. And I’m pleased to announce 

that in total, 177 locations across the province have been 

approved for funding. 

 

Last Friday, Mr. Speaker, we outlined the progress achieved 

under the telecommunications enhancement fund. The fund 

provides support to schools for securing the wiring and cabling 

necessary to link students to each other and to an array of 

electronic resources such as the Internet. These technological 

enhancements will enable Saskatchewan teachers to develop 

links to enrich student learning, exchange resource tools, and 

facilitate discussion groups with fellow educators. 

 

Providing access to computer technology to today’s learners 

opens a new world of learning and prepares our young people 

for the future. It is in support of these goals that the provincial 

government committed funding of $934,000 to the $1.35 

million telecommunications enhancement fund. 

 

The telecommunications enhancement fund was approved 

through the Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works 

program in 1994. One million dollars from this fund is 

allocated to cost-share wiring and cabling. Today we see how 

computer networking and multi-media technology can be 

applied for education and training. Educators and learners can 

access information in the next classroom, across the province, 

or around the world. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, my colleague and I launched our 

department’s newly developed home page on the Internet — 

development of the web site in the early stages — and those 

who view it are invited to leave comments or suggestions 

through the e-mail button. 

 

The department, along with its public education partners and 

private industry, are well on the way to ensuring that 

Saskatchewan learners get the skills they need to participate 

fully in our knowledge-based economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Education, I would also like to 

acknowledge that today is the first day of Education Week in 

our province, and I would encourage all members of this 

Assembly to participate in special events that may be occurring 

in their community during this week. I would also encourage 

you to take the opportunity to view Saskatchewan Education’s 

new home page on the Internet. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1996 336 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I first 

would like to acknowledge the minister’s statement regarding 

the improvements to the Internet home page. It’s encouraging to 

see that a program has been put in place. We’re also encouraged 

by the fact that 177 locations in the province will have the 

services of Internet. 

 

My concern around the Internet of course is to see that there is a 

fair breakdown of the 177 sites between rural and urban 

communities, and we know that there are. We know that there 

are, and we encourage that. We have had questions raised of 

course, around the area of funding and the cost of paying for 

the Internet. 

 

There are different rates to use the Internet  urban and rural 

 and we’re hearing that the cost factor almost makes it 

prohibitive in some areas. So while we’re encouraged with that, 

we see that the federal government has been involved, and 

nearly half a million dollars of the project is federal funding. 

 

So we’re very encouraged with that. And as the minister has 

indicated, and I have stated already, that this is Education 

Week. We’re very encouraged by the many projects that MLAs 

have been invited to, whether they are in their home 

constituencies, in schools, and we know that there are many 

positive things taking place for the children of Saskatchewan 

and we hope that this is one of those. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Minister, in response to that 

announcement, I think it’s exciting that during Education Week 

that we’re moving into some new areas of technology. I think 

there’s three areas there that deserve commendation for what’s 

happening. It’s a technology area and I think it’s good to see 

that we’re moving into that as well. 

 

I think when we’re looking for new areas in job opportunities, 

hopefully some of the learnings that will take place because of 

this will help the job opportunities for the kids. And I think also 

because this week is a week that talks about wonder in 

education, I think it’s also good to see something new 

happening there so kids can be in some wonder about what’s 

happening. 

 

One or two concerns that I do have. One is, I think we need to 

ensure that this has access to everyone, all our students. It 

would be very unfair if some of the students didn’t have access 

to it. The other one is on the matter of cost. And I’m wondering 

who’s going to be left having to fund all of this in a year or 

three. I believe it starts off with something like $125 in the first 

year with unlimited access. Second year, it moves to $250 for 

75 hours of access and then $5 per hour after those 75 hours are 

taken care of. The third year it moves to $500 for 100 hours and 

that’s on a monthly thing. 

 

I’m a little worried it’s going to be a little bit like the gambling 

scenario. Kids are going to get hooked on this because it’s a 

great idea. They’ll love it, they’ll get excited about it, and then 

who’s going to pay for it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet  to request 

leave to respond to the statement? 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  With leave, to make comment on the 

ministerial statement. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First 

of all, I would like to thank the hon. minister for being so kind 

as to supply me with her statement today, and to congratulate 

the government, as well as the Government of Canada, on such 

an important initiative. 

 

It’s very interesting, and it’s timely that this should happen 

today. Not because of Education Week, but because of a 

telephone conversation I was having yesterday with an 

expatriate of Saskatchewan who’s now living in Alberta. And 

part of our discussion were the areas in Canada where there is a 

dearth of training, and tremendous opportunities for people. But 

what it does is point out to us the lack of training that we’ve 

had that’s focused on preparing our young people to take over 

those positions. That, of course, was in the area of 

telecommunications. 

 

So I think it’s a very, very exciting venture. I think once again 

we should congratulate the provincial and federal government 

for working in cooperation with one other to ensure that we 

have well-trained young people who can take us into the next 

century. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say congratulations 

once again and look forward to seeing the benefits of this 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 28  An Act to provide for the Establishment, 

Development and Maintenance of Public Libraries 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

provide for the Establishment, Development and Maintenance 

of Public Libraries be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 29  An Act to enable Co-operation among 

all Types of Autonomous Libraries for the 

Provision of Library Services 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  I move that a Bill to enable 

Co-operation among all Types of Autonomous Libraries for the 

Provision of Library Services be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be  



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Yes, I’m pleased to table the answer 

to question no. 11 in keeping with our policy of being open and 

accessible. 

 

The Speaker:  The answer to question 11 is tabled. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I would like to have done the same 

on this question except that if the question had been answered 

as it was asked, the answer wouldn’t make any sense. We’ll 

have to convert this one. 

 

The Speaker:  That’s converted to motions for returns 

(debatable). 

 

Members, I just realized here that I’ve gotten slightly out of 

sync and can I ask for leave of the House to return to just before 

orders of the day. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

TABLING OF REPORT 

 

The Speaker:  I wish to table the auditor’s report on the 

financial statements of Crown agencies, to be laid before the 

Legislative Assembly in accordance with provisions of section 

14 of The Provincial Auditor Act. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and I want to say that it’s indeed a pleasure to rise and begin the 

second reading debate on An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to this Act are necessitated by the 

great success of what is known as Innovation Place in 

Saskatoon and the desire to continue to build on its success, 

both in Saskatoon and elsewhere in our province. 

 

In order to do this, it is deemed advisable to set out SOCO’s 

(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation) legislation and 

specify authorities with respect to the operation of the research 

and development park in Saskatoon as well as the rest of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before turning to the details of the legislative 

amendments, I want to briefly place SOCO and Innovation 

Place in context in the government’s overall economic strategy, 

particularly as it relates to Partnership For Growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on February 22 I had the distinct privilege to 

announce in Saskatoon the Partnership For Growth, the second 

phase of the government’s economic development strategy. It’s 

fair to say that this strategy was created by stakeholders in all 

sectors of our economy  community economic development 

leaders, business, labour, REDAs (regional economic 

development authority), municipal government, and many, 

many others, including members of the opposition. Many of 

them were in Saskatoon for the announcement. 

 

Partnership For Growth builds on the success of our first 

strategy, Partnership for Renewal, which was initiated in the 

fall of 1992. And under that strategy we set a target and goal, 

we and industry, of 30,000 new jobs by the end of the year 

2000. And I’m happy and pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that in 

the first three years since the announcement of the program in 

the fall of 1992, 10,000 new jobs have been added to the 

economy of Saskatchewan; those jobs being added in large part 

by small and medium-sized business, many of them export 

oriented. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this provincial government will work diligently to 

implement the initiatives outlined under Partnership For 

Growth and we will do our part to create a positive climate for 

growth and forge many more partnerships between private and 

public sector entities. The Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation is one of the ways the government can make a 

cooperative . . . and do cooperative ventures with the private 

sector to create wealth and jobs. 

 

We introduced the legislation to create SOCO back in . . . about 

a year ago, and we have built a very new and exciting Crown 

corporation which is increasingly recognized as a significant 

contributor in many ways to the economy of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the results of SOCO’s first full year of operation I 

believe are impressive, and I want to congratulate the staff of 

SOCO for the excellent work that they have done. 

 

I just want to outline, Mr. Speaker, a few of the success stories 

for the Assembly before I move on to the final comments. But 

since its inception in August of 1994, SOCO has committed 

and created many new projects for a total of $11.4 million of 

investment and equity. These projects have an estimated overall 

value of $37.8 million including a total commitment of other 

private and public sector investors. 

 

Companies such as SLS Manufacturing, a manufacturer of 

hydraulic valves in Yorkton, has used Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation, as has Shuttlecraft, a boat 

manufacturing facility in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will be well aware of the Temple Gardens Spa 

project in Moose Jaw and the Microgro greenhouse in Biggar as 

they also received SOCO investment. The list goes on and the 

projects range from conventional manufacturing to leading edge 

technology developments. 

 

Clients estimate that the projects SOCO has invested in or  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1996 338 

committed to will result in 168 new jobs  permanent jobs  

and 98 temporary jobs. And in addition, 156 jobs will be 

maintained through client expansion or increased operating 

capabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SOCO was instrumental in facilitating 

arrangements for numerous other projects where it was not 

necessary for the corporation to invest. And as we said in our 

opening speech back when we introduced SOCO, part of the 

role is to help facilitate companies get loans from other entities 

so that the government does not have to be involved. And if 

SOCO can assist a business to obtain financing without 

investing taxpayers’ money, they have truly done that job in an 

admirable way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the assets of Innovation Place, the province’s 

research and development park located in Saskatoon, were 

transferred to SOCO in August. And in 1995 the construction 

of a 15,000-foot office and laboratory and warehouse building 

was completed and an expansion of the atrium was initiated to 

house a pilot scale biofermentation facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SOCO also established a development division 

which established contracts with a large number of 

out-of-province businesses which could benefit from a presence 

in Saskatchewan. And I mentioned those in the House the other 

day, companies like AgrEvo from Berlin, Plant Genetics from 

Belgium, plant Limagrain from France, and Monsanto from the 

United States are but a few of those out-of-province companies 

that have found home in Saskatoon that add credibility, huge 

amounts of credibility to this institution as a world-class 

research and development park. 

 

I think this is an impressive list of accomplishments of a new 

corporation with a total of 29 staff and an operating budget of 

approximately $2 million. I congratulate the management and 

staff of SOCO for their work over the past year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to speak that SOCO does not create jobs, as 

we all know; the businesses that they invest in create the jobs. 

And again, this use of partnership-based approach to economic 

development is the cornerstone of SOCO’s efforts as well as 

Partnership for Growth. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, a major addition to SOCO’s mandate 

during 1995 involved the transfer of Innovation Place from 

Crown Investments Corporation to Saskatchewan Opportunities 

Corporation. We believe the integration of Innovation Place 

with SOCO is an excellent strategy. Both have a strong 

economic development mandate and complementary activities, 

and SOCO is now positioned to support economic growth in 

advanced technology through investment and through the 

provision of research and development provisions and facilities. 

 

Since its creation in 1976, Innovation Place has grown to 

become one of North America’s  in fact one of the world’s 

premier research development parks. It’s hard to believe, but 94 

companies now have employees amounting to 1,400 working in 

various and a variety of areas of knowledge-based business and 

research development projects. 

 

Tenants at Innovation Place are involved in environmental 

science, telecommunication, pharmaceuticals, and several other 

areas. Lately Innovation Place has become known particularly 

for its strength in agriculture biotechnology, and Innovation 

Place is recognized as a world-class ag biotech centre. 

 

A strong demand for new facilities has come with this 

recognition, and occupancy today is close to 100 per cent. And 

many tenants are expanding, and new tenants are seeking 

facilities in the research park. By the end of 1995, Innovation 

Place assets totalled $14 million with approximately 14 million 

of new construction approved or under way. Several new 

multimillion dollar projects are at the conceptual and analytical 

stage for Innovation Place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this kind of expansion, it is possible that we 

could run up against SOCO’s legislated capitalization limit of 

$100 million for its activities in the coming year. We would 

then be faced with having to turn away potential clients and 

development for Innovation Place in Saskatoon, which would 

harm the economy of Saskatchewan. And clearly this is an 

untenable position, and the prudent step to take is to amend the 

legislation to facilitate the meeting of that strong demand. 

Therefore the amendments that we are bringing in today. 

 

I hasten to add that the capital required for Innovation Place is 

investment capital. It is not a grant or a subsidy. The taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan receive interest on the money we invest on 

their behalf in Innovation Place. And Innovation Place from 

time to time has required modest operating subsidies, but we 

constantly strive to keep that to a minimum. 

 

Innovation Place has been so successful that in response to 

requests from the University of Regina, REDA, and the city of 

Regina, we are examining the potential of a similar park at the 

University of Regina. 

 

Partnership for growth established commercializing new and 

emerging technologies as its 20th objective. As a specific action 

in support of this objective, the Government of Saskatchewan 

made the following commitment. During 1996-98 expansion, 

expand Innovation Place at the University of Saskatchewan and 

examine the feasibility developing a complementary research 

and development park at the University of Regina. 

 

It is for these reasons that we place before the House the Bill 

that would amend Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

the minister for a few of the comments on the Bill. But in 

looking at the Bill, I see there’s a tremendous amount of money 

that in fact we’re dealing with. And I think given the record of 

some of the economic development initiatives by the 

government, we’d want more time to consult with some of the 

groups and stakeholders. And at this time I’d ask that we move 

adjournment on debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and 

Safety Act, 1985 and to make Related Amendments to 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all 

recognize the need for health and safety at home and at work 

and in public places. The legislation before us is not 

controversial. The amendments that we propose simply bring 

existing legislation up to date. 

 

I’d like to take a few moments to give some background on the 

legislation and the proposed amendments before us here today. 

 

The need for radiation safety legislation in Saskatchewan was 

first recognized in the field of medicine. Ionizing radiation or 

X-rays became major diagnostic tools for the medical 

community in the years following the war. 

 

In 1958, the Minister of Public Health appointed a committee to 

look at the whole issue of hazards arising from the use of X-ray 

equipment. The committee also considered the need for 

regulations in regard to radiation and methods which would be 

used for compliance and enforcement of such regulations. 

 

As a result of the committee’s work, the radiological health Act 

was passed in March of 1961. Ten years later, in 1971, the Act 

was renamed The Radiation Health and Safety Act. The Act 

allowed regulations to be put in place. It also required all 

radiation emitting equipment to be registered, set formal 

requirements for the maintenance of such equipment, and 

introduced standards for the training of operators. The purpose 

of the legislation was to protect both the public and the 

technicians from exposure to excessive amounts of radiation. 

 

The last major revision in 1985 considerably expanded the 

provisions relating to the uses of non-ionizing radiations. Three 

years ago in 1993, a comprehensive package of new regulations 

covering all aspects of the use of both ionizing and 

non-ionizing radiations came into effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the preparation of the radiation health and 

safety regulations, several limitations became apparent. It is to 

address these limitations that the amendments are before us 

today. The proposed amendments to The Radiation Health and 

Safety Act, 1985 will clarify the qualifications for persons 

allowed to operate X-ray equipment. This is necessary, because 

at present some entities with ionizing radiation equipment are 

allowing untrained persons to operate the equipment. Obviously 

that is not a desirable situation. 

 

The majority of required qualifications have been prescribed in 

the Act. Patients, workers, and the public should be reassured 

because the amendments will ensure only qualified and trained 

people will be able to use such equipment. Obviously the 

amendments will address concerns raised by professional 

associations like the Saskatchewan Association of Medical 

Radiation Technologists, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Combined Laboratory and X-ray Technicians, and the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons. 

 

Safety is of course at the root of these amendments. The  

legislation will enable the minister to issue codes of practice as 

recommended by the radiation and health safety committee. 

 

It will also, for example, enable regulations to be made 

regarding the display of warning and other signs about health 

and safety. This benefits both workers in the field and the 

public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Health Canada has developed several safety codes 

for radiation emitting equipment which may be adopted as part 

of the province’s radiation regulations. The amendments before 

us also make several housekeeping changes. These include for 

example, the deletion of the term, maximum possible dose, 

because the term is no longer in use. Other clauses which 

specify the regulation-making authority of The Radiation Health 

and Safety Act are also clarified. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have before us consequential amendments 

to The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993. These 

amendments simply clarify the occupational health and safety 

legislation by including references to radiation issues. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is, I am confident, one of those occasions 

when we can all agree on a piece of legislation. These 

amendments will improve safety for both people working in the 

professions and for the public who have come to rely on the 

services that they provide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of this 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, to give us an opportunity to 

review this Act with our stakeholders, we ask for an opportunity 

to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 25  An Act to amend 

The Legal Profession Act, 1990 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  I would beg leave of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, for a moment or two. The minister who is to introduce 

the Bill is at the present moment being interviewed by the 

media and I expect him to be in here in a minute or two. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Legal 

Profession Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

In 1994 the law society amended its rules to make discipline 

hearings open to the public. With the full endorsement of the 

law society, this Bill enshrines that requirement in the Act. 

 



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1996 340 

Amendments are also being made to ensure that the law society 

has the ability to discipline former members and lawyers from 

other provinces who are authorized to practise in Saskatchewan 

but who are not “members” as that term is defined in the Act. 

 

With the increase in mobility in the profession, it is necessary to 

tighten up the wording of the Act. These amendments will 

ensure that lawyers who practise in more than one province are 

not able to avoid being disciplined for misconduct for technical 

reasons. 

 

I’m also introducing amendments to clarify the discipline 

process. A complainant’s right to appeal a decision to take no 

action on a competency complaint is more fully established. 

This will make the Act consistent with the current practice of 

the law society, which is to provide these complainants with the 

right of appeal. 

 

The competency and standards committee performs a very 

valuable service for the public and the profession. It works with 

lawyers who may be experiencing difficulties, to assist them in 

improving their skills. Amendments I am introducing today 

confirm the remedial and consensual approach of this 

committee. 

 

A new Legal Profession Act was passed in 1990. It allowed the 

government, for the first time, to appoint two public 

representatives to the governing body of the law society. Today 

I am introducing amendments to this Act to increase the number 

of public representatives to four. 

 

The public representatives already in place are making a 

valuable contribution to the law society. By increasing their 

number we will be able to appoint persons who represent an 

even broader cross-section of the community. I know that this 

will be of considerable assistance to the law society as they 

continue to meet the challenge of regulating their members in 

the public interest. 

 

The Legal Profession Act, 1990 also continued the existence of 

a special fund. This fund, financed entirely through 

contributions by lawyers, is available to reimburse clients when 

their lawyer misappropriates their funds. 

 

In a recent case, the Court of Appeal allowed a business partner 

of a lawyer to make a claim against this special fund for money 

the lawyer had taken from the business partner. The purpose of 

the fund is to protect the clients of lawyers, not someone with 

whom the lawyer may have had business dealings. Today’s 

amendments will clarify this situation. 

 

The final change proposed by this Bill addresses the jurisdiction 

of the small claims court to resolve disputes between lawyers 

and clients respecting fees. A recent Court of Appeal decision 

held that if a lawyer sues a client for fees in small claims court, 

the client cannot dispute the amount of the claim at this level of 

court; instead the client must first ask the small claims court to 

delay hearing the case. If the court consents, the client must 

then make an application to the Court of Queen’s Bench to 

have that court review the amount of the bill. 

This process places an unnecessarily complicated and expensive 

onus on the client. The change proposed in the Bill before us 

today will allow the small claims judge to determine the dispute 

in its entirety. This change will enhance the ability of clients to 

achieve a fair result in a less expensive manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Legal Profession Act, 1990. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly appreciate 

the Justice minister’s comments with respect to the amendments 

to this particular Act since it is one that is good for the legal 

profession, particularly because our society in this day and age 

is virtually driven by lawyers. And it’s also an opportune time. I 

just recently heard that lawyers nowadays are buried at sea, Mr. 

Speaker, because someone said that way down deep they’re 

good people. 

 

These amendments to the Act appear to afford, at least, clients 

the opportunity to cut some costs, maintain some control over 

attorneys from other jurisdictions. And I think anything that 

assists the public in dealing with any professionals for 

assistance is an important move. The disciplinary hearings to be 

open to the public and the increase in public participation is 

definitely a welcome change to these types of statutes and laws. 

 

I believe that it’s necessary that our public, the very people who 

rely on professionals, do have more input and are involved in 

some of the processes that involve disciplinary actions 

procedures. So I commend the government for moving in that 

direction. 

 

I then would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that any further 

concerns . . . I’d like to adjourn debate on it since any further 

concerns may be raised at the committee stage. I thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No 26  An Act to amend the Statute Law 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise again 

today to move second reading of The Statute Law Amendment 

Act, 1996. This Act makes several very minor amendments to a 

number of existing statutes. It corrects inaccurate references, 

numbering errors, typographical errors, and other minor 

mistakes in statutes. It also corrects errors made in previous 

consequential amendments and makes consequential 

amendments that were previously missed. These amendments 

ensure that minor technical errors in legislation are removed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend the 

Statute Law. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, due to the nature of the 

amendments, or the Bill as we see it, we see no need in holding 

up this Bill. We may have more to say in Committee of the 

Whole. Human nature being what it is and the human element  



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

being involved in the putting together of words and phrases and 

documents, creates some errors, and I believe it is astute on the 

part of those individuals who determine and find those errors 

and then make the necessary corrections. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1500) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 9  An Act to 

amend The Direct Sellers Act be now read a second time. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, with respect to The Direct Sellers 

Act, Bill No. 9, we understand that it deals specifically with 

door-to-door sales and that the recommendations were made by 

representatives from the Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business, from the Consumers’ Association of Canada, the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, the consumers’ 

association . . . Retail Council of Canada, and government 

representatives from Justice and Education. 

 

We understand that there will be increased penalties for 

individuals with their first offence with a maximum of $10,000 

and a one-year jail sentence. Subsequent offences could have a 

$25,000 fine or one year in jail. For corporations, there would 

be a maximum fine of $25,000 for a first-time offence and a 

subsequent of $100,000 in fines. The court can order restitution 

but not more than specified in the small claims court. And this 

can only happen if a civil suit has not been launched. 

 

The registrar can slap a restraining order on the person or his 

business if his licence is suspended. This prevents a business 

from continuing to carry out business. 

 

It defines home renovators as a category of direct sellers. A 

deposit is limited to about 15 per cent, and hold-backs must be 

in compliance with The Builders’ Lien Act. The registrar must 

be given written change of any notices and business . . . with 

their names, the owner’s names and address, and members’ 

names and address. 

 

The Act will not apply to direct sales contract entered into 

before the Act comes into force. These changes, as we see it, 

will help Saskatchewan come in line with other provinces in 

harmonizing direct sales, cancellation rights, and contract 

requirements. 

 

And so due to the nature of these amendments or the Bill, we 

can see no need in holding up this Bill any further. And we may 

have more to say to it at the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 10 - An Act 

respecting Marketplace Practices, Consumer Products 

Warranties and Unsolicited Goods and Credit Cards be now 

read a second time. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you. The Consumer Protection Act, Bill 

No. 10, introduced by the Hon. Minister John Nilson, on 

Monday, would make offence to engage in unfair business 

practices. Recommendations, again, were made by the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business, consumers’ association, 

the chamber of commerce, the Retail Council of Canada, and 

government reps. 

 

The maximum penalty would allow for $5,000 per individual, 

or $100,000 per company. The main focus as we see it for this 

Bill is to protect seniors, immigrants, and disabled by selling 

them products that they won’t need, they don’t need, or by 

charging them exorbitant prices. The door-to-door salesman and 

home renovators were typically the worst offenders. 

 

This Act will also punish garages that offer free estimates and 

then charge for repairs without consent or indicate repairs are 

necessary when they are not. Supposedly trying to encourage 

. . . this will encourage out-of-court settlements. 

 

A director would be appointed to administer and enforce the 

Act and inform consumers and businesses of their rights and 

duties. It would also maintain public record of enforcement 

proceedings, judgements, and compliance. The director may 

take action on behalf of a group of consumers. 

 

This Act includes consumer product warranties and provides 

remedy procedures for defective or substandard products if the 

defect results in a breach of warranty. 

 

Unsolicited goods and credit cards will continue to ensure 

recipients of these credit cards are not obligated to the sender 

unless it is in writing and signed by the purchaser. 

 

Stories of unscrupulous corporations from time to time in 

Saskatchewan proves that there needs to be a better system to 

control these people. Due to the nature of this Bill, of the 

amendments of this Bill, we’ll see no need to hold this up any 

further. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 3  An Act 

respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me great pleasure to make some comments on Bill No. 3, 

the amendment to the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of  



  Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 1996 342 

Science and Technology) Act. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to meet with some people from the 

institute and talk about the previous Acts  The Institute Act 

 as well as the amendments that are proposed. And in 

meeting with them, I see the kind of the move that is taking 

place in terms of really reaffirming what is actually taking 

place. We recognize the fact that the campuses, as they were 

once known, is no longer the term that is being used, and now 

we’re referring to them as the institutes in the four locations. 

 

The centralizing of education under the auspices of the 

secretariat and addressing the concerns around its make-up will 

be addressed. And I think it recognizes the fact that there is a 

need for a central coordinating unit, and the secretariat will be 

responsible for that. 

 

In discussions with a couple of the principals from the two 

institutes, they have identified some small, little concerns, but 

nothing serious. And they’re pleased with the fact of course that 

it will be now known as the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology. And of course there is some reference 

to removing gender-biased language. And we’re also pleased 

with that. 

 

So after some consultation and discussions, we see no need to 

hold the current Bill up. And we would like to make further 

comments at committee after consulting again with other 

partners. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 4  An Act to 

amend The University of Regina Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as far as The University of Regina Act, we are aware, of course, 

that The University of Saskatchewan Act was amended in the 

spring of 1995 and has brought into line the conditions 

regarding investment procedures at the University of 

Saskatchewan. And after some consultation again, it seems that 

The University of Regina Act is attempting to do exactly that  

bring it into line with The University of Saskatchewan Act in as 

far as its investment powers. The amendment will allow the 

board of governors at the university to have some flexibility as 

far as investments, similar to that at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The University of Regina has of course requested this 

legislative change. And we see very little problems in terms of 

its suggested amendment. And therefore we will also have the 

Bill proceed to next reading. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 6  An Act 

to amend The Community Bonds Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to participate in the debate about the Bill on 

community bonds. I note that at the present time that there is 

virtually no community bonds corporations active. It’s indicated 

in the information that I’ve received that in 1993-94 there were 

only four bond corporations actually active and I’m very proud 

to be a part of one of them, the Melfort and District Community 

Bond Corporation. 

 

One of the experiences that our group had through this whole 

community-bond exercise was that on one hand it seemed that it 

would be a very, very easily sold kind of a venture whereby 

local people could invest in their communities with no risk. The 

risk being taken by the province of Saskatchewan and that the 

processes that were in place of due diligence and things of that 

nature would also minimize the amount of exposure that these 

projects would have to the taxpayers of the province as well. 

 

Strangely enough, the experience with this whole bond 

corporation has not been all that positive. I recall in 1995, the 

Saskatoon experience where they raised a significant amount of 

money  $2.2 million  and at the end they could only find a 

couple of eligible projects to invest in and 1.2 million of the 2.2 

was actually returned to the investors. 

 

The Prince Albert experience was even worse, about the same 

time, where they raised $796,000, couldn’t find any eligible 

companies to invest in and the whole amount was returned to 

the investors. 

 

The Melfort and District Community Bond Corporation had 

similar difficulties in that we raised some significant money. At 

the end of the day it was very difficult to find any company that 

was eligible for these investments and we had to apply for a 

change in the statutes governing our bond corporation set-up so 

that the investment could actually be made in Thomson Meats, 

which the minister of Economic Development is very proud to 

always point out as one of the stars in the Saskatchewan job 

creation platform. And certainly the fact that we were able to 

convert our community bond to support a local project was very 

worthwhile. 

 

So I guess the point of all of this thing is that I’m trying to 

suggest that there maybe are problems that go beyond The 

Community Bonds Act itself and I recognize that this particular 

statute does not address them. 

 

One of the concerns that people came to us with as community 

bond participants, were that the overall climate of investment in 

this province, even though it is such an ironclad investment as 

that done with community bonds, was such that many projects 

just were not interested in accessing projects within 

Saskatchewan. 

 



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

So we would hope that this program, that has a lot of merit and 

has a lot of potential, would be looked at, not only just in 

isolation but in context of the overall labour laws, the overall 

statutes governing Crown corporations and tendering and all the 

rest of the things that are giving us kind of a bad eye in terms of 

why investors or particular companies want to come to this 

province, will be looked at. So we hope that as we go into 

committee and look at the details of this that we’ll be able to 

point out and suggest ways that this Act can actually be 

improved. And we therefore will not be limiting its process 

right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 13 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 13  An Act to 

amend The Department of Social Services Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, in respect to Bill No. 13, An Act to 

amend The Department of Social Services Act, we see that this 

Act promotes fairness to all parties. However our caucus does 

not have any concerns at this time, but we will be addressing 

the Act in some more detail during the Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1515) 

Bill No. 14 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 14  An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure members 

in this Legislative Assembly can understand the great deal of 

work that has to be done to talk to stakeholders in some of these 

Bills, and certainly this Bill is one of the ones that has been 

very, very much in need of conversation with stakeholders. So 

with the permission of the Assembly, I’d like to move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker:  The motion for adjournment of debate by the 

hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale is out of order. I refer 

members to page 1 of the appendices of the rule book in which 

it says: 

 

That a Member who has moved for and obtained the 

adjournment of a debate should not be thereby precluded 

from moving an amendment to the motion, other than a 

second motion to adjourn the said debate. 

 

Having previously moved adjournment, therefore the member is  

ineligible to do that and debate will proceed. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After listening to 

some of the member for Melfort-Tisdale’s comments, Mr. 

Speaker, I too have a great number of concerns probably shared 

by the government members opposite. And so at this point I’d 

like to move adjournment of debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 15 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert that Bill No. 15  An Act to 

amend The Child and Family Services Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, in respect to this Act, Bill No. 15, 

the Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act, again our 

caucus does not have any concerns at this time and we will be 

addressing the Act in more detail, in complete detail, during the 

Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:19 p.m. 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................327 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................328 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................328 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Atkinson .....................................................................................................................................................................................328 

  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................328 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 RCMP Discusses Race Relations 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................328 

 Education Week 

  Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................329 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................329 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................330 

 Onion Lake First Nation -Wascana Energy Agreement 

  Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................329 

 E.C. Leslie Provincial Debating Tournament in Lloydminster 

  Stanger .......................................................................................................................................................................................330 

 Wendel Clark a Maple Leaf Again 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................330 

 L’il Red Bus Line 

  Bradley .......................................................................................................................................................................................330 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 Rural Road System 

  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................331 

  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................331 

 Rabbit Processing Plant Failure 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................331 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................331 

 McDowell Report 

  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................332 

  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................332 

 Addiction Services Funding 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................333 

  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................333 

 High-Risk Offender Identification 

  Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................334 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................334 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Telecommunications Enhancement Fund 

  Atkinson .....................................................................................................................................................................................335 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................336 

  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................336 

  Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................336 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 28 - An Act to provide for the Establishment, Development and Maintenance of Public Libraries 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................336 

 Bill No. 29 - An Act to enable Co-operation among all Types of Autonomous Libraries for the Provision of Library 

Services 

  Teichrob .....................................................................................................................................................................................336 

 



March 18, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................337 

TABLING OF REPORT 

  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................337 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................337 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................338 

 Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and Safety Act, 1985 and to make Related Amendments to 

 The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................339 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................339 

 Bill No. 25  An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................339 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................340 

 Bill No 26  An Act to amend the Statute Law 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................340 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................340 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 9  An Act to amend The Direct Sellers Act 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................341 

 Bill No. 10 - An Act respecting Marketplace Practices, Consumer Products Warranties and Unsolicited Goods and 

 Credit Cards 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................341 

 Bill No. 3  An Act respecting The Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................341 

 Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................342 

 Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................342 

 Bill No. 13  An Act to amend The Department of Social Services Act 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................343 

 Bill No. 14  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act 

  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................343 

  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................343 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................343 

 Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................343 

 

 


