




















































April 29, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1199 
 April 29, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names are of people throughout southern Saskatchewan 
and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today also to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Brownlee, Chaplin, Eyebrow, Davidson, Tugaske; and then we 
get all the way over to the east side with Melville and Fillmore; 
and then a number from Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names of people from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from Regina here. They’re from Glenbain, from 
Kincaid, and all from throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I also rise on behalf of concerned 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with respect to the 
closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on this petition are primarily from Indian Head and 
White City. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice regarding the Kerrobert 
court-house: (1) how much money is the department 
expecting to save by closing the Kerrobert court-house; (2) 
how many overall court appearances were made at the 
Kerrobert court-house . . . handle in 1995; (3) how many 
Court of Queen’s Bench court actions or procedures were 
dealt with at the Kerrobert court-house in 1995? 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Northern Affairs with 
regards to health care in northern Saskatchewan: (1) at 
what stage of development are the northern health districts 
and district health boards; (2) when are these district health  



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

boards expected to be in place; (3) can any northern 
communities apart from La Ronge expect to see a new 
health care centre in near future; (4) What percentage of 
the cost of the proposed health centre in La Ronge will be 
provincially funded and what percentage will be federally 
funded? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
welcome here today a group of grade 11 students seated in your 
gallery. These students are from Campbell Collegiate and also 
some exchange students from the province of Quebec. They are 
accompanied today by their teacher, Mr. Peter Charles. And I’m 
looking very forward to meeting with them later on this 
afternoon to talk about our legislative process. So welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I too would like to welcome the 
students from Campbell Collegiate and the exchange students 
from Quebec. It is our hope that while you’re here in 
Saskatchewan you will fully enjoy our fair province. 
 
I would ask the Assembly to warm them welcomely . . . 
welcome them warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past 
couple of months people have had the opportunity of 
welcoming their kids here as they spend some time with mom 
or dad. Today it’s my day, and I’d like to have my family stand 
and be recognized: my wife Arlene; my daughter Nancy; my 
son Ken, and his fiancé, Sandy. And my other daughter is just 
leaving Britain today to come back home after doing internship 
in England. Would you welcome these people to the House, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Day of Mourning for Killed and Injured Workers 
 
Mr. Trew:  Thank you. Mr. Speaker, April 28 is the day set 
aside as a day of mourning for workers killed or injured on the 
job during the previous year. The private members’ Bill you 
introduced made Saskatchewan the first jurisdiction in Canada 
to observe this day. Now it is recognized across the country. 
 
Eighty-two years after the first workers’ compensation program 
was introduced, we’ve made considerable progress towards 
improving workplace safety. But the fact that we still mark the 
day to remember those killed tells us we haven’t done enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year in Saskatchewan, 27 workers were killed 
on the job; 15 more were killed in farm accidents  men,  

women, and children. Forty-two deaths to mourn, forty-two 
families to heal, forty-two accusations against our society, 
which too often places productivity ahead of safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a few moments the Minister of Labour will read 
into the public record the names of those killed and we will all 
observe a moment of silence. 
 
I would suggest that as we silence ourselves, we should ponder 
our duties as legislators. We should remind ourselves that 
depriving workers of the right to organize, that weakening laws 
regulating working conditions, that subverting occupational 
health and safety rules, and that promoting right-to-work 
legislation are all guarantees that we will be here at the same 
time next year mouthing the same sentiments. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
recognize yesterday’s designation as a day of mourning for 
workers killed or injured on the job. Sadly, 27 Saskatchewan 
people were killed while at work last year. Over 13,000 others 
were forced to take time off from work because of job-related 
injuries. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, I would like to extend condolences 
to those families who have lost a loved one in work-related 
accidents, and I wish a speedy recovery to all of those who are 
still nursing work-related injuries. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we observe 
yesterday’s day of mourning to honour workers killed in or 
injured in the workplace. Tragically, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan people are all too familiar with the problems of 
work-related injuries. Because our province’s number one 
industry is agriculture, we have a lot of people working with a 
wide range of dangerous equipment under tight deadlines and 
stress. Especially with late spring and Saskatchewan about to 
begin its billion-dollar megaproject, which of course is spring 
seeding, I urge farmers to think safety. 
 
I know already of one seed cleaner in our community who, 
according to his wife who called me this morning, has been 
working for 36 straight hours with only three hours of sleep. 
 
To those who have suffered the loss or injury of loved ones, I 
offer my deepest sympathy and that of my colleagues in our 
caucus. To those who have been fortunate enough to avoid such 
experiences, please take note and exercise caution on the job 
and in the workplace and in all parts of your life. I want to 
thank the Saskatchewan employers who have continued to work 
diligently to make the workplace a safer place to work every 
day. At the same time, let’s all be sure to offer our suggestions 
and solutions to other countries where the working conditions 
are far less safe than our own here at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important day, and I ask all members to 
join me in remembering the workers that have been killed or 
injured across the province and around the world. We will be  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

pleased in our caucus to support the minister’s call for a 
moment of silence later this day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

NATO Delegation to Tour Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to bring to the 
attention of members in the House an important event which 
will be happening in Saskatchewan this week. 
 
On Tuesday and Wednesday of this week, a 24-member group 
representing 14 NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) 
countries will be in Moose Jaw to tour our city and 15 Wing 
CFB (Canadian Forces Base) as a potential site for the training 
of NATO pilots. Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw, Portage la Prairie, 
and Cold Lake are joining as potential sites to provide training 
for NATO pilots in a long-term project that would include 
millions of dollars for our national, provincial, and local 
economies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the group will have a whirlwind tour of the city, 
including a welcome from our mayor, our Premier, local MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly), business groups, a tour 
of the city to view everything from our murals, churches, 
schools, and the beautiful Wakamow valley, showing 
everything that Moose Jaw has to offer to potential trainees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several Moose Jaw streets will be decorated for 
the occasion, along with a ribbon campaign by the chamber of 
commerce. Mr. Speaker, tomorrow I will provide to all 
members of this House a blue tartan ribbon which I will invite 
members to wear as a way of welcoming this NATO delegation, 
not only to the city of Moose Jaw but to our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a big thank-you to all those who’ve been so active 
in organizing the tour, demonstrating that Moose Jaw and 
Saskatchewan remain one of the best places in all the world to 
train pilots. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Early Childhood Intervention Week 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to recognize 
this week’s designation as Early Childhood Intervention Week. 
 
Across Saskatchewan there are therapists who devote their time 
to working with children who suffer from developmental 
impairments. More recently these therapists, volunteers, and 
parents have started directing their efforts towards home-based 
intervention programs. Quite often when a child suffers from a 
disability, a tremendous strain is placed upon his or her parents 
to help the youngster cope. It’s extremely important that these 
families have access to outside help so that together they can 
provide a stimulating environment. 
 
I commend all those involved for their efforts in early 
childhood intervention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, I too rise today to inform the 
members of the House that April 28 to May 4 has been 
proclaimed Early Childhood Intervention Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many children in our society begin life with 
development impairments, but this doesn’t mean that they have 
less to contribute to society, but it often means that being a part 
of the community will be more difficult. Programs which assist 
these children and their families at an early stage to deal with 
the impairment are often a factor in the future healthy 
functioning of that child and family in the community. 
 
There are many community programs which support and assist 
families and children in dealing with a child’s developmental 
issue. Various government departments are working with 
community groups in supporting and developing these 
programs. One such program is the successful mothers’ 
program which works with teen and young parents and with 
disabled parents and their children. This is work which is very 
important, and I am pleased to recognize that through the 
designation of this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the members of this House to join 
me in commending all of the many parents, staff volunteers, 
and community organizations involved in these important 
programs. Their work plays a significant role in the lives of 
children and families across Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

90th Birthday Tribute to Bernard Korchinski 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I was 
privileged over the weekend to be invited to a special dinner 
honouring a very special man. Family and friends of Bernard 
Korchinski gathered Saturday evening in Regina to pay tribute 
to Mr. Korchinski, a man whose 90 years on earth have been 
filled with remarkable achievements  the kind of 
achievements that helped to build our province. 
 
Mr. Korchinski was born 90 years ago near what is now Ituna, 
located in my constituency. Mr. Korchinski devoted his life to 
teaching others, enjoying a 35-year teaching career at schools 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Korchinski threw himself into literally 
dozens of projects and proudly showed off his strong Ukrainian 
heritage. The list of his achievements is long and I can’t go into 
all of them here, but just a few of his achievements include; 
co-founding the Ukrainian Catholic Youth of Canada, 
becoming the first Canadian of Ukrainian descent to join the 
Knights of Columbus. 
 
He was an organizer of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and had a 
long-time association with the Boy Scouts of Canada 
movement. During the war he worked for the National Film 
Board. He also served two terms in the legislature as a Liberal 
MLA from Redberry, where the press selected him as the 
legislature’s best debater. 
 
After his retirement in 1964, Mr. Korchinski served as  



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

provincial director of the Emergency Measures Organization 
and was appointed as citizenship court judge in 1967. 
 
Today Bernard Korchinski is still going strong at age 90. I can 
only hope that when I turn 90, in a couple of years, I remain as 
strong and as vital as Mr. Korchinski. And I congratulate him 
on a life well spent and wish him many years to come. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Grand Opening of Regina Community Clinic’s New Facility 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In July of 1962 the 
Regina Community Clinic opened its doors for the first time, 
operating out of a house at College Avenue and McIntyre. The 
founding of this cooperatively operated clinic, one of five in the 
province, was one of the triumphant results of the introduction 
of medicare by the Woodrow Lloyd government. 
 
In 1968 the clinic moved its services to Sherwood Drive. And 
last Wednesday the Premier and many colleagues, along with 
200 other guests, were happy to attend the grand opening of the 
clinic’s new facility on Winnipeg Street, a location from which 
it will continue to tend the heath needs of its members for many 
years to come. 
 
It was a modest and happy ceremony. The ribbon was cut by 
our Premier and the President, Nial Kuyek. The mayor brought 
the city’s blessings. And the first member, Mrs. Beatrice 
Harding, was presented with a charter marking her historic 
entry into this innovative and increasingly relevant system of 
health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Community Clinic has 44 full-time and 
part-time employees, including several dedicated, salaried 
health professionals. It provides a number of services all under 
one roof and contains two unique resource centres, as well as 
sponsoring a 30-space day care centre. As a girl, my health 
needs were met at this McIntyre centre and then continued to be 
met at the Sherwood Drive location, and I will be happy to be 
part of a membership that looks after its own health needs 
provided now in this excellent new centre. 
 
Congratulations to everyone involved in the move. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government has again 
demonstrated that they will not and cannot be open and 
accountable with the people of Saskatchewan. Instead they 
continue to operate under the same back-room politics that the 
previous Tory administration became famous for. 
 
Prior to the election last June, the NDP government gave a $5  

million hand-out to Intercon for a so-called expansion project. 
Now we have the confidential government documents 
supposedly outline a proposal that could close Intercontinental 
Packers plant in Vancouver and just end up moving 400 jobs to 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these back-room politics are 
completely unacceptable. 
 
Will the Minister of Economic Development come clean with 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and table this government’s 
agreement today in the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I notice the member 
reading her question. And I wonder out loud whether or not the 
member from the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), 
Michael Tymchuk, helped draft the question. 
 
But when it comes to back-room politics, I want to tell you 
there isn’t a group of men and women anywhere in the province 
that knows more about back-room politics than those 10 sitting 
over there, given what they did to their Liberal leader. 
 
But when it comes to the deal with Intercon, what you will 
know is that your accusation that the deal only meant moving 
400 jobs from Vancouver to Saskatoon and Moose Jaw 
couldn’t be further from the truth. The fact is that under the 
deal 130 new jobs will have been created by July 1 in Moose 
Jaw and 60 jobs have been created in Saskatoon. That’s the first 
200 without any change in the Vancouver position. 
 
Now Vancouver may close their office; they may not close their 
office. It has nothing to do with the arrangement that was made 
during 1995. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, here again, attack Crown Life. 
You can go ahead and get more articles in the newspaper . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Next question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, this documents states, and I 
quote: 
 

As the jobs to be created in Saskatchewan equal the jobs 
lost in Vancouver, the trick will be to talk about jobs 
without bringing attention to the Vancouver operation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I realize their job creation record is extremely 
poor but this NDP government resorts to poaching jobs from 
other provinces. What’s alarming and frightening is that our 
Deputy Premier quotes: 
 

I think this is perfectly normal. 
 
But, and again I quote: 
 

It is imperative that the government distance itself from the 
decision. 

 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

Mr. Speaker, will the Deputy Premier admit that this is in fact 
wrong and come clean with the details of this proposal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I say to the member opposite if she 
would quit reading her questions and listen she would 
understand. There have been no jobs moved from Vancouver; 
no jobs have been moved. So your talk about poaching jobs in 
Vancouver is absolute nonsense. And I explained this to anyone 
who cares to listen — that the accusation that jobs have moved 
from Vancouver isn’t true. 
 
Now you may be opposed to jobs moving from other parts of 
Canada. Obviously with Crown Life you were, you were very 
upset, and didn’t like the deal that moved jobs from Ontario to 
Saskatchewan. But you have to ask yourself who you represent. 
Do you represent the workers or the business people in 
Vancouver trying to protect jobs in B.C. (British Columbia) or 
are you on the side of working people in Saskatchewan? Now I 
say to you, no jobs have moved from Vancouver, but why 
would you be opposed to people moving to Saskatchewan from 
other parts of Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to let the Deputy Premier 
know that I’d rather be inexperienced than unaccountable. The 
Deputy Premier of B.C. has issued a warning that in fact if our 
NDP government is poaching jobs from B.C., he will launch a 
blistering attack on Saskatchewan. He also said that he’ll be 
pursuing their options under the Internal Trade Agreement. 
 
This government has broken another agreement and this time 
it’s with the B.C. government. Undoubtedly our Saskatchewan 
economy will suffer. Mr. Speaker, the action of this NDP 
government will have serious effects on every business person 
who conducts business outside of our province. 
 
My question to the Deputy Premier is, what immediate actions 
are you going to take to ensure that the business people of this 
province won’t be made to suffer under your reckless actions? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say again to 
the member opposite that when it comes to job creation, I want 
to tell you that working with business people is what we do 
every day. And the thousand business people who were out to 
the Premier’s banquet last week flies in the face of what you 
say — that business people don’t cooperate in partnership with 
this government. It isn’t true and it isn’t accurate. So when you 
talk about misrepresenting the facts, you should get your story 
straight. 
 
The fact of the matter is that under the deal an arrangement was 
made to create 400 jobs at Intercon through a forgivable loan, 
that if the jobs were created, the loan would be forgiven at a 
rate of 12,500 per job. To this point, a number of new jobs have 
been created by Intercon. No jobs have moved from British 
Columbia. So your talk about poaching or representing the  

people and business people in Vancouver, I’m not quite sure 
where you’re coming from. The fact of the matter is that if jobs 
move from Vancouver, they will not be included in the 
arrangement. 
 
But I welcome every working person who wants to come from 
Vancouver, Toronto, and Halifax  come here and come 
tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care District Advertising 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
media reports this morning indicate that a number of district 
health boards are considering advertising in order to encourage 
people to use local services. The reason they are having to look 
at this option is because of the fact that this government has 
chipped away at local health care to such an extent that people 
have very little faith in their local health care system. The 
Department of Health simply has to exercise stronger 
leadership. 
 
Will the minister admit that because of his government’s 
short-sighted cuts to rural health care, district boards are being 
forced to consider spending valuable health care dollars on 
advertising instead of providing services to the sick and our 
elderly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I believe what the gentleman 
from the Moose Jaw District Health Board said, at least 
according to the report I heard, was that they were going to be 
looking at community announcements and so on. And I support 
what they’re doing and I think it’s a very good idea, and I have 
so said to a few district health boards that I’ve been visiting and 
to the Saskatchewan Medical Association, which I spoke to on 
Friday. 
 
And I’ll tell the member why. One of the things that is 
happening in our health care system is that the seven largest 
districts, with 61 per cent of the population, are doing 94 per 
cent of the surgeries. 
 
And what we should be doing is analysing what is going on in 
the districts and seeing if the level of surgery done across the 
province could be increased. Many people are going to larger 
districts for procedures that could be done at home in their 
home district, which would be better for them and would be 
better for the district too, because we have to pay for surgeries 
that occur in the larger centres when people go there. If more 
surgeries can be done in the smaller centres we’re 100 per cent 
in favour of that, and we’ll work with the districts to try to 
encourage people to stay home if possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, during the address that the 
minister referred to, to the Saskatchewan Medical Association 
last week, you indicated that another one of the co-challenges 
of health reform is convincing patients that they can receive 
indeed the same care of service in rural areas as larger centres.  



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

This is clearly not the case in the minds of the people. And the 
fact that rural districts are looking at advertising to maintain a 
local client base serves as proof. 
 
The Minister also indicated that the Health department may 
need to consider ways to reverse the centralization of some 
services. Will the minister explain what he is only now coming 
to realize, that services to rural residents are not equal to those 
in urban centres? And will he explain what measures he intends 
to take to address this serious problem other than advertising? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  It was not me that proposed advertising. 
But I did say to the member, increasing the level of individual 
awareness is not a bad idea. And I said that to the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association) as well. And I think the 
physician that raised this matter agreed with that. 
 
Because the fact is, I was out in Tisdale a few weeks ago and 
was quite impressed to meet some surgeons from Saskatoon 
who were doing surgery in Tisdale, where they do laparoscopic 
surgery by the way, and the same in Nipawin. And the thought 
did strike me that individuals make choices in the health care 
system. Sometimes they choose to go to Saskatoon to get their 
surgery; but if we can increase the amount of surgery that is 
done in other areas, we should be doing that. And those 
members should be working with us in that regard, Mr. 
Speaker, because this is one of things that we need to do, not 
only to take the pressure off some of the larger centres, but to 
have more surgery done in the rural centres. 
 
And I’ve asked the department for a report as to the amount of 
surgery going on in each district. I’m going to study it. I’m 
going to work with the surgeons. I’m going to work with the 
local doctors and I’m going to work with the districts. And 
we’re going to make sure that there’s good services all over the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
according to internal cabinet documents the Intercon deal was 
actually approved in September of 1994. Those same 
documents indicate that the $5 million was contingent upon the 
closure of Intercon’s Vancouver plant. 
 
And the minister talks about poaching jobs. That is what the 
interprovincial agreement is all about, Mr. Minister. Of course 
we want jobs, but that kind of action is a clear violation of the 
agreement that you signed, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, these documents clearly show that you were 
personally appraised of the situation. Mr. Premier, why did you 
approve a deal that violates the interprovincial trade agreement? 
And why weren’t Saskatchewan voters told the real reasons 
behind this deal when it was finally announced just before the 
last election? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 
to the Leader of the Third Party that the arrangement that was 
made was well explained to the people of Saskatchewan and 
supported by the people of Saskatchewan. What we said in 
1992 and 1993 in the Ag 2000 document is that hog production 
in Saskatchewan would increase from less than a million hogs 
to more than 2 million. And in that increase, there would be 
need for increased capacity at a kill plant and processing in 
Saskatoon and for cattle in Moose Jaw. 
 
In order to eliminate a bottleneck that would occur, by 
everyone’s admission and understanding, anyone who 
understands that kind of increase in production in 
Saskatchewan, there was need to expand the plant in Saskatoon 
and in Moose Jaw. To that end, an arrangement was made to 
allow for a forgivable loan for $5 million to Intercon, and you 
understand that. This was not connected to Vancouver. In fact 
jobs are being created  up to 200 already  and Vancouver is 
still open, to prove the point that it wasn’t and is not linked. 
 
Now after this first 400 jobs are created, or while they are being 
created, if people from Vancouver, from Intercon, want to move 
to Saskatchewan, or from other areas, good luck to them. We 
welcome them here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, next question. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, I think it’s 
time that you explain your actions. This deal was approved in 
September 1994. Why did you wait so long to announce it if 
you had nothing to hide? Why did the Treasury Board 
documents that I was shown clearly link the $5 million to the 
closure of the Vancouver plant? And why does the 
communication strategy go on to say: “It is imperative that the 
government distance itself from the decision to close the 
Vancouver plant.” Is because you knew it was a clear violation 
of the trade agreement that you signed and you went ahead and 
approved it anyway in order to buy votes just prior to the last 
election? 
 
Mr. Premier, Saskatchewan people deserve some answers. The 
minister says the deal was explained properly. Well I don’t 
think so. Mr. Premier, will you release all of the planning 
documents associated with the $5 million Intercontinental deal, 
Intercon deal, so that the people of Saskatchewan can judge for 
themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Again to the member opposite, the 
arrangement to create 400 jobs in Saskatchewan at Intercon 
obviously has nothing to do with closing Vancouver because 
the jobs are being created now. Almost 200 have already been 
created, and no decision has been made by the company 
whether they close or keep Vancouver open. I think for the 
majority of the public who watch and observe, they will 
understand that the new jobs being created have nothing to do 
with Vancouver because Vancouver’s still open. Now that may 
be too complicated for you understand. 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

But the fact of the matter is that the new jobs are being created. 
Vancouver’s still open. How could there possibly be any 
conflict within internal trade when their office and the 
operation in Vancouver is still open? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
have some questions for the Premier about this deal which has 
more to do with hogs to the trough than hogs to slaughter. 
 
Not only has the $5 million forgivable loan been a violation of 
the interprovincial trade deal, Mr. Premier, it was also used to 
buy labour peace in Moose Jaw so your two Moose Jaw MLAs 
wouldn’t have to face a messy strike just before and during an 
election. 
 
Mr. Premier, this is a dangerous precedent that you have set. 
Tax dollars should not be used to settle labour problems in the 
private companies. We can’t afford a situation where every time 
a company has a strike, they’re going to be calling on the 
government for assistance. 
 
Mr. Premier, why did you give Intercon $5 million to buy 
labour peace in Moose Jaw? And we’re talking about labour 
peace  not jobs in this instance. And why wasn’t this given as 
one of the reasons behind the deal when it was finally 
announced nine months later? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that it may be your policy, if you were 
government  it certainly was of the previous Conservative 
government, the Devine administration  to squander hundreds 
of millions of taxpayers’ dollars. You may have said, look, 
we’re going to give out that kind of a loan while there was a 
strike on. That doesn’t seem to make much sense to many 
people in the public  to make a deal while there was a strike 
on. Obviously there could be no deal while there was a strike in 
progress. 
 
The fact of the matter is that before the order in council was 
signed to make the loan, the strike had been settled for some 
months. So I challenge you to get your facts straight so that you 
understand that there was no connection to solving the strike 
issue and giving the loan. 
 
But if you’re making the argument that there should have been 
a loan given while there was a strike on, it’s no wonder that you 
have five members here in the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
supplemental. 
 
Mr. Premier, again your minister’s words simply don’t match 
what is said in the Treasury Board documents, although I do 
think that I sense a clear admission of guilt in his . . . in the 
statement that he just made. But that’s not surprising since the 
communications strategy was to distance yourself from the real 
reasons behind this $5 million deal. 

Mr. Premier, you have been caught red-handed. The strike at 
Moose Jaw, at the packing plant, had gone on for two years. In 
September 1994 you approved a $5 million forgivable loan, and 
three weeks later the strike ended. Now you’re denying that the 
two events were related at all even though it specifically said so 
right in your internal cabinet documents. These are documents 
that you people put your signatures to. 
 
Mr. Premier, come clean with Saskatchewan people. Will you 
today release those documents, release all of the documents that 
your cabinet filled out with regards to this deal, to the people of 
Saskatchewan and let them be the judge of whether you are 
honest or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I’m shocked that the member 
from Cypress Hills says the Premier’s been caught red-handed 
creating jobs and balancing the budget. What a terrible thing to 
have happen to a Premier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I want to say to the member 
opposite, I want to say this, that the economy of Saskatchewan 
today is red hot when you look at wheat production, price of 
wheat, production of hogs, production of cattle. But I say to the 
members opposite, everyone will recall the terrible deals that 
were made during the 1980s by that administration. 
 
And I say to you and to that member, that supporting farmers by 
having an operation for the slaughter of cattle and pigs, and the 
processing, is very encouraging. And far from attacking this 
government or the Premier, you should be congratulating him 
for the job creation program that’s been undertaken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Strike 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
media is reporting that SaskTel’s 650 managers who are filling 
in during the current labour dispute are receiving, in addition to 
$50 an hour overtime, free dinners, suppers, cab fare, extra hour 
babysitting costs, and one can only guess how many other 
perks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister justify spending hundreds of 
thousands of dollars each week and every week to keep SaskTel 
managers satisfied, when private sector managers would be 
expected to carry out these extra duties with no extra wages, 
simply because they’re a part of management? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m really sorry that the 
management employees of SaskTel have been caught at the 
crime of eating on the job. They’re putting in very long hours, 
and yes, they do need some nourishment and some 
transportation to and from work. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the good news on this front is that a press 
release has been issued by the union announcing that a tentative  



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

agreement in this labour impasse has been reached, and this is 
very good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that news, 
Madam Minister, is good for everyone in here and we would be 
first to say that we’re very . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. I’ll ask all 
members to come to order. The Speaker is unable to hear the 
question being put by the hon. member for Saltcoats. Order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just reiterate that 
I think as official opposition we’re very happy also that an 
agreement has been reached at this time for the betterment of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Wildlife Damage Compensation 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, my second question is for the 
Minister of Environment and Natural Resources. Mr. Speaker, 
the issue of big game crop damage is one which has been raised 
on numerous occasions in this House. In spite of the fact that 
elk and deer have destroyed millions of dollars in crops, the 
Environment minister and this government will not commit to a 
compensation package. 
 
Will the minister indicate in the House today if any 
compensation packages have been paid out to any individual 
farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for the question. There has been no compensation 
packages paid out to any landowners. We have put out some 
money towards intercept feeding, fencing materials; but as far 
as outright compensation, no money has been paid out this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  One hundred thousand dollars . . . I would 
suggest that the government opposite shouldn’t be clapping 
when no compensation package is paid out and farmers in rural 
Saskatchewan are not really impressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the overpopulation of white-tailed deer in this 
province is evident in the number of acres of crop they have 
destroyed. Will the minister indicate if this government is in the 
midst of negotiating a 10-year deal or agreement to sell 
white-tailed deer to Canadian and American game farms and, if 
so, will he make a commitment in this House that all such 
revenues will be used to compensate farmers who have suffered 
crop damage as a result of this same big game? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to the 
question, I can assure the member that wildlife in 
Saskatchewan, as is throughout North America, is a public 
resource and we have no intentions of capturing wildlife and  

selling it to anybody. 
 

Income Supplement for Farmers 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
working income supplement proposed in the government’s 
discussion paper on Redesigning Social Assistance is geared 
towards the working poor. We have farmers who are, in some 
instances, the working poor simply because their profit margin 
is very low or in the negative due to high costs related to 
farming. These are people who are working and trying to make 
a living. My question to the minister responsible for Social 
Services is this: will the working poor farmers be entitled to this 
working income supplement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as we discuss these very 
progressive proposals with groups across the province, I 
certainly welcome the input of the member, and I welcome her 
input today. We are not at a point, today, of having made all of 
those decisions. 
 
What I can say to the member today, is that the working income 
supplement will be based on family and household income 
levels. And it would be my view that should any household in 
the province have an income level that would qualify for the 
working income supplement, that that household would have 
access. Now again I say, Mr. Speaker, that we are in the process 
of spending some careful weeks and months reviewing the 
various terms of these programs because it is our determination 
that when we announce the new programs that we have as many 
of the questions ironed out as is possible. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Health benefits are 
necessary for farmers’ children, as well as for urban children. 
Are the children of low income farmers going to qualify for the 
same health benefits that poorer urban children qualify for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that 
I am enthusiastic about in terms of the proposals that we’re 
advancing, will be that proposal which will provide 
supplemental health benefits to the children of our province 
outside  outside  of the traditional welfare system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is being noted across Canada as, if not the, 
one of the most progressive attempts to deal with the very 
serious issue of child poverty in our province. Again I would 
say to that member, we’re working through the details. And it 
would be my view that the supplemental health benefit will be 
available to all of the children of this province based on their 
family income. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave to make a 
statement of importance to the people of Saskatchewan 
concerning the day of mourning. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday was the annual 
day of mourning for workers killed or injured on the job. Today 
we in this Assembly formally observe this important day. 
 
The annual day of mourning for workers killed or injured on the 
job is a solemn time of reflection. In the past year, 27 men and 
women died as a result of workplace accidents in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record the names of those 
men and women that have been lost to their families, friends, 
and colleagues. 
 
Their names are: Andrew Robillard, Nola Belisle, Terry 
Phillips, John Gilchrist, Randy Lia, Eric Schultz, Verna 
Schinkel, James Konopelski, Glen James, Steven Beardsworth, 
Larry Lemke, Ken Weinheimer, Jason Nicolichuk, Simone 
Denis, Clifford Villeneuve, Rudy Thurlow, Aaron Warren, 
Dwight Sanders, Rodney Fleming, Lyndon Hushagen, Victor 
Cholewa, Lynn Sharber, David Wiens, Phillip Desrosiers, 
Richard Beasley, Michelle Kaczmar, and Perry Charbonneau. 
 
At this point, Mr. Speaker, I think it appropriate to also 
acknowledge the 15 men, women, and children who lost their 
lives in farming accidents last year. 
 
And whether farmers, factory, or office workers, today 42 
families in Saskatchewan are grieving for the loss of a loved 
one. We grieve with them. 
 
On this day of mourning, we also remember all those who have 
been seriously injured or have attained illness at work. And we 
remember the men and women left with the permanent 
disability as a result of hazardous conditions or accidents at 
work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we cannot undo what has happened. We cannot go 
back and prevent the accidents that have taken such a heavy 
toll, but we can renew our determination to create safe, healthy 
workplaces for all. 
 
As elected members of this Assembly, we are responsible for 
the legislative framework to achieve that. It is up to each of us 
to support the ongoing education and promotion of workplace 
safety; to support the enforcement of health and safety rules and 
regulations; and to remain firm in our resolve that even one 
death in the workplace is too many. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not some arcane or academic point. For 
working people, it is a matter of life and death. Mr. Speaker, I 
now ask that all members of the this Assembly rise in their 
places and observe a moment’s silence. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I wish to lay on the 
Table the Provincial Auditor’s 1996 spring report in accordance 
with the provisions of section 14 of The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker:  Question 78 is converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair:  The question before the committee is resumed 
debate on the motion moved by the Minister of Finance that be 
it: 
 

Resolved that the sum not exceeding $678,091,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 1997. 

 
I would ask the minister to introduce her officials, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
left is Bill Jones, who is the deputy minister of Finance; on my 
right is Brian Smith, executive director, Public Employees’ 
Benefits Agency; behind Bill is Larry Spannier, executive 
director, treasury board branch; behind me is Kirk McGregor, 
executive director, taxation and intergovernmental affairs 
branch; and behind Brian is Jim Marshall, executive director, 
economic and fiscal policy branch. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
welcome the department officials here today. 
 
Mr. Chairman, any time we are dealing with a financial issue in 
this province I believe it is very important that it comes under 
close scrutiny. We have a massive debt in Saskatchewan and it 
doesn’t seem like it is disappearing very quickly, if at all. The 
concern I have about such a massive debt is that the 
hard-working men and women of Saskatchewan are the ones 
that have to foot the bill. We have a population that is taxed to 
the limit, a job creation record that is absolutely destitute, and 
unfortunately, a government that refuses to do anything about it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I ask the Minister of Finance, if no money is 
specifically allocated in this two-twelfths for servicing the debt 
because it is authorized by law, then what action is being taken 
to pay down the debt out of this total amount that you are 
requesting today? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I’d like to take a moment to answer a number of her 
questions. 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

First of all, we as well believe that there has to be close scrutiny 
of the finances of the province and that’s why there is a process 
in place called the estimates whereby every department of 
government comes before the legislature with all of their 
detailed information and allows the opposition members to ask 
whatever questions that they want of the various departments. 
That process is an ongoing process and when we finish interim 
supply we can obviously move on to that process. 
 
I would also like to correct the member opposite in terms of the 
province’s debt. Saskatchewan is one of the few provinces in 
Canada where the debt is declining. This is because we have 
balanced the budget. 
 
In fact the debt reduction occurring in this province is the most 
dramatic of any province in Canada. In 1994 the province’s 
debt, relative to the size of its economy, relative to the GDP 
(gross domestic product), which is the measure the federal 
Liberals always like to use, was 68 per cent. By 1998 it will be 
down to 44 per cent. 
 
It’s important to remember as well how far ahead Saskatchewan 
is, in that we have balanced our budget. The Government of 
Ontario has not balanced its budget; the Government of Quebec 
has not balanced its budget; the Government of Canada is a 
long way from balancing its budget. So in terms of debt 
reduction I think this is something the people of this province 
should, and I think do, take a lot of pride in. 
 
With respect to jobs, I would say since 1992, 10,000 new jobs 
have been created in the province. With respect to measures 
taken to reduce the debt, recently we sold Cameco shares for a 
net benefit of over $700 million, all of that money being used to 
reduce the debt of the province. 
 
The only thing that is statutory is interest on the public debt. 
That is, interest on the public debt has to be paid as a matter of 
statute rather than as a matter of vote. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Chairman, what this government has done is 
offloaded onto third parties at record levels. The health boards, 
school boards, social agencies, and municipalities have seen 
drastic cuts in funding from this NDP government. 
 
This has gone on since the NDP government formed in 1991. 
Third parties have suffered five years of dramatic provincial 
offloading. They have been forced into the predicament of 
having to provide the same level of service with a heck of a lot 
less funding. Mr. Chairman, these third parties didn’t like what 
was happening to them, but they took it on the chin and kept 
moving forward. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I would ask the Minister of Finance to 
explain her government’s decision to offload so dramatically 
onto third parties and how she expects them to continue to 
operate effectively with such drastic decreases in funding. 
 
(1430) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this is not the House of Commons; this is not the  

government that has offloaded onto third parties. In fact in our 
budget in 1996-97, the operating budgets of all third parties are 
maintained. There is no cuts in this budget to third parties in 
education, health, social services, municipal government. All of 
their funding is maintained at current levels. 
 
The government that is a master of offloading is the federal 
government. Three-quarters of all of their cuts in this budget 
was cuts to provincial governments. The next year it grows: 
1997-98, 79 per cent of all the federal cuts are to third parties 
. . . or to provinces. 
 
So I think that the member opposite has the wrong level of 
government. In fact what we’ve done in this budget, in this 
province, is we have cut the administrative side of government. 
That’s where we have directed our savings. That’s where we 
found the savings. 
 
So the member has it absolutely topsy-turvy. In the ‘96-97 
budget we maintain all of the funding for third parties at 
existing levels. And it’s the federal government that deals with 
its deficit problem by shifting it over to the provinces. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This NDP 
government could learn a very valuable lesson from third 
parties  obviously they haven’t, though. Our federal 
government is also faced with a massive debt and they are 
currently working hard to pay down that debt. 
 
In order to do that, they too had to do some cutting. As a result, 
transfer payments to the provinces had to be cut. There was no 
other choice. Transfer payments to the provinces account for 20 
per cent of Ottawa’s total program spending. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what does this NDP government say about these 
cuts? They say Ottawa is threatening our health care, our 
education, and our social programs. The Minister of Finance 
jets around the province telling the people of Saskatchewan that 
the nasty federal government is at the root of all evil. 
 
She tells them that the federal government is cutting funding for 
health, education, and social programs. The people tell her they 
want to maintain their health, education, and social programs. 
Then on March 28 she stands up in this Assembly and claims 
that the government is back-filling 100 per cent of the cuts to 
these programs. She expects everyone to look at her as if she’s 
some kind of martyr. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I would hope the Minister of Finance knows 
how block funding works. I know her department officials do. 
The very same way they know how tax harmonization works 
when she uses the wrong figures. The intent of the Canadian 
Health and Social Transfer is to allow provinces more freedom 
and more flexibility in determining where they will allocate 
federal transfers. 
 
If there are cuts to health, education, and social programs, it is 
the provincial NDP government’s choice. We know that and 
they know that. Unfortunately the Minister of Finance and her 
NDP colleagues won’t admit it. 
 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

Mr. Chairman, will the Minister of Finance admit that the 
decision to drastically cut funding for schools, health boards, 
and municipalities was the decision of her government and that 
block funding gives them the leeway to make such decisions? 
 
The Chair:  Order. Order. Before the minister responds, I 
guess I want to bring this back to where we came from  
Friday again  that the purpose of interim supply is to grant 
money for the operation of government departments and 
programs on an interim basis, while reserving the right to 
complete the details later in estimates. So I think we have to 
stay away from the policy and we’re getting back into that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Chairperson, in light of all the 
circumstances, I think it would appropriate, and in fact the 
government is prepared, by leave, to permit a broader range of 
questions along the lines we engaged in Friday morning. So I 
make that offer, I think, with leave. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. A couple of general comments. You would be well 
advised to set aside the personal comments. They don’t hang 
well on you. You would also be well advised to check your 
facts before you make statements. 
 
The money we get from the federal government has a name. It’s 
called the Canada Health and Social Transfer. That’s what it’s 
called. That’s what the federal government called it  that is, 
it’s money for health and social programs. Clearly, clearly 
designated for that. That’s the money that they’re giving us for 
health and social programs. 
 
Now the members opposite should really be concerned about 
the position they’ve taken in this House and in this province. 
What we’ve said is, in the recent federal budget, three-quarters 
of all of their cuts are to the Canada Health and Social Transfer. 
That is, three-quarters of the cuts that the federal government 
made are to cuts for health, education, social programs  their 
funding for it. And we have said that those are the wrong 
priorities. 
 
The members opposite have not agreed with that. In fact they 
stand up, every day in the legislature that this issue’s raised, and 
defend the federal government. Obviously making it clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan two things: they don’t mind; they 
support a government in which three-quarters of the cutting is 
to health, education, social programs. Meaning that if they were 
the Government of Saskatchewan they probably would try a 
similar route here, I guess. I guess. 
 
The other thing they’re saying though, consistently to the 
people of Saskatchewan, is that they are prepared to come to the 
legislature of Saskatchewan and support the federal 
government. That is, not speak up for the people of 
Saskatchewan and what the implications of these things are for 
the people of Saskatchewan, but to speak up for the federal 
Liberals. And again, you know, the electorate will have to draw 
its own conclusions from that. But I would say to the member 
opposite, the final fact that has to be clarified is the federal  

government, over the next four years, is taking 250 million  a 
quarter of a billion dollars  out of its funding for health, 
education, social programs. And there’s no disputing those 
numbers. 
 
This province is putting back $240 million of new provincial 
funding. So yes, we are back-filling close to 100 per cent  96 
per cent back-filling of the federal cuts  because we don’t 
agree with their priorities. And if you want to add another layer 
onto it, I don’t believe they should be going around, if they 
have a billion dollars, spending a billion dollars to bribe 
provinces to change their tax regime. 
 
If they had a billion dollars, they should have put it where the 
people of Canada want it put  into health, education, social 
programs. They shouldn’t be hacking and slashing at health, 
education, social programs, at the same time as they’re saying 
to Liberal provinces, here’s a billion dollars to try to  as the 
press has called it, it’s not my words, the press calls it  
bribing people to change their tax regime. 
 
What are the priorities and what are the priorities of the 
members opposite? They seem to be saying they support cuts to 
health, education, and social programs. They don’t mind 
governments being bribed to change their tax regimes. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question, 
basically of clarification, that I would like to present to the 
Minister of Finance. I would like to ask you, Minister, just for 
the information of the people in the province that are watching 
this, could you let these people know what CAP (Canada 
Assistance Plan) stood for at the time that program was in 
place? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  CAP was the Canada Assistance 
Plan. It was money that went into social assistance. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. When is CAP going to be changed to 
the Canada Health and Social Transfer? When is the date for 
that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  April Fool’s Day  April 1, 1996 
 a very sad day for Canada because what it meant when we 
moved from the old system to the new system is there are now 
no national standards for welfare beyond the fact that you can’t 
deny welfare to somebody from another province. So that any 
province has the freedom to decide that they want to cut off a 
certain group of people from social assistance; they want to 
drop their social assistance rates through the floor so families 
can’t possibly live on the money that they’re getting. And 
besides the funding problem  a problem we have  is that 
under the new system, there are no national standards. 
 
One of the things Canadians have always prided themselves in, 
is making them distinctive from Americans, is that we have a 
universal health care system and we have a social safety net. 
The beginning of the unravelling of the social safety net in 
Canada began April 1, 1996. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, if 
in fact April 1, 1996 was the date that the transfer took place  



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

from CAP to the Canada Health and Social Transfer, how is it 
that this government has placed a lot of blame on the federal 
government for a program that had not yet changed over? 
 
The poverty rate had escalated in this province prior to April 1. 
There were many social problems going on in the province that 
this government was not taking care of, in spite of the fact that 
the same funding was coming from Ottawa before April 1. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what this government has said is that our capacity to 
deal with any of the social problems in the province  whether 
it’s poverty, whether it’s requiring more in health, whether it’s 
enhancing education  has been greatly diminished by the fact 
that the federal government is taking so much money out of the 
system. 
 
From 1991 to 1995, what we were dealing with was the mess 
left by the Conservatives: massive, massive debt deficit too 
 but massive debt and deficit. So we were getting the 
province back on an even footing by having to make very, very 
troubling choices, having to cut things to deal with the problem 
that we inherited. 
 
1995 we get it back on an even footing. We’re actually looking 
forward to a future of some enhancements. The federal 
government says, we have a problem of our own deficit. No 
doubt about it; we believe they should handle that problem. 
 
How do they handle their problem? By taking the cuts that they 
make and handing three-quarters of the problem over to the 
provinces and saying here, you take our problem  by the way, 
still not balancing their books  and putting us back in the 
position where, instead of saying, boy we can see some capacity 
here to do a lot of enhancements in these areas, we have to 
struggle to find new provincial dollars  about a quarter of a 
billion over four years, 242 million over four years  to 
back-fill what the federal government is taking out of the 
system. 
 
And the other thing they’re doing is they’re leaving the door 
open for governments like the government in Ontario to do 
what it likes with respect to poor people because there are no 
standards. The funds have been cut. The government has its 
own rationale to say, therefore the first place we’re going to 
look, when we look for ways to save money, is to look to the 
backs of the poor people. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I would just suggest 
that in the future, when you’re referring to what has transpired 
in this province up to April 1, 1996, that you give the federal 
government the commendation that they have coming to them. 
After all, they were providing sufficient amounts for social 
services in this province. There had been no change up to that 
point. 
 
And if you’re going to then in fact blame someone, I wish then 
you would put the blame on the Tories, as you have just 
mentioned, for their contribution to this. 
 
However the federal government has been generous up to that  

point and continues to be generous, as far as that goes. I think 
that the people of the province need to know that the funding 
from the federal government up to April 1, 1996 had not 
changed, and so there’s no excuse for your government not to in 
fact put forth social programs that are adequate and for the 
province. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I sometimes wonder whether we’re in the House of 
Commons or in the legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m sorry; no, I’m not prepared to give the federal government 
that credit because what it was doing before April 1, 1996, 
across the piece, was moving people onto our welfare rolls. It 
was, for example, taking status Indians in the province who are 
clearly a federal responsibility, reneging on its commitments to 
status Indians the minute the status Indian moves off the 
reserve, and saying sorry, the province is going to have to pay 
for that about 30 million new dollars in costs in welfare and 
more people on welfare, on our welfare rolls, because they were 
reneging on their commitments to first nations people, to the 
concern of first nations people as well, I might add. 
 
At the same time, they were changing their unemployment 
insurance, saying look at all these wonderful numbers here. 
People are moving off unemployment. We’re saving money on 
our costs for unemployment. What was happening to the 
people? A significant percentage in every province in Canada 
were simply being moved from the unemployment rolls over to 
the provincial welfare rolls. 
 
So I’m not sure why we’re here deciding what we think of the 
federal government. I’m not sure how this affects this particular 
budget or this particular process. But if you keep on asking 
questions about what they’ve done, I have to keep saying that 
when the history books are written about the ‘90s, they’re going 
to say all the federal government did substantially — made a 
few cuts of their own — but substantially they moved the 
problem over to the provinces. 
 
(1445) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Madam Minister, I have one more question to ask 
you. If in fact a first nations person is placed in hospital in this 
province, is it not true that the bills for that person are 
forwarded to the federal government for payment? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what has changed? Ten years ago, if you were a first 
nations person in Saskatchewan, you were clearly the 
responsibility of the federal government, whether you lived . . . 
whether you were at this particular moment on your reserve or 
whether you were in another part of the province. 
 
What has now occurred is if a person is on reserve, they’re 
living up to that obligation. What they are not living up to is the 
obligation for the person when they set one foot off reserve. 
Then the costs are shifting over to the province. And as I say, 
this is a matter of concern not just to us, but it’s a concern to 
first nations people. 
 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

So there has been a significant change in their own 
interpretation  and again it’s unilateral  I mean we could 
fight them on it and say we won’t pay the costs. But we’re not 
prepared to let people suffer so we end up having to pick up the 
cost for social assistance. But there has been that dramatic 
change over the last 10 years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
I’d just like to make a couple of points as some of the 
comments that you’ve made this afternoon . . . You’ve 
indicated that federal transfers and grant have changed 
significantly for this year, whether or not the numbers that 
you’ve put forward and the numbers that we have are obviously 
different. And we believe of course, that number to be in the 
neighbourhood of $60 million this year. 
 
What we do know, though, is that since 1991 there have been 
significant offloading to school boards, in particular, as a third 
party receiving a grant from government, that being in the area 
of approximately $26 million over the course of those four 
years. 
 
Madam Minister, you stated that there have been no reductions 
to school boards as far as third-party funding. Over the last four 
years your government has decided that the educational 
development fund was going to be ended, and this past year, 
1995, was its last year. I recall that in, I believe, in 1991 the 
allocation for the EDF fund (education development fund) to 
boards of education, I think, was $7 million in that one year 
alone. 
 
Now when you take into account the fact that the EDF fund has 
ended, the fact that there is a new contract which the Minister 
of Education through, I imagine, consultation with yourself has 
decided that an additional $2 million will be spent to offset the 
cost of the salary increase for 1996, when you add those 
numbers up, they don’t balance, Madam Minister. And I go 
back to your comment a number of minutes ago when you said 
that third-party funding has not decreased when in fact, I 
believe for school boards, it has. Could you comment on that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what we have to look at . . . in fact funding to third 
parties as a percentage of the pie of government has increased. 
If you go back to 1991-92 and you look at, okay, the whole pie, 
here’s all the money that government spends, how was it 
divided? Forty per cent went to third parties, and I’ll clarify 
who I’m talking about here — health, education, 
post-secondary education, municipal. Forty per cent of the 
money went to third parties, 60 per cent of the money went to 
government to run the rest of our operations. 
 
If you look at ’96-97, that number has changed  third parties 
have increased their share by 3 per cent. So now of the pie, 43 
per cent of the pie is going to third parties, 57 per cent is going 
to government. So we have decreased our share of the pie, and 
we have increased the third-party share of the pie. 
 
I would invite the member opposite to compare that to the 
federal situation, which they always seem to want to get into, 
where in fact the opposite is the case. There has been a dramatic  

decline in funding to third parties, and not the same kind of 
decline at all, relative to . . . in fact some parts of their 
government are increasing their spending, federally, while 
they’re cutting money for health, education, social programs. 
 
But I mean, coming back to Saskatchewan, unfortunately it’s 
the opposite of what you say. Third-party funding as a 
percentage of the pie has increased, government spending has 
decreased. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Madam Minister, clarify these numbers for 
me. In 1991 I understand that the grants to school boards, the 
foundation grant plus the EDF, was $381 million. In 1996, your 
budget ’96-97, you’ve indicated that the budget is going to be 
355 million. Now that is a significant decrease when you talk 
about the fact that the costs of operating the school boards in 
this province is in excess of $900 million. This is downloading, 
Madam Minister. And I’m not sure who you’re referring to as 
far as third party, but if third party is receiving more money, 
who’s getting it? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, again I would remind him that detailed questions 
come in estimates. I don’t have the Department of Education’s 
total budget here, and the member opposite knows that. And so 
I mean, if you want to talk about general things, fine. But if you 
want to get into the nitty-gritty, pass interim supply and we’ll 
bring Education forward. 
 
But I will say to the member opposite, going back to the money 
the government spent on all of its operations  1991-92, 10 per 
cent of all of that funding was for education, and what I mean 
by education is K to 12. By 1996-97, of the total government 
pie, 12 per cent of all of the funding was for K to 12 education. 
So in fact, of the money that the government has available to it 
to spend, there has been an increase in the percentage going to 
education relative to what we’re spending our money on across 
the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Madam Minister. We’ll get into 
those discussions, I imagine, with the Minister of Education. 
 
My question around the decision that you would make or that 
you and the Education minister would make together in terms 
of the changes to how monies are paid out by this government 
to school boards, are you involved with those discussions as far 
as the changes to the rules that grant the third-party grants to, 
specifically school boards, I’m referring to. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I certainly don’t mind clarifying to him the process 
that occurs. 
 
There is a Treasury Board constituted which includes six 
cabinet ministers. The Minister of Finance chairs the Treasury 
Board. They establish the budget for the whole government, and 
they set different target levels for various departments. 
 
Then the departments come before the Treasury Board, 
proposing ways in which they would meet the targets. And so 
then the decisions are made by the Treasury Board as to how  



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

the targets in education would be met and the process . . . you 
know, how the funding would be allocated in education. Then it 
goes forward to cabinet and to caucus and to the House as part 
of the budget. So we would make decisions in terms of how the 
allocation would occur, but they’d be decisions on the basis of 
recommendations from the department. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Clarify for me this procedure then. What I’m 
hearing you say is that if there is a decision made that the 
allocation of money to the Department of Education, K to 12, is 
$355 million, which is what you have, and you’ve indicated 
then that it’s the department that comes up with the plan to 
actually spend that kind of money. 
 
Now on the other side of the coin, I’m hearing the Minister of 
Education tell me that there have been moves made by the 
government, the Treasury Board, yourself as Finance minister, 
to say that there will be additional spending in the area of core 
curriculum implementation, rural technological development  
all those other things that the Minister of Education, I’m sure, 
has communicated to you. 
 
Those items of expenditure are significant. The decision that 
was made to change the equalization factor  in other words, 
the amount of money now that you’re asking the local taxpayer 
to contribute to your plan  is that your decision, or is that the 
Minister of Education’s? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well as I said before, what would 
occur would be the Treasury Board . . . It’s all the same 
decision. It’s a government decision. I mean we’re a group. 
We’re a team. And so when the government makes a decision, 
all I’m outlining is the process as to how the decision occurs. 
But once it’s a decision, it’s a decision of the whole 
government. 
 
The Treasury Board focuses on the spending of the particular 
department and some general allocation of the spending. They 
do not delve into the details of what it looks like in one 
particular community. That is, we wouldn’t look at what does it 
look like in Saskatoon or what is it going to look like in 
Humboldt. We only deal in the general policy overview, not 
into the details. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I do 
want to assure the minister that we, as the official opposition, 
do care about the health, education, and welfare programs. That 
is the most important priority for us and we’re very 
disappointed when we see what is happening in rural 
Saskatchewan and right across the province. 
 
I want to address the whole picture of federal transfer payments 
just for a second. I think it’s very important after hearing the 
comments from the member from Regina South in the 
Assembly last week, and I was appalled when I heard him say, 
and I quote: 
 

Tax points were a concept introduced in 1977, almost 20 
years ago. It was a one-time shift from a federal tax base to 
a provincial tax base to cover a program called established 
programs financing, EPF. That happened in 1977. There’s  

been no tax point transfers since then. 
 
Mr. Chairman, with comments like that, it’s no wonder why the 
NDP back-benchers can’t speak in this House. I can understand 
why the Premier and his cabinets have put a muzzle on them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this NDP government ignores the tax transfer 
component because it allows them to understate the size of the 
federal transfers and exaggerate the size of the cuts. The 
member from Regina South says tax transfers don’t exist, so 
why are the provinces asking for more of them? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I ask the Minister of Finance if she agrees with 
the comments from the member of Regina South, and if so, will 
she provide us with a complete breakdown in terms of CHST 
(Canada Health and Social Transfer), equalization, and tax 
transfers for 1996-97, and of Saskatchewan’s total federal 
transfers so we can clearly see that they are receiving a $1.211 
billion that we believe they are receiving, and how this $1.211 
billion is being allocated from the federal government? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. I really do wish that she would . . . that the members 
opposite would play down the rhetoric. It doesn’t . . . it sounds 
so old-fashioned. 
 
These back-benchers are not muzzled; we have amongst the 
best back-benchers of anywhere, any place in Canada. They are 
active participants in our decision making. We wouldn’t have 
the good decisions if we didn’t have these good back-benchers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  So do I endorse the member’s 
comments? I heartily endorse the member’s comments. 
Absolutely, heartily. Couldn’t have said it better myself. 
 
And what I would say to the member opposite is there isn’t a 
government in Canada  a provincial government in Canada 
 that buys into this notion of tax points. 
 
Recently six governments came out publicly in a document  
four western governments, the two territorial governments  
and said, the federal government is making misleading 
statements. Misleading statements  that’s strong language for 
governments to officially sign on to. The federal government is 
making misleading statements about the transfers in order to 
minimize the extent of the cuts 
 
But misleading statements  and they were referring to tax 
points. I mean tax points are just tax room. Let’s go back to 
1977, okay. So yes, the federal government decreased its taxes 
in 1977, allowing the provinces to increase its taxes. And they 
say, well this has all grown, you know, these things have 
grown. 
 
But they don’t mention what’s happened since 1977. Since 
1977, the federal government has again increased its income 
taxes to move right back into that tax room. Or as a member in 
one of the Atlantic provinces said, in 1977 sales tax was the 
sole jurisdiction of the provincial governments. There was no  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

federal sales tax  didn’t exist. 
 
You talk about moving into somebody’s tax room. In the 1990s 
when the federal government put in the GST (goods and 
services tax)  and the Liberals now hardly love the GST as 
much as the Tories did  they moved into that tax room. That 
was the biggest grab of tax room in Canadian history. 
 
So ask the Treasurer of Alberta. Why does he say publicly to 
the federal government? If we are getting benefits from tax 
room, show us where we’re getting the money from the tax 
room in our budget and show us where it’s costing you 
federally. 
 
So I say, you won’t find a self-respecting provincial 
government in this country that does anything but say the 
federal government is making misleading statements to try to 
mask the fact that they are dramatically cutting health, 
education, and social programs. 
 
Again, to the members opposite, I don’t know why you want to 
have across your forehead: call us the federal Liberals. People 
of Saskatchewan want people here who are defending their 
interests and worried about their concerns, not worried about 
defending somebody off in Ottawa. 
 
(1500) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Does that mean 
that you don’t want the tax points? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No, I propose a deal to the federal 
government. We will give them back their income tax points if 
they give us back our sales tax room. That is, they didn’t have a 
sales tax in 1977; they do now. If they’ll get out of the GST, 
give us all that room, we’ll give back our income tax points. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d like to talk 
about the NDP government portraying these cuts as sudden and 
unexpected. The Minister of Finance stated in the Leader-Post 
on February 17, and I quote: 
 

Let me say something positive about the federal 
government for a change. At least we’ve had a number of 
months (warning about federal cuts so) we can respond. 

 
Last fall she stated in the same newspaper, and I quote: 
 

In Saskatchewan we have a growing economy and a stable 
fiscal position. This means we are in a better position to 
make the difficult and necessary choices required to take 
Saskatchewan into the next century. 

 
Mr. Chairman, the minister is saying they knew well in advance 
about the cuts and were in a position to deal with them. And 
why did they continue to blame every single problem on the 
federal government? Do they not realize how ridiculous they 
sound each day in question period when every answer they give 
blames the federal government? 

Mr. Chairman, I ask the Minister of Finance to explain why, if 
these reductions in federal transfers are causing such a burden, 
what are they doing with the excess revenue they’ve received 
from such things as taxes, non-renewable resources, transfer 
from Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming, etc.? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I don’t know what to say to the member opposite. 
What excess revenue? We didn’t just go out and find some 
money sitting by the side of the road from the resources. We 
laid before the people our financial plan which takes into 
account anticipated growth in the resource sector and in other 
areas. 
 
But I would say to the member opposite this as well. When we 
say we have some advance notice of reductions, we mean 
months. And how could we possibly know what the cuts were 
going to be to health, education, social programs, over a 
four-year period when the federal government didn’t know until 
its budget recently. 
 
And if you want to find something that’s actually humorous, 
our cut to equalization, which we became . . . Let’s go back, 
February 1995, the federal government said how much are we 
going to give Saskatchewan in equalization this year. I think it’s 
about $650 million. We agreed. Good estimate. They come 
back in April. They say, yes, 650 looks good. By October, 
they’ve said whoops, all of the estimates for other provinces 
were off, you’re doing a lot better than we thought, that’s 
dropped by over 200 million. 
 
In December the same federal government, when they have us 
at Finance ministers’ meeting in Ottawa, comes back with our 
equalization estimate at $650 million. And we have to put up 
our hand and say whoa, wait a minute, you’re actually cutting 
that by over $200 million, you just haven’t revised your own 
numbers. And they have to say, whoops, I guess you’re right, 
we still haven’t revised our numbers. Then when we get into 
March and we actually find out what the reduction was, the 
reduction and equalization in one year is over $400 million. 
How can anybody possibly plan for that? 
 
Now we’re not blaming the federal government for that because 
the estimates change as they find out more information about 
how Ontario is doing, relative to Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 
did a lot better; Ontario did a lot worse. But please don’t tell us 
that we should have known something back in February or 
April or June or July of ’95, when the federal government 
didn’t even know it and as late as December is still using its 
own old estimates going back to February, 1995. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
this NDP government inherited a large part of the problems of 
the previous Tory government. I can sympathize with them on 
how difficult it must have been to make some kind of 
semblance out of that mess. But that problem was five years 
ago. 
 
The time has come for this government to start making the right 
choices and start taking responsibility and doing the job they 
were elected to do. Quit playing games with the people of  



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, this NDP government blames everyone else at 
the same time they increase taxes. I ask the Minister of Finance 
how she can claim that taxes are not increasing when estimated 
tax revenue for ’96-97 is expected to increase by $95 million 
over the forecast for ’95-96, and the forecast for ’95-96 is $135 
million higher than the original estimate. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the members 
opposite, I really don’t know what to do with the Liberal Party. 
Last year they were in the House  it wasn’t the member 
opposite, it was the member from Greystone, but same group  
and she was saying, you can tell your economy isn’t growing 
because your tax estimates are all wrong. She went on  our 
members will remember, the back-benchers here will remember 
 she went on for a couple of days saying, you can tell your 
economy isn’t growing because you’re getting less in income 
tax this year than you did last year. So you say, well wait, our 
economy is growing. No, you’re getting less in income tax so 
your economy isn’t growing and I just showed you. 
 
Now we come back this year and we say, hey, we’re getting 
more in income taxes because our economy is growing. No, we 
won’t buy that; you’re getting more in income tax because 
you’ve increased taxes. And I say, here’s the budget; show me 
where in the budget we increased taxes. We have to come 
through this process. We haven’t increased taxes for two years. 
 
So you can’t have it both ways. We’re getting more in revenue 
from taxes because our economy is doing so well. And when 
last year it looked like we weren’t going to get more in taxes, 
you can’t be in here saying, you’re not getting more in taxes 
because your economic plan isn’t working and your economy 
isn’t moving. And then when our economy starts to move and 
all of our tax revenue is up all across the piece  and we’re 
proud of that  there’s more people paying taxes because 
they’re making more money and they’re doing better. And 
corporations are paying more taxes because they’re making 
more money and they’re doing better. This is good news, not 
bad news. 
 
And if you want to talk about tax increases, the last tax 
increases have been at the federal level. Their last budget, ’95 
budget, increased gas tax. They don’t like to talk about it, but 
they did. We haven’t increased taxes, not for two years. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would just 
like to say hello to the minister’s officials here this afternoon, 
and we appreciate their attendance here and have a few more 
questions here for them. 
 
Madam Minister, the first question here today would centre 
around how some of these monies are being used. There’s a 
rather exhaustive list of expenditures which are to be voted for 
here. And my question would simply be this. Do some of the 
agencies  for example, like SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) or let’s say the Women’s Secretariat 
 do they receive the money immediately and then place it in 
an account or a fund of their own? Or do they only access the 
money after they’ve paid their bills or met their obligations? 

So basically, which of these departments here would receive the 
money immediately? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, this actually works the same way as the budget. It just 
authorizes the department to spend the money. But if they don’t 
require the money, if for some reason or another they’re not 
going to have the expenditures that they thought, they won’t 
spend the money. It won’t go to them until they’ve actually 
been . . . there’s some reason for the money to be spent. 
 
It’s the same as the budget. You give the Department of Health 
$1.5 billion because that’s what you believe, from all of the 
estimates that you’ve received, they should spend, that they’re 
going to need. And you outline, you know, the different areas 
they’re going to spend it on. But it doesn’t mean they have to 
spend that amount of money. If in fact they find that they don’t 
require the money, it won’t be spent. So the same here, this is 
just giving them the authority to spend up to that amount. But if 
they don’t require it, it won’t be spent until they require it. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If we look over this 
summary for the interim supply itself, I have a few more 
questions about it. But one thing though that we had a concern 
about last week  and if I might just have the minister provide 
us with an explanation  but we didn’t receive a copy of the 
department’s summary for interim supply until well into our 
debate on Friday. And as you know, we had entered into the 
debate on Thursday, and would you just make a comment about 
that. Was it just merely an oversight, or were there some 
particular reasons for that? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, there’s no particular reason. There’s nothing 
particularly magical about it. I mean it’s just two-twelfths of 
every government department’s spending. So there’s no 
particular explanation except we were into a general discussion. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. With respect to 
the interim supply summary provided, could the minister please 
explain. There are a few discrepancies in the numbers on the 
documents themselves . . . or itself. 
 
Would the minister tell the House whether the fact that the 
amounts for the freedom of information and conflict of interest 
. . . why they’re not equal to two-twelfths? Is it simply because 
of a rounding, or is there some other reason? And if the 
numbers are rounded off, would the minister please provide us 
the exact figure? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, except for the ones which are statutory, which we’ve 
talked about, they’re all two-twelfths. And if there’s any 
variation, it’s probably just rounding, rounding them out to 
some even number. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. But would you 
be able to provide us with the exact figures though, as I had 
requested? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

opposite. I’m not sure exactly which ones you’re talking about; 
if you’re talking about freedom of information or you’re talking 
about Ombudsman. So maybe if you’d like to clarify that. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Yes, Madam Minister, I had referred earlier 
to the figures under freedom of information and conflict of 
interest. But also with respect to this, I’ve noticed the figures 
for the Sask Property Management Corp. not exactly equal to 
two-twelfths. 
 
So if you wouldn’t mind . . . We’re assuming that it’s also due 
to rounding, but could you provide as well the exact figures for 
Sask Property Management Corporation in addition to those 
other two? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. We just put these through the calculator again and 
they’re rounding. 
 
First of all, to go back to SPMC, it’s not even rounding; 1.759 
is two-twelfths. To go back to freedom of information, it’s 10.5 
rounded up to 11. Go back to conflict of interest, it’s 13.5 
rounded up to 14. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister, and I would 
apologize for my mistake with the calculator in that one. But it 
is a pleasure to have your officials feel wanted here this 
afternoon and engage them in some of the questioning here. 
 
But also on the summary, Madam Minister, I see that you’ve 
been kind enough to include a list of non-budgetary 
expenditures that will occur in the quarter. And I see the list 
here includes expenditures for Agriculture and Food, Economic 
Development, as well as Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training. And I’m curious as to what these expenditures are for 
and why they are in fact non-budgetary and therefore not 
subject to the interim supply process and not voted on here 
today. 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I would refer him in the Estimates to page 128. And 
what you’ll find there is Agriculture and Food, investment in 
Crown agricultural land held for resale; Economic 
Development, loans and advances pursuant to The Department 
of Economic Development Act; Post-Secondary Education and 
Skills Training, loans pursuant to the student assistance and 
student aid fund; Agricultural Credit Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, advances to the Agricultural Credit Corporation 
of Saskatchewan; and Crop Insurance. 
 
So it’s basically loans that are outlined at page 128 of the 
Estimates. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Also I see 
elsewhere in the interim supply document there, there’s other 
non-budgetary expenses. And one of them is servicing the 
public debt. And I know you had provided an explanation to the 
House at an earlier date, in an earlier debate in fact. And I’m 
curious about the section under the Department of Finance on  

this document. The amount of money, which is $104 million, is 
that amount actually for pension plans which are under the 
province’s areas of jurisdiction, such as public employees’ 
superannuation fund or the teachers’ superannuation fund? 
 
Secondly, could you tell me if I’m correct in suggesting that the 
Acts which lay out the pensions are in fact the pieces of 
legislation which would authorize, or require, those 
expenditures, and then that being why they’re not part of the 
interim supply process here today and not being voted on? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I would say is, first of all, there is the two entries 
for the Department of Finance: one is servicing the debt, which 
is clearly statutory; the other is the Department of Finance’s 
general expenditures, $104 million of which are statutory. They 
would include things like pensions and benefits that there’s no 
discretion about paying, and so they’re part of statutes. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. It appears 
self-evident, you know, why there are amounts under legislation 
and electoral expenses that aren’t included as part of the interim 
supply. But I do have a few questions about why some others 
aren’t. 
 
Now for example it says there that the Executive Council has 
expenditures authorized by law which amount to some 
$681,000 for the year. And as a consequence, these are 
authorized by law; I see that they’re not part of the two-twelfths 
calculation. And I wonder if the minister could tell the House 
what those might be for and what piece of legislation would 
have authorized them, so we can have an idea of why they’re 
not actually included here today as part of this interim supply. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s for the electoral office, and 
the legislation authorizing that is The Elections Act. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I would also 
like to know why we have another . . . there’s 5.649 million in 
Municipal Government not included in the interim supply. And 
it might be appropriate here if you could just briefly describe 
what those expenditures are generally for and what piece of 
legislation might authorize that. And I’d ask this so that we here 
in the opposition, that we can get a clearer understanding of the 
certain things that are included and aren’t included in the 
interim supply. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The Municipal Government ones 
that you’re asking about include funding for agencies like 
SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency), the 
Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority, 
the Wascana Centre Authority  those sorts of agencies that 
have to be funded. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Also I notice 
there are more numbers here under the amounts authorized by 
law, and some of these other numbers here include Education, 
$29,000; $275,000 for Environment and Resource 
Management. And there’s also another 8,000 for Justice. 
 
And it’s just the fact that all of these are in brackets, and  



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

usually that’s . . . in accounting, it’s a negative sum or 
something to be subtracted from a previous figure. And I was 
just wondering if the minister might clarify this for us, why 
these figures are in fact documented in brackets. And as such, 
like, do they represent revenues if they’re in brackets, or do they 
represent some shortfall of a previous expenditure? Would you 
just provide us with some brief explanation as to what that 
means? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what I would say is the numbers are bracketed 
because there are surpluses in them for some reason and the 
money will be coming back the other way, instead of being paid 
out. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Also on the 
bottom of the document you’ve passed to us, summarizing the 
amounts asked for under the interim supply, there’s this small 
note here, and the note reads: resolutions for legislation 
pertaining to Legislative Assembly only and Provincial Auditor, 
and these have been forwarded to the Standing Committee on 
Estimates. 
 
And I just wonder if the Minister could provide a bit more 
explanation concerning that note, and tell the House why these 
are, in fact, not sent to the Standing Committee on Estimates 
rather than handled here in interim supply? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. That’s a process issue. These are situations in which 
the budgets go directly to another agency  the Board of 
Internal Economy  and then to the House. But they don’t go 
through the estimates process to get to the House. They go 
through another process to make their way to the House. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Last week in 
the House, we were given a copy of the STC (Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company) annual report. And I know, granted 
this is a Crown corporation whose revenues are not provided by 
the Legislative Assembly; instead they’re provided by, in this 
case, cross-subsidization within the Crown Investment 
Corporation. Now STC lost money and I see there is some sort 
of plan being proposed to try and stop this bleeding, if you 
would have it. And this is nothing new. 
 
Essentially however, most of STC’s losses are on public policy 
sorts of initiatives, not unlike the items that we’re talking of 
here in interim supply today. And I’d just like the minister, if 
she could, to maybe tell us what the reasoning is behind not 
having such a public policy initiative included under the normal 
budgetary process like this one here today rather than having it 
in the Crowns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  We have allowed a wider range of 
discussions, but losses within Crown corporations and the way 
those are handled are not a  unless I’ve misunderstood the 
member’s question  are not an appropriate topic for interim 
supply even under a broader definition of interim supply. What 
goes on within the Crown corporations is surely a matter for 
discussion in the Crown Corporations Committee, not in the 
Chamber. 

Mr. Aldridge:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. But if I could 
just again elaborate and perhaps you might make one further 
comment. 
 
What I was saying was that a lot of the losses attributed to STC 
are in fact because of a public policy initiative undertaken by 
that particular Crown, so my argument here, therefore, is why 
not include something which is a public policy initiative within 
these interim supply votes today. Because it is that  it’s a 
public policy initiative that we’re talking of here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  It’s a completely separate process 
and dealt with in a completely separate fashion. Those 
questions are . . . the proper domain for those questions is 
Crown Corporations Committee not the Chamber. Even within 
the estimates of the departments, there would be, I think, no 
opportunity for the member to ask questions about STC’s . . . 
the origin of STC’s losses. It could be done in question period 
because the ministers have a much broader responsibility in 
question period than they do in estimates. 
 
The proper place for those questions, I repeat, is Crown 
Corporations Committee when the annual report for STC comes 
up. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the summary 
document here, there’s no expenditure for any money in the 
interim supply for the electoral expenses, and those are covered 
separately, I suppose, but I see that there’s none quoted in 
‘96-97 in any event. And I’d like to know whether that means 
that the minister is certain there are no potential revisions to any 
election returns which may create the need for an electoral 
office to pay the business managers or suppliers or any 
returning office. But I know perhaps it’s covered under the 
electoral Act, but if you would just make one more comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before members opposite begin to 
rejoice over the fact that we’ve abolished democratic elections 
 I know that would be a considerable relief to members 
opposite  I have to inform you that those expenditures are 
statutory and therefore don’t appear. I explained this the other 
day with respect to statutory expenditures. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. But on a 
number of occasions, Mr. Minister, we’ve been told that the 
primary concern is to get the cheques out to people who need 
them, on time. And I know that you want to make sure people 
in need are treated fairly. And the opposition does agree with 
this, Mr. Minister, in that we want the government to make 
good on its commitments to help those people. 
 
And one group of people that will be in need quite quickly here 
now . . . and there’s a significant number of students who have 
applied and will be receiving summer employment from this 
government. Many have just, well basically they’ve just eked 
out their way through the year and they’re now incurring, like, 
moving expenses, while they’re cleaning out their apartments, 
you know, whether they be by universities or by one of the 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

Technology) campuses. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could tell us when the first set of 
cheques for the student summer employees working for the 
government would be sent out. And then aside from telling us 
how urgently these cheques will be sent out, I wonder if the 
minister could tell us how many people would be receiving 
those, and do you have a global figure for what part of this 
interim supply would go to what is a very important project. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the budget provides funding for 2,500 summer jobs, 
and it will vary from department to department. So the 
departments, as summer jobs come on stream, will be paying 
the students for the summer jobs. But it will vary from 
department to department. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Another 
important set of cheques to many people in Saskatchewan are 
those which would be involved in the Partnerships program. 
And under this program, as I’m sure the minister would know, 
the government subsidizes employment for students with the 
private employers. And I believe it’s probably fair to say that 
the government considers this is a significant portion of its 
student employment strategy. 
 
And given the workings of this program, I wonder if the 
minister could tell us whether these cheques will be sent out 
immediately or are they not dependent upon the speedy passage 
of this interim supply Bill? And what I’m wondering is, do the 
employers receive this subsidy on an ongoing basis or is it paid 
out at the end of the work year? And if it’s the former case, 
speedy passage of the interim supply is important. In the latter, 
it isn’t so important. So if you could just answer and make 
some comment of that, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, again, these are the kinds of detailed questions that 
you need the Department of Education here. And they will 
gladly come and answer your questions because they will have 
all of the detailed information as to when the cheques go out 
and how they go out. 
 
What we’re doing here is . . . all we’re trying to address is the 
fact that the budget is before the legislature. The budget hasn’t 
been passed yet but there are agencies that require ongoing 
funding. And the budget is . . . the interim supply is just seeking 
approval to spend two-twelfths of the budget for the next two 
months so that these agencies and government departments can 
continue with their regular operations. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister, but I would 
still entertain that these are important issues too. I just ask . . . 
just one more along this same line. Would you be able to tell us 
about the cheques related to the JobStart and Future Skills 
trainees because these are also obviously employment programs 
which are important to your government. 
 
And I’m wondering if these cheques are sent out at the 
beginning of May. And then I’d also like to know when the 
Future Skills cheques are sent out. Is this at the beginning of the  

month; and do both trainees and employers receive the money? 
And lastly, would you provide us in this instance a global 
figure? I know you haven’t in my previous questions, but could 
you in this case, of how many cheques are sent out, and for 
what amount, and how many people might be affected? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, again he’s talking about training programs that are in 
a particular department. JobStart, Future Skills, are in the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
What he’s asking is very, very detailed questions. As the 
members opposite would appreciate, if I had to come and tell 
you how many cheques were going out to how many people and 
answer these sorts of detailed questions, this whole side of the 
House would be full of paper and books. 
 
There is a process in place, which is the estimates. The 
departments will be here; they will have the specific, detailed 
information to answer those sorts of questions. 
 
But as the member opposite would know, that in interim supply 
we’re talking about just providing money to the departments so 
they can continue their ongoing funding and operations. But the 
more detailed questions have to be directed through the other 
process. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 
last year the government spent approximately $64 million more 
than it had estimated. Do the various departments come to 
cabinet and ask for increases when they realize funding are not 
sufficient on a monthly basis or on a quarterly basis, and when 
does cabinet decide how and if they’re going to get the extra 
money that they’re asking for? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, it’s not regarded as customary for departments to have 
spending beyond what they’ve been allocated, so usually 
something has occurred that was unanticipated  a flood, a 
forest fire, that sort of situation. 
 
So it will vary. If there’s a forest fire, the department will come 
forward when they realize they have a problem and they’re 
going to have to spend more money than they anticipated. They 
will come before the Treasury Board, make their case, and we 
will look at whether or not there is extra funding required. And 
we’ll also start looking at where that money might come from, 
what other parts of the budget. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Madam Minister. This year I 
would imagine that there has been a request for compensation 
for wildlife damages, and I’m just wondering if that kind of 
request has come already this year for this year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. That probably would not be regarded as an 
emergency. That would be covered by ongoing programing. 
 
So it’s what . . . Something that is an emergency is something 
that is of significant size  forest fires, over $60 million of 
spending that was not anticipated  and that is quite 
unexpected. So those sorts of things would not be considered  



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

emergencies and of a magnitude that they would require special 
attention. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Madam Minister, I think that there’s going to 
be quite a number of farmers disappointed to hear that you 
don’t consider their problems emergencies because it is for 
them. 
 
When the government has requested support for the 
two-twelfths of the budget for each department, is that the 
amount that would be given to them this month, or will they be 
sent . . . I understand some of it is for this month and some of it 
is for next month. Is a one-twelfth cheque sent now and another 
one again next month? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Again, Mr. Chairman, to the 
member opposite, as I was explaining a moment ago to the 
other member, we don’t send a cheque to the departments, that 
is, what we do is we authorize them to spend up to this amount 
over the next two-month period. 
 
But they have to have a reason to do the spending. So that if in 
fact we’ve authorized spending and this funding isn’t required, 
the cheque won’t be released. It’s only released when there is a 
demonstrated need that the funding is going to be required. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again, Madam Minister. Is there 
any of the departments that will receive their full budget 
allocation once the budget has been approved and passed by the 
legislature? Will they receive the total amount that they’ve been 
allocated? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Again, to the member opposite, to 
repeat what I said. Once the budget is passed, the government 
doesn’t just go to a department and say, here’s all your money. 
And we don’t just write a cheque. That allows them . . . it 
means the Government of Saskatchewan, through the 
legislature, has authorized them to spend up to that amount of 
money. 
 
And they only spend it though as it’s required. If in fact there is 
an estimate that there is going to be a certain number of people 
requiring health care through the medical care insurance 
system, we only pay the amount that’s used. If in fact the 
estimate is high and not as many people use the health care 
system, we won’t spend the whole amount of money. 
 
So it’s only allowing them to spend up to that, but they have to 
actually come and show that the money is required before the 
money is released. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you again. How do you deal with a 
department like the Saskatchewan Research Council that does 
receive their funding in a one lump sum after the budget has 
been approved? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well again, Mr. Chairman, to the 
member opposite, third-party agencies have different formats by 
which they get their money. Third parties are in a different 
situation. We’re talking about government departments. They 
have commitments to third parties, which we honour. And they  

vary from third party to third party, depending on what the 
arrangements are, what the agreements are that we have with 
the third parties. 
 
Ms. Draude:  If you have a priority list for . . . Do you have a 
priority list for different departments if they do come and 
consider and ask for additional funding? For example, if the 
Department of Economic Development comes to you at the 
same time that Department of Education comes to you, do you 
have to decide, do you have to priorize? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, what you’re really talking about is the budget process. 
When you start in the fall and you start looking at the kinds of 
resources the province is going to have available to it, you start 
looking at the priorities of what the government are. You look 
at the priorities of what the people of Saskatchewan are through 
the consultations around the province. 
 
You put all of this together over a period of about six months 
 our MLAs take a very active role in this  and then we 
decide. Here’s how the government’s going to spend its money. 
And we allocate the money right then and there on the basis of 
what priorities are. 
 
And so the priorities of this government were health, education, 
social programing. Those were areas that received enhanced 
provincial funding; that is, more provincial dollars went into 
them. And then that’s the budget for the rest of the year. And 
you go through that process starting again in the fall. 
 
So once the budget is set, the assumption is that you don’t 
authorize new spending. The only time that occurs is if there is 
something extraordinary, something that was not anticipated  
the best example being a forest fire that last summer swept 
through the northern part of the province and added, I think, 
60-some million dollars on to the costs of the province. 
 
But once the budget is set, you don’t anticipate  at least we 
don’t. I know some other governments that get themselves into 
difficulty. Well I must admit some concerns about what’s 
happening nationally because I see their budget some days 
unravelling; where they’ll say the next day, sorry, we didn’t 
really mean that on unemployment insurance; we’re going to 
change it. 
 
But our view is, once you’ve set your budget, that’s the budget; 
those are the priorities of the people. And you meet the targets. 
And if something comes before Treasury Board it’s because it 
was unexpected. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I see from looking at the Estimates that 
Education actually received less funding last year than was 
estimated. And with the cut-backs to education and the 
concerns in rural Saskatchewan for the depletion of money, is 
that 7 or $8 million that is less than is shown in the budget, are 
they going to be given that money this year? As a sort of a 
bonus, are they going to be able to use it? Because I’m sure 
they could spend every penny that was in the budget. 
 
(1545) 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, if you were to run a government like that, you’d run a 
government like the Tories. Every time somebody didn’t spend 
the money that they required you’d say, keep it, you can keep it. 
But then of course when you have the forest fires and 
somebody has extra expenses that they didn’t anticipate, the 
only way that you could deal with it is by running a deficit. 
 
So I mean, it’s a wonderful idea. You didn’t spend all your 
money. By the way, it wasn’t school boards, this wasn’t money 
that went to third parties that they didn’t get. It was pensions, 
who didn’t have the same requirement to spend money on 
pensions as anticipated. 
 
But just think this through. If you said to the Department of 
Education, okay, you didn’t have to spend as much on pensions, 
hand it out to the school boards; go ahead, it sounds great. That 
was Santa Claus in the 1980s. Then you come along with this 
other department that has a problem, like a forest fire problem 
that you have to deal with  you have to fight the forest fire  
and they have an $8 million problem on the other side. Where 
do you find the money? Well you run deficits. 
 
One of the assumptions in budgeting is that some areas yes, 
you’ll have to spend more than you thought because there was 
something that you didn’t anticipate. There’s going to be other 
areas where you spend less than you thought. And they balance 
each other out. But if you want to play Santa Claus, then you 
end up like the Tories, with deficits. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So what do we do when we have the opposite, 
when there was extra money coming in than had been 
anticipated? Is that extra . . . do you decide that it can stay in a 
certain budget if you receive more revenue from some area than 
was originally anticipated? For instance, Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  What I would say to the member 
opposite is two things. If in fact you’re getting in more money 
than you anticipated, you can do one of two things. You can go 
 and it sounds like you’re lining yourselves up for the Tory 
route  we’ve got a little bit of extra money, let’s go out and 
spend it. Boy, can we make people happy today. They will be 
very happy today. Now the next day, when you’re getting less 
money than you thought, and something’s happening and 
you’ve got more expenses than you thought, you’ll be there like 
this, saying, oh my gosh, we don’t have enough money to cover 
our expenses and we’re running deficits. 
 
Or the other answer I would give to the member opposite. The 
members opposite, at least some of you, talk about debt all the 
time. If the member from Wood River would listen, he might 
learn some things . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sure I will 
never teach you anything; it’s impossible. 
 
An Hon. Member:  I think you both agree. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think we both agree. 
 
The Chair:  Order. Let’s keep to order. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  If in fact you say you have some  

extra money, the thing to do with it is to spend it, well then why 
not use it to pay down the debt? I mean our view is, if at the end 
of the year you have a surplus that you didn’t anticipate, you 
don’t go out and spend it; you put it on the debt to lower the 
debt of the province because that lowers your interest payments 
in the long term. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Has all the money from the sale of the Cameco 
shares been realized? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well again, when you have the 
minister for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) here, you may want to get into the details. The 
money is being paid over a period of time; it’s not being paid 
all up front. But certainly the commitment  that is, the key 
commitment of the government  is that the money is being 
used to reduce debt. 
 
Ms. Draude:  So with the reduction in the debt, there’s 
going to be an obvious large saving in interest. Has that saving 
already been allocated? Has it been determined already  the 
amount of the saving, sorry  and that’s the figure that’s been 
used in the budget for your number, your estimate? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member 
opposite, yes. What we faced was $215 million less from the 
federal government over four years, about a quarter of a billion 
dollars less that was coming to us. We had a choice. We could 
have passed those cuts right through to health, education, social 
programs, and they could have experienced that kind of decline. 
Instead, what we did was we said we’ll put new provincial 
dollars into health, education, social programs. 
 
We found the money by cutting government, by cutting 
administrative and other expenses in government, by reducing 
duplication, by delivering services better. We also found the 
money by selling Cameco and reducing our interest payment. 
 
So one of the reasons we’re able to put new provincial dollars 
into health, education, social programs, is because we’re paying 
less in interest. And that money  the interest savings from 
paying down debt  is going right into social programing. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Are you anticipating an interest rate cut when 
our bond rating is analysed by . . . after your visit to New York? 
Are you anticipating a cut in the interest rate? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. What I would say is that the market has already taken 
into account the turnaround in Saskatchewan. That is, if you 
look back to 1993 when I first became the Finance minister, the 
Government of Saskatchewan could not borrow money in 
Canada. Our credit rating was so low we couldn’t borrow 
money here. Now not only can we borrow money in Canada, we 
can borrow money almost as cheaply as Ontario. 
 
So they’ve already looked at our budget, said that this is a 
province that is creditworthy, and they’ve already given us the 
benefit of what they call narrowing of the spreads  borrowing 
money at a rate very similar to what a large province and a very 
creditworthy province like Ontario would be able to borrow  



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

money at. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam 
Minister, I’d like to touch on something you had said earlier, 
and I’d like your opinion on this. From ’91 on, your 
government has cut health care, education, municipal 
governments, drastically. You’ve closed numerous hospitals  
52 to be exact. You’ve downsized, closed wings and wards in 
regional hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. You’ve cut funding in 
municipalities in some cases up to 40 per cent, and there’s no 
other name for this but downloading. 
 
And, Madam Minister, earlier you said of the federal 
government, and I quote: “Here, you take our problem.” Well, 
Madam Minister, I suggest you’re a pro at passing problems to 
someone else, especially in health, education, and 
municipalities. And the federal government is only following 
your lead. 
 
Why is it okay to balance the budget in Saskatchewan by 
closing hospitals, cutting funding in schools, stop maintaining 
and building highways and rural roads, and yet it’s not okay for 
the federal government to do the same? 
 
Madam Minister, I’d like your opinion on this: should we be 
addressing our large debt in Saskatchewan, but the federal 
government shouldn’t be addressing theirs? Keeping in mind 
the same taxpayers are responsible for both debts. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I really think he would be serving Saskatchewan 
taxpayers better if he had less rhetoric and a few more facts, 
because one of the things I’ve realized about the Liberals who 
tend to take their advice from the member from Wood River is 
you’ve got to start by correcting the facts. 
 
What I would say is, in fact if you look at the money the 
province spends, the pie of provincial spending from 1991 to 
1996-97, in fact the share of that spending given to third parties 
has increased. In 1991, 40 per cent of the province’s spending 
went to third parties. By 1996, 43 per cent of what the province 
is spending is going to go to third parties. 
 
What in fact we have cut most dramatically is not funding to 
third parties but funding to ourselves, our own government 
operations. 
 
I would say that the question is quite backwards. Do we believe 
the federal government needs to deal with its deficit? Of course 
it does. We wish they had a plan to deal with its deficit. They 
cut and cut and cut. The books aren’t balanced in Ottawa, and 
there’s no plan. There’s no day at which they’re going to say 
the books are going to be balanced. 
 
What I’ve said to you is, if you look at the basic numbers, in 
1996-97 in Saskatchewan third parties maintain their funding. 
That is, none of the cuts in ‘96-97 affect third parties at all. 
 
If you compare that to what happened in Ottawa, 75 per cent of 
all the cuts they made weren’t cuts to their own operation, their 
own government, their own civil service, their own programing.  

Seventy-five per cent of all those cuts were cuts to provinces. In 
‘97-98 that number goes up to 79 per cent of the cuts are to 
third parties, particularly provinces. I’m not including other 
third parties; I’m just talking about provinces. 
 
But the main point that I want to drive home to the members 
opposite, because I cannot get them to speak out on this, is 
three-quarters of the cuts in the most recent federal government 
were to health, education, social programs. The members 
opposite have yet to express their view of that. I’m assuming 
silence and the questions supporting the federal government 
imply consent. So I would ask the members opposite why they 
support budgets in which three-quarters of the cuts are to 
health, education, and social programs, when Canadians value 
health, education, and social programs more highly than any 
other area of spending. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Madam 
Minister. I’m sure you’re aware that a review involving the 
Canada Pension Plan began public hearings in Prince Edward 
Island last week. This is a significant undertaking that will have 
a major impact upon the provinces, and especially on the 
Canadian public. 
 
In respect to the provinces, as governments like ours here have 
been the main borrowers of capital generated by the pensions, 
any changes will have an impact on you. For example, if they 
set up a fund that must earn higher rates of returns than the 
cheap lending done to the provinces that has cost pensioners 
lots of lost income, this will have to be replaced somehow. 
 
And given the seriousness of this issue, I wonder if the minister 
could tell us whether enough money here has been allocated to 
the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs or to your own 
department to participate in these important discussions. And 
will Saskatchewan be able to fulfil its role within these 
two-twelfths allocated to these two departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, there will be adequate funding available to ensure that 
the province can fulfil all of its roles in the intergovernmental 
area. And I’m sure that area, the House Leader would agree, is 
very well funded. 
 
Our position on the Canada Pension Plan is that it’s the 
obligation of the federal government to, first of all, make 
Canadians aware of the problem. And the process that they’re 
undergoing now is designed to do that, which is fine — here’s 
the problem — and to get feedback about the different types of 
solutions that exist. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. Earlier in the 
year, the government opened the casino here in Regina, and 
other ones are opening up around the province. Many people 
around the province have noticed billboards for Casino Regina, 
and others have noticed boards talking about gambling 
problems. If I recall, they have a slogan that says something 
like, gambling  know your limit. 
 
In one of this Executive Council’s recent polls, there were even 
questions which asked whether people noticed these  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

advertisements. Obviously the government has some concern 
about potential gambling problems, and I wonder if the minister 
could tell us whether, in the two-twelfths interim supply, 
whether Health and possibly Social Services will have enough 
money to deal with the problem. Will it not be at its worst for 
the first few months that the casinos are open? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Well again, Mr. Chairman, to the 
member opposite, the funding will ensure that the Department 
of Social Services and the Department of Health have adequate 
money available to them to ensure that there are ongoing 
programs available. 
 
I would say that the province of Saskatchewan has a very 
positive record in terms of the amount of money that it’s 
prepared to spend on the sorts of programs that it is putting in 
place to deal with this problem. So the money will be there, 
available to both the departments of Health and Social Services. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I’d mentioned 
the other day that over the last seven years, revenues going to 
this government from taxes have risen by 46 per cent. They will 
rise a full hundred million over the coming year, and that 
represents 3.3 per cent increase over last year. And that’s, to our 
notion, a pretty startling statistic. When we look at the petty tax 
breaks that have been given by the government in recent years, 
they’re very small in comparison. 
 
And secondly, if one looks over the expenditures here in the 
interim supply, they are all smaller. And most of that is a 
reduction of program spending and front-line staff. If one looks 
at Agriculture spending, it’s probably about a quarter or a third 
of what it was seven years ago in a similar interim supply like 
this. And given these things, I wonder if the minister might like 
to offer some thoughts on the vast difference between the 
sky-rocketing revenue and the declining program expenditures? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would and I 
would like to offer some information that is somewhat more 
accurate. First of all, I would say to the member opposite, I 
think they have their good news and their bad news mixed up. 
Is it or is it not good news to you when you’re getting more 
money from taxation? It’s because people . . . isn’t it a good 
idea that people in Saskatchewan are doing better so they’re 
actually paying more taxes? 
 
Would you have them be paying less taxes because they’re 
more poorly off or would you have the corporations in the 
province paying less dollars in taxes because they’re worse off 
than they were a year or two before? To me, it’s good news if 
our corporation capital tax is up. It means that the assets of the 
companies operating the province are higher, of higher value 
than they were the year before. To me, it’s good news if our 
corporation income tax is up because it means the corporations 
operating in this province are making more money; they’re 
doing well. So to me this is good news. 
 
I’m not sure why the member opposite thinks it’s bad news to 
be spending less on agriculture. Lots of money was spent on 
agriculture in the 1980s because there were very, very serious 
problems in agriculture  problems with prices, problems with  

crops. One of the reasons why less money is being spent on 
agriculture is because agriculture is doing better. Farmers are 
becoming more self-sufficient. 
 
(1600) 
 
And when I was on my tour around the province before the 
budget, I’ve never seen farmers more self-confident, more 
proud of themselves. They’re standing on their own two feet 
and they like it that way. So to say you’re spending less on a 
program doesn’t necessarily mean that this is a bad thing. It 
means that that part of the economy is doing better and requires 
less money. 
 
Where did all the money go? The money went to the loss in 
federal revenue with respect to health, education, and social 
programs. Again, over the four-year period, we’re losing a 
quarter of a billion dollars in funding from the federal 
government for health, education, social programs. That money 
had to come out of the provincial coffers. We had to go out and 
find new money for health, education, social programs, just to 
ensure that they kept level, because the federal government is 
taking out a big chunk of its share of funding for those areas. 
We had to top them up using provincial tax dollars. 
 
So I would say to the member opposite, I think you and I may 
fundamentally disagree about good news and bad news. For me, 
the economy growing is good news. For me, farmers doing well 
is good news. 
 
The division bells rang from 4:02 p.m. until 4:08 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas  32 
 

Romanow Mitchell Wiens 
MacKinnon Shillington Atkinson 
Tchorzewski Johnson Whitmore 
Goulet Kowalsky Calvert 
Koenker Scott Teichrob 
Nilson Serby Stanger 
Murray Langford Wall 
Sonntag Murrell Aldridge 
McLane Draude McPherson 
Belanger Bjornerud Julé 
Krawetz Gantefoer  
 

Nays  nil 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1997 the sum 
of $678,091,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

(1615) 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 81, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 1997, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  By leave of the Assembly, and 
under rule 55(2), I move that Bill 81 be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 55  An Act 
to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the chance 
to speak again to the Assembly about this Bill. In some ways 
this Bill is very timely. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the auditor 
released a report this morning and a large portion of the report 
dealt with unfunded pension liabilities in Saskatchewan. 
Although the changes to this piece of legislation are mainly 
housekeeping, I think we should discuss some of the underlying 
issues behind any pension laws. 
 
Certainly the auditor was concerned, and that means the people 
of Saskatchewan should be concerned as well. The money we 
are talking about is belonging to the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
They have a right to know what is going on with their money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have continued to insist that this government 
needs to be open and accountable to all people in 
Saskatchewan. We believe that people have a right to know 
what the government is planning to do to address this problem, 
and they must address it soon. 
 
According to the auditor, we are looking at $3 billion of 
taxpayers’ money in 14 pension plans administered by the  

government. That’s $3,000 for every man, woman, and child 
living in this province. And the auditor says that unless the 
issue is solved now, this figure will grow. And we can’t afford 
to have it grow. 
 
On March 29 of last year the Dominion Bond Rating Service 
issued a similar warning. They said unfunded past-service 
pension liabilities are large and growing and must be paid. A 
plan to erase this liability is needed. A plan is needed. And at 
that time and since then, the members opposite insist they are 
listening. They assured the public that there is a plan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, forgive me for being cynical, but I don’t see 
the government dealing with this issue. 
 
In the budget released in March, the government was careful to 
steer clear of discussions on unfunded pensions. They brushed 
away our questions about the fund with an air of indignance. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the only people who deserve to be indignant 
are the people of this province. 
 
The government seems to forget this, but like us, the only 
reason they are in this Assembly is because people elected 
them. Did the people elect them to play cover-up? Did the 
people elect them knowing that they would treat taxpayers’ 
money with contempt? Did the people elect them to scoff at any 
questions about their accountability? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we all know the answer to that is no. 
No, the people elected us to act in their best interests. And I 
think it’s time the government stopped playing hide and seek 
with taxpayers’ money and started to run an open and 
accountable system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor has continued to recommend that an 
external review task force be struck to deal with this problem. 
The government apparently agreed. Well surprise, surprise, Mr. 
Speaker; the government members didn’t keep their word. 
Nothing has been done. How many more examples do we need 
to see that this government has no intention of following 
through with its promises? Every day it’s the same thing. We 
stand up in this Assembly and point out the government’s 
broken promises. But the saddest part is that every day it’s a 
different promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have said it before and we’ll continue to say it 
over and over and over again: the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve more than broken promises from the government. Mr. 
Speaker, before we can support any legislation regarding 
pensions, we need to know, firstly, what is the government’s 
plan? Secondly, how will it affect the people involved in these 
pension plans? And thirdly, how will it affect the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The first step to answering our questions, Mr. Speaker, would 
be to let the public see the cash flow requirements  lay it on 
the line. How much do we have? How much do we need? How 
do we balance it out? We are talking about taxpayers’ money, 
Mr. Speaker. We support an external review, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m quite certain that most people in this province would 
support it as well. Since the members opposite are unable to  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

speak out for their constituents in fear of criticizing their 
government, we must speak for them as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Provincial Auditor’s report, a very valid 
question is raised. The question asks: are 12 boards needed to 
manage the government’s pension activities? Are 12 boards 
needed? Maybe the government’s simple answer of 
amalgamation is actually the right one in this case. They think 
forced amalgamation is the answer with school boards, with 
rural municipalities, and we disagree. However, this may be one 
case when it would be a valid answer. 
 
Unlike the government though, before we propose this in any 
legislation related to pensions, we would like to consult with 
the people. Consult first and act later; unlike the government, 
this is the order we prefer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor said today that unfunded liabilities will 
be the issue of the future. Those are powerful words coming 
from a wise man. The government should listen. I know the 
taxpayers will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not unique in the challenges of 
unfunded liabilities. It’s a nation-wide problem. Let me read an 
article from the April 9, 1996 edition of the Fraser Forum: 
 

As the federal government downsizes, fewer employees 
will be contributing to the account and more will be 
drawing pensions. This will result in more rapid growth in 
the contingent liability in the future, and an acceleration in 
the rate of growth in the cash requirements which results 
from the government’s self-imposed commitment to pay 
superannuation to retired employees. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I know that’s a mouthful but what it basically 
outlines is the exact same problem we’re having here in 
Saskatchewan. We will have less people contributing to the 
funds and more people who want to collect them. What 
happens then? Well further down in the same article, it 
explains: 
 

Therefore, because the government was in a deficit 
position in 1994/95, it had to borrow $3.3 billion in capital 
markets just to finance the net cash outflow resulting from 
the commitment to pay federal pensions. This amount can 
be expected to grow very rapidly in the near future because 
of the downsizing in the federal public service. 
 

This is why the people here in Saskatchewan should be 
concerned, Mr. Speaker. This is the problem the government 
must address. We must think about it. The NDP government 
says it is downsizing. And according to Saskatchewan Public 
Accounts, the average age of persons paying in rose from 45.6 
to 46.3 from 1993-94 to 1994-95. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I hope I have just made clear, any 
legislation relating to pensions must be carefully considered. 
And that includes the government’s proposed amendments to 
The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just reiterate some of the concerns brought  

forward by my colleagues. They say that our party agrees with 
the extension when there is a break in service. The current law 
puts a six-month limit on non-permanent members who are 
looking for a job with another employer in the plan. That 
change extends to a two-year period. We think this is absolutely 
fair. There are thousands of people in this province who could 
tell the members opposite how difficult it can be to find a job in 
our weak job market. Because the NDP government has been 
unable or unwilling to foster positive economic opportunities in 
Saskatchewan, significant jobs are hard to come by. Sadly, there 
are a lot of people who want to work but can’t find jobs, 
particularly within six months. By lengthening the period, the 
government can at least make one small step in helping 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
But we can’t forget to look at the long-term consequences of 
these changes. I have already expressed our concerns about the 
longevity of the pension plans. We are already concerned that 
the plans will not be sustainable, particularly as the population 
ages and the government continues to downsize. If we make 
these changes, we will likely be adding an even greater strain to 
the fund. If a worker does not pay for two years, but steps back 
in the same status as he or she had before leaving, it could 
seriously affect the funds available to pay out other employees. 
This means that taxpayers’ money will have to be stretched 
further and that the debt will continue to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to discussing the details of this Bill 
when we examine it more closely as the Committee of the 
Whole. But before I end, I must again emphasize how important 
the issue of pensions are to Saskatchewan people. We agree 
with the auditor. We think that unfunded liabilities may indeed 
end up being the issue of the future, and, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
be part of this solution, not part of the problem. When I talk to 
people 20 years down the road, I want to be able to say we 
recognized the need to do something to ensure taxpayers were 
not caught in a web of debts spun by the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we take the right steps now, we can start to curb 
this problem before it grows even more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity to speak on the resolution 
regarding this Bill. Municipal employees’ pension plans are 
something near and dear to me after my seven years of services 
as reeve of the RM (rural municipality) of Saltcoats. I know 
very well the value of good rural administrators and other 
municipal government employees. And so the need for stable 
pension plans with fair rules is something I am very familiar 
with. 
 
The first substantive section in this Bill is section 3. This 
section would replace the old section 6 of the Act with new 
wording. Section 6, subsection 3 of the Act deals with a 
situation where a municipal employer such as a town, RM, or 
other municipality begins to participate in the pension plan 
operated by the municipal employees’ pension commission, but 
does not immediately begin making contributions. In these  



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

circumstances, clearly, some kind . . . some form of lump sum 
contribution needs to be paid from the municipality to the 
commission. 
 
The old section 6 set out in a formula for how this lump sum 
was to be calculated. The old lump sum was calculated as being 
the greater of either of the following: 
 

(a) the amount determined in accordance with generally 
accepted actuarial principles, that the commission requires 
for the purpose of funding any allowances that have 
accrued to the employees of the employer during the 
period (in which the municipalities were participating, but 
no contributions were being made, on the one hand) . . . 

 
Or: 

 
(b) twice the amount of the contributions that the 
employees would have been required to make with respect 
to the allowances that have accrued to the employees of the 
employer during the period (when the municipality was 
participating but no contributions were being made) . . . 

 
In other words, the old formula provided for either an 
actuarially determined amount or twice that would have been 
the employees contributions during the relevant period, 
whichever was greater. 
 
Now the minister wants to replace the old formula by the new 
set out in section 3 of Bill 55. The new formula is shorter, but 
not necessarily sweeter. The new formula for determining the 
amount of the lump sum is: 
 

“. . . an amount, determined by the commission in 
accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles, 
that the commission requires for the purpose of funding 
any allowances that have accrued to the employees of the 
employer during the period of participation . . .” 

 
Mr. Speaker, the new formula is certainly more vague than the 
earlier one. I have some real concerns as to whether there is 
enough certainty. 
 
As we have seen in the last few years, some very large and 
respectable financial institutions in this country have become 
insolvent due to inadequate reserves being set aside. We don’t 
want the same thing to happen to our municipal employees’ 
pension commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note in the explanatory notes provided by the 
government that the stated reason for the change is in order to 
bring the legislation into line with the requirements of section 
147.2(2) of the Income Tax Act of Canada. The explanation is 
that the Income Tax Act does not allow employers to match 
contributions based on the salary of members. 
 
That may be the case, Mr. Speaker, but if the federal legislation 
will not allow for a strict dollar-for-dollar contribution from the 
employer based on the salary of the member, then we have to 
ask ourselves a very serious question: is it adequate to simplify 
the process of the commission and its actuaries, or should there  

be some other formula to fall back on in the event that their 
calculations prove to be wrong? At least the old formula had a 
fall-back position. It was twice the amount of the employees’ 
contribution for the period during which there was participation 
but no contributions, if that was larger than the actuarially 
determined amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the old formula ran afoul of an income tax rule, 
then I think we should put our minds to thinking up a new and 
better fall-back formula. Fall-back formulas were determined 
for a reason, and that reason is that sometimes actuaries and 
other professionals make mistakes. It’s better to have a reserve 
over and above what the professionals tells us rather than no 
reserve at all. 
 
We have to ask ourselves what are the financial consequences 
of having no fall-back formula and becoming totally dependent 
on actuarial calculations? 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next substantial change proposed by Bill 55 is 
the increase in permitted breaks in service from six months to 
two years. This is found in section 4 of the Bill, and again, has 
potentially dramatic financial consequences for the municipal 
employees’ pension plan. 
 
Under the old rule, an employee of a municipality who left the 
service of one municipality but then joined another one within 
six months could rejoin the pension plan on the first day of his 
new job at the second municipality. Under Bill 55 that break in 
employment is extended up to two years. As with the old 
six-month rule, the length of the break in service may be 
extended by a written application to the municipal employees 
pension commission. The commission may grant for the 
extension if there is reasonable grounds for asking for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our party stands in favour of this broadening of 
the six-month rule up to two years, because we all know that 
breaks in employment are often longer than they were in the 
past. For example, a mother who decides to take time off from 
her work with a municipality at the time of the birth of her baby 
may in today’s workplace quite reasonably decide to take a year 
or two off from full-time employment before returning to the 
office. Six months is often simply not long enough. 
 
Similarly, if there are lay-offs or downsizing, the gap between 
losing that first job and finding the second job may be well 
longer than six months. This change, as proposed in section 4 
of Bill 55, is compassionate and we support it. 
 
The trouble, Mr. Speaker, is that the financial obligations of the 
fund keep piling up. It’s fair to ask the minister what will be the 
financial effect of the allowing a person to rejoin the pension 
plan on the first day back to work after being away from the 
plan and not making any contributions for two years? We will 
want to know the answer to that question. It is a perfectly fair 
question and one that the employees themselves would surely 
want to have asked on their behalf. 
 
If we’re going to permit and encourage people to take up to two  



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

years off, and even longer, that if an extension is granted . . . 
and then come back and step in exactly the same status as 
before departure, what financial guarantees are there going to 
be in the plan to make sure that it does not run out of money as 
a result of such breaks in service? Are some special 
contributions in order perhaps? Should there be some graduated 
scale for some small, reasonable contribution to be made by the 
employee who takes more than two years off? 
 
I believe there are reasonable concerns, indeed concerns that 
will lead to better understanding and acceptance of the plan by 
employees  both those who make use of the extended break 
in service rules and those who don’t. The latter group needs to 
be reassured that their contributions are being fairly treated as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next substantial change in the law proposed in 
this Bill is found in section 5, and the change provided in the 
Bill means that employees who over-contribute to the pension 
plan in any particular year will get back their over contribution, 
but they will no longer get back the interest on the 
over-contribution. Mr. Speaker, the government has provided us 
with explanatory notes which say this change is necessary in 
order to comply with section eight five zero six, subsection 4(a) 
of the Income Tax Act regulations. 
 
While this may be true, Mr. Speaker, surely there is something 
that we can do with the interest that is more creative than 
merely pretending it doesn’t exist. Could not the interest on 
contributions in excess of the limits be credited to the 
individual employee’s own entitlement account with the plan? 
Where does the minister plan to put the interest on 
contributions in excess of the permit limits? In simple terms, 
Mr. Speaker, I ask, where is the interest going? 
 
The next major change proposed in Bill 55 is found in section 
6. This provision has the effect of moving the plan away from a 
strict dollar-for-dollar formula to a much vaguer method of 
calculating employee contributions to the plan. The old rule 
said that a municipal employer was required to contribute the 
same amount as the employee contributed. We hear the 
provincial government telling us that section 147.2(2) of the 
Income Tax Act has . . . no longer allows employers to match 
contributions based on the salary of members and so this 
change is necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t propose at this time to challenge the legal 
opinions which the government has solicited in the course of 
reaching the rather extraordinary conclusion. But I will say this: 
if we are going to move away from the old tried and true 
dollar-for-dollar rule based on salary, then we owe it to our 
municipal employees to enact a formula that is at least as sound 
financially as the old formula. And I have real questions 
whether the formula proposed in Bill 55 is adequate. 
 
The new formula says the employers are required to contribute, 
and here I quote: 
 

an amount . . . determined by the commission in 
accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles, 
that the commission requires for the purpose of funding  

any allowance that may accrue to the employee pursuant to 
this Act. 

 
This formula again leaves the entire business of determining the 
employer contributions in the hands of actuaries who are very 
skilled professionals to be sure, Mr. Speaker, but who can 
nonetheless be overly optimistic from time to time and 
sometimes, as in the case of some of the largest life insurance 
companies in this country, absolutely wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am thinking of Confederation Life Insurance 
Company which went insolvent a couple of years ago after 
decades and decades  indeed, the better part of the last 
century  of excellent management by skilled professional 
actuaries and others just because of some bad planning in the 
‘80s. 
 
The next major change proposed in this Bill is found in section 
7. This changes the section of the Act which deals with 
payment to employees who die after the pension is vested but 
before becoming entitled to receive an allowance who have not 
left a named beneficiary. Here the change is significant and 
must be examined carefully. 
 
Under the existing rule, the pension plan would pay to the estate 
an amount that would be (a) twice the employee’s contribution 
to the plan plus the amount in the employee additional 
contribution account plus the employee’s annuity account plus 
the employee’s annuity surplus account, the employer’s 
additional contribution account, and finally, the amount in the 
employer annuity account. 
 
That entitlement of the estate is altered. The new entitlement 
rules are somewhat different. The new entitlement of this is the 
total of the commuted value of the employee’s allowance 
calculated as if the employee’s date of death were the 
employee’s date of termination and the amount by which the 
employee’s contribution plus interest exceed 50 per cent of the 
amount mentioned in subclause 1, plus the last five items in the 
old formula. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have two concerns with the new formula. The 
first is this: how is the commuted value calculated? That may be 
a question which the actuary or an accountant would scoff at, 
but I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that it is a question that a 
widow or a widower or the children of the deceased municipal 
employee would not regard as foolish or simplistic. 
 
We used to have a formula that everybody could understand. It 
was the amount of the employee’s contribution multiplied by 
two. I could understand that, and so could the municipal 
employees and their dependants. 
 
That formula has been replaced by something called commuted 
value based on the assumption that the employee was 
terminated at the time of his death. And added to that is another 
value. The other value is the amount by which the employee’s 
own contribution to the pension plus the interest earned on 
those contributions are greater than the commuted value of the 
pension. So in other words, if the employee’s contribution plus 
interest is greater than 50 per cent of the total commuted value,  



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

then the excess margin is added on to the entitlement. 
 
My second question is this: is the family of the deceased 
municipal employee going to get more or less than before? 
Does it promote good investment practices by those who are in 
charge of administering the plan? What mechanisms are going 
to be put into place in order to make sure that the commuted 
value is going to be fair? 
 
Closely related to this question is the issue of how the 
commuted value is going to be calculated. Mr. Speaker, here is 
my worry in a nutshell. The death benefit calls for a payment of 
a vague, nebulous amount called a commuted value. Then it 
goes on to add a specific small additional amount to that 
entitlement. I’m referring to the portion of the employee’s 
contribution plus interest that is in excess of over 50 per cent of 
the commuted value. 
 
That sounds great at first glance, but my worry is that the size of 
the employee’s contribution plus interest, especially if it’s a 
large amount, will be used by those in charge to alter the 
commuted value in such a way to keep the payment to a 
minimum. I would like to know what mechanisms will be put in 
place to calculate the commuted value of the death benefit and 
how those rules will be applied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next significant change that would be brought 
about by the passage of Bill 55 is found in section 8 of this Bill. 
This is the section which deals with reductions to the benefits to 
pensioners who take early retirement. This change seems to be a 
sensible one although I will probably have some questions for 
the minister if the Bill reaches Committee of the Whole. 
 
Section 9 is the portion of the Bill which deals with pensioners 
who, due to serious medical conditions likely to shorten their 
lives, elect to receive the commuted value of the allowance, 
annuity, or other benefit to which they would normally have 
been entitled. Mr. Speaker, the present wording of the Act says 
that in such a circumstance the members of the plan can receive 
a payment or series of payments for a fixed term calculated in 
accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles, equal 
to the value of the benefit to which he would normally have 
been entitled. 
 
The new word says that the pensioner gets the commuted value. 
We seem to have replaced the generally accepted actuarial 
principles with the commuted value once again. There will 
certainly be some questions to be answered in Committee of the 
Whole on that point. 
 
Mr. Speaker. I agree with section 10 of the Bill, and it offers a 
much more detailed and complete definition of the totally and 
permanently disabled. It adopts the definition of totally disabled 
found on the income tax regulations. Our party supports this 
change. 
 
My last comment about the Bill is that the two-year waiting 
period in section 11 is too long. This is a section which 
provides that if an employee leaves the service of a 
municipality, he must now wait up to two years before 
receiving his refund on his pension contributions. Mr. Speaker,  

I understand that the reasoning behind this change is to make 
consistent with the new rule that if an employee gets a new 
position with another municipality within two years, he may 
rejoin the pension plan right away. None the less, two years is 
simply too long to wait, and I think we as legislators simply 
have to find a better formula for refunding pension 
contributions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this concludes my remarks on the second reading 
of debate in Bill 55. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(1645) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
The Chair:  I would ask the Minister to introduce her 
officials please. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, I have with me 
today, Bill Jones, who is the deputy minister of Finance. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. My first question to 
the minister is going to be a repeat. But in the interests of the 
tax-paying public, most of who can’t afford flights to the Big 
Apple, I have to ask the question of the minister because she 
refused to answer it before. I’d like the minister to tell me, tell 
the people, what the cost of her trip to New York was to 
promote the recent budget. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I guess in a budget of $5 billion we understand what 
they think the most important issues are. And that will be 
recorded as well . . . the first question that they wanted to know 
about a $5 billion budget was how much it costs to go to New 
York. The answer is we don’t have the bills in yet. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Madam Minister. 
I know the minister doesn’t like the question, but I can tell her, 
you know, that because I’m asking this because most people in 
the province don’t get a chance to take these sorts of 
opportunities to take trips to far-away places. So I just ask the 
minister to keep that in mind. 
 
But given the fact that you don’t have the bills in yet for your 
recent trip, would you just provide a brief overview otherwise 
on the travel policy of your department as it relates to both 
yourself and to out-of-scope personnel. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I think the basic travel policy is that 
we travel by the least expensive air travel. That is, nobody in 
government is ever allowed to travel whatever is called first 
class, business class, so all of our tickets are always commercial 
tickets or the least expensive air tickets. 



April 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

If there’s an opportunity to take advantage of discounts, we do 
that, but we have to be careful because our plans can change 
quite quickly. You can end up costing taxpayers more if you 
have to pay a penalty because you got a discounted ticket, and 
then the agency couldn’t see you on exactly that day. You have 
to change your day. You end up losing money. 
 
I think the main thing that is different about our government 
and other agencies is all of the travel points, accrued by 
government people when we travel, accrue back to the 
government. That is, what will often . . . it happens all the time 
in the private sector and happens in other public agencies. I 
travel; the Government of Saskatchewan pays my travel 
expense. You get air points when you travel. In other places, the 
individuals are allowed to keep those air points. In our 
government, any air points that accrue have to go back into 
government travel so that they’re assigned to future government 
travel. So we save money in that way. 
 
And those are the basic guidelines. Other than that, we have 
basic public service rates of allocations for meals, etc. No 
money of course allowed for entertainment or any such 
expenses. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I do think 
that that is a rather positive initiative, that the travel points here 
in this province would be kicked back in the kitty, so to speak, 
for use by government. 
 
Mr. Chair, I noticed after the budget a number of fairly large 
advertisements in the papers around the province, regarding the 
recently announced provincial budget. And I’m sure the 
minister is well aware of the ads which I’m talking about here. 
I’d like the minister to tell us who contracted these 
advertisements. And was this done through the communications 
coordination unit at the Executive Council, or was it some other 
organization? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, first of all I’d like to 
introduce two new officials who’ve joined us. Behind me is 
Kirk McGregor, executive director, taxation and 
intergovernmental affairs. And behind Bill Jones is Bill Van 
Sickle, executive director of administration. 
 
The ads were tendered in the usual way; that is, we went 
through the process of getting an agency of record and then that 
agency did the advertising according to our government policy. 
So it was a standard, open approach to assigning advertising. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. And I was lax 
earlier in not welcoming your officials here. And now that 
there’s more that have joined you, I just take the opportunity to 
do so now. 
 
I thank the minister for her answer, but I would like to know 
how much was paid for these ads and what input, if any, the 
minister’s department had on the selection of that company. I 
know you said it was tendered in the normal process, but I 
would think there must be some consideration given here for 
the minister’s own department. And if you would just perhaps 
elaborate on that. 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  The total cost was $31,231 for the 
placement of the ad; $4,139 for the design of the ad, which is 
on a par what occurs when a budget is produced and the public 
is informed of what’s in the budget. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  I thank the minister. And I would ask, would 
it be possible if you table those figures because they went by me 
just a little bit quickly? 
 
But also I’m aware that many departments create a committee 
to advise on the tenders or these bid submissions for ads, and 
often they’re formed by top officials. Did your department have 
such a committee involved, and did you appoint the people on 
it, and who were these people, and what would be their 
qualifications? 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the content comes from the Department of Finance. 
We would ask people in the communications unit for some 
advice on presentation. And then the ads would be put together 
in place, but certainly the Department of Finance is the one that 
decides the content. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. I was looking 
at one of these ads, and the presentation of the ad raised some 
concerns with me. The government should be spending 
taxpayers’ dollars in an impartial manner, and I would hope it 
would present the facts over and above anything else. 
 
To begin with, I was quite concerned when looking at the graph 
in the ad regarding employment in the province. Here in the 
graph, the bottom of the graph started at zero, and the next 
number is 450,000. And the net effect of setting a graph up that 
way is to give a reader a false impression of job growth in the 
province. The graph makes job growth look far more dramatic. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could tell us whether this would be 
a good use of our money. The minister would be, in this case, 
wasting taxpayers’ money on ads with skewed graphs just to 
make the sorry job-creation record of the government look 
better. If I could have a comment. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I guess what I would say, first of all, is the material 
presented to the public reflects what it’s in the budget speech. 
So what they would have put in that material would reflect the 
budget speech. 
 
But I would say to the member opposite, we’ve now been at 
this for  I don’t know  five or ten minutes. We’re talking 
about $5 billion in taxpayers’ spending, and we’re concerned 
about .0000, whatever per cent of it, in terms of the ads. The 
information in the ads is produced by the Department of 
Finance. It reflects the budget, and it portrays, we believe, very 
accurately to the public what the main messages of the budget 
are. And there’s different ways one could use to convey to the 
electorate what is in the budget. 
 
Our view is that the most effective way and the way that it 
benefits local people the most is using local newspapers. 
 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 1996 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Madam Minister. But I do have 
to ask a few more questions concerning the advertisements. 
 
I know that you feel that this isn’t of any significance, these 
sorts of dollars, but I do think that people of this province think 
otherwise. So in that same ad, which says the Department of 
Finance, it has another graph, and it shows the department’s 
impression of the figures involved in the federal transfer cuts. 
 
And we all agree there were some cuts here. But I’m concerned 
that the minister allowed yet another ad to go through which 
skews the facts to the public. The chart here shows cuts to 
funding for health, social services, and education from the 
federal government, and I’d like the minister to tell us why 
equalization wasn’t included. Because these things are worth 
money, in terms of millions, to the province, and when you 
show how big transfer cuts are to the province and you’re 
excluding them here. 
 
And I’d remind the minister that on at least one other occasion 
we’ve heard the minister say that finances are complicated, and 
what the minister must do for the public is explain them in a 
clear and concise manner. And given those remarks, I would 
like the minister to explain why she would . . . again, why 
would our money be wasted on an ad that has a graph that 
clouds the federal transfer cut issue by excluding the 
equalization transfer component. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, first of all, these are not impressions; these are all 
facts. I don’t do the charts; my office doesn’t do the charts; the 
Department of Finance does the charts. They are real numbers. 
We could very well, Mr. Member, have included a graph on 
equalization. What it would have shown though, is exactly the 
same trend  a dramatic reduction in federal money for 
equalization. 
 
So if we had done that, it would have just underlined the point 
even more  not only are we getting less money for health, 
education, and social programs, we’re getting dramatically less 
money for equalization relative to what we’ve gotten in the 
past. 
 
So we could have made that point, but it would not strengthen 
your argument that we’re getting more from the federal 
government; it would have strengthened the argument that 
you’re getting hit twice  less money for health, education, 
social programs; less money for equalization. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Chairman, and, Madam Minister, earlier 
in the session I had asked a good number of written questions. 
The one that I believe this supposedly open and accountable 
government answered was one about payment made to Phoenix 
Advertising in 1994-95. That answer had stated that Phoenix 
was paid significant sums of money for advertising for some 
jobs, strategic advice, as well as work in preparing the Public 
Accounts documents for the Department of Finance. 
 
The response I was given raised a number of concerns. Firstly, I 
wonder if the minister could tell us why it says here under 
Provincial Comptroller that his branch prepares the Public  

Accounts. And if the Provincial Comptroller prepares them, is 
there any sort of contracting out planned in the coming year? 
 
And what I would like to know specifically is, if the department 
plans to contract the Public Accounts documents out, does that 
simply involve printing, or does that involve presentation, 
design, strategic communications advice as well. If you could 
reply. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, the Department of Finance doesn’t physically print the 
Public Accounts. They get all the information compiled and 
they’re printed elsewhere by a private agency. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Madam Minister, the Provincial Auditor has 
expressed concern about your department being the only 
department which doesn’t file an annual report. An annual 
report, as you’re aware and fully understand, keeps people 
accountable. And to use one of your own phrases, it prevents 
powerful officials like yourself from squaring circles, if you 
will. 
 
And given this, would the minister explain whether or not she 
intends to comply with the request of the Provincial Auditor. 
And if not, could she offer an explanation of why she feels that 
she’s above being accountable in such a manner. 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I would say that the Department of Finance probably 
tables more public documents than any other part of 
government. We table the Public Accounts in two volumes in 
the fall, mid-year financial reports, Estimates, the budget 
speech, and all the background papers for the budget. 
 
So I think the issue is, is there adequate information available? 
And we believe there is. It’s what do you actually call the 
information. Whether you call it an annual report or you call it 
some of these other things may not be as important as what the 
information is that exists. So I would say, in terms of openness 
and accountability, Canada West recently looked at the 
budgeting of different governments across Canada, and 
Saskatchewan was accorded the highest mark  85 per cent  
for its budgeting practices and its openness and accountability. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ........................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................1199 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Thomson ..................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
  Heppner ...................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Day of Mourning for Killed and Injured Workers 
  Trew .........................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1200 
 NATO Delegation to Tour Moose Jaw 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
 Early Childhood Intervention Week 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
  Wall ..........................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
 90th Birthday Tribute to Bernard Korchinski 
  Osika ........................................................................................................................................................................................1201 
 Grand Opening of Regina Community Clinic’s New Facility 
  Hamilton ..................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1202 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1202 
 Health Care District Advertising 
  Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
  Cline .........................................................................................................................................................................................1203 
 Agreement with Intercontinental Packers 
  Boyd .........................................................................................................................................................................................1204 
  Lingenfelter .............................................................................................................................................................................1204 
  Goohsen ...................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
 SaskTel Strike 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
  Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................1205 
 Wildlife Damage Compensation 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
  Scott .........................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
 Income Supplement for Farmers 
  Julé ...........................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
  Calvert .....................................................................................................................................................................................1206 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 
  Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................1207 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker .............................................................................................................................................................................1207 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  The Speaker .............................................................................................................................................................................1207 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1207 
  Julé .................................................................................................................................................................................1207, 1209 
  Draude .................................................................................................................................................................1208, 1212, 1217 
  Krawetz....................................................................................................................................................................................1211 
  Aldridge .........................................................................................................................................................................1214, 1220 
  Shillington................................................................................................................................................................................1216 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1220 
 Recorded Division.......................................................................................................................................................................1221 
FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1222 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1222 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 55  An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act 
  Draude .....................................................................................................................................................................................1222 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................1223 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Finance Vote 18 
  MacKinnon ..............................................................................................................................................................................1226 
  Aldridge ...................................................................................................................................................................................1226 
 
 


