


















































April 12, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 843 
 April 12, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of the people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition  I 
see most of them are from Moose Jaw area, many from Carlyle, 
Regina, and I see many actually from Regina Albert South 
constituency and Regina Elphinstone constituency. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present petitions of names from throughout southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The petition is signed from people from McLean, Indian Head, 
Qu’Appelle, numerous southern Saskatchewan communities 
including Regina. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise today to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Regina, Melville, but they’re also from 
Bredenbury, Pilot Butte, Dubuc, and a number from Brock. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of concerned citizens about the future of the Plains 
Health Centre in Regina. The prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition are from Vanguard, Melville, 
Regina, McLean, Balgonie, and Qu’Appelle. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names of people throughout Saskatchewan  

regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Moose 
Jaw. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too today to 
present a petition of names from people throughout southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed from people from the city of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition are from Pilot Butte, 
Lanigan, Wishart, Bankend, Moose Jaw, and a number from 
Regina. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture regarding the closure of 
eight Crop Insurance offices: (1) are there leases for Crop 
Insurance offices that were closed in February in the towns 
of Wilkie, Kyle, Wynyard, Carnduff, Outlook, Melfort, 
Canora, and Wolseley; if so, (2) who holds the leases; (3) 
what will be the cost incurred in the termination of the 
lease at each of the said offices; (4) since the rural service 
centre extensions offices in Leader, Kamsack, Melfort, and 
Fort Qu’Appelle are to be closed immediately, what is the 
date for the termination of those leases by the rural service 
centre extension offices; and lastly, what costs will be  

  



844  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

associated with the termination of these lease agreements? 
 
Mr. McPherson  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that 
I shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SaskPower regarding the 
management conference in Banff attended by Carole 
Bryant, the vice-president of corporate affairs for 
SaskPower: (1) what is the focus of this conference; (2) 
what is the fee to attend this conference; (3) why is Carole 
Bryant there; (4) what is the full cost to the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers to send Carole Bryant to this conference in 
Banff; and (5) does this include lift tickets? 

 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 
Palliative Care Week 

 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, Mr. 
Speaker, to recognize Palliative Care Week in Saskatchewan, 
which begins today, and to pay tribute to the gift of life that 
palliative care workers give to those who are dying. 
 
It is easy to measure life in terms of material goods or to make 
assumptions about how long we’ll all live, especially if things 
are going fine for us. But anyone who has ever had to walk with 
a loved one or friend through a terminal illness will know that 
the quality of life assumes greater importance as the quantity of 
life is diminished. 
 
And so today we honour all those who provide palliative care 
and we thank them for the faith and the hope and the love that 
they give so gracefully and unselfishly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Royal Bank Branches 
 

Ms. Draude: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
express my concerns about the Royal Bank’s recent 
announcement of its plans to close five branches in 
Saskatchewan; this in addition to the other Royal Bank 
branches that have already been shut down in rural 
Saskatchewan. Even though the Royal Bank made over $1 
billion in profit last year, it says the closures are needed to stay 
competitive on the banking scene. 
 
My main concern is about the accessibility of banking services, 
particularly for rural clients. Now that the Royal Bank has an 
exclusive contract on Saskatchewan student loans, I have had 
several complaints from constituents. They are post-secondary 
students who are worried about access to fewer and fewer Royal 
Banks in the rural areas. 
 
This latest round of closures will create similar problems for 
students in other parts of Saskatchewan. I urge the Royal Bank 
and the other major financial institutions to consider the 
negative impact this trend is having on rural residents in 
Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Focus on Trade/Tourism in Moose Jaw 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this will be a very exciting weekend in the city of Moose Jaw. 
This weekend Moose Jaw will host not one, but two trade 
shows  a Focus on Tourism and a Focus on Trade. 
 
Our Focus on Tourism show will be held at the Heritage 
Pavilion on the Moose Jaw Exhibition grounds and will have 
information on great Saskatchewan holidays. Mr. Speaker, at 
the tourism show the visitor will be able to see a number of 
displays highlighting Saskatchewan’s parks, outfitters, events, 
and great tourist destinations, including one of the newest of 
Saskatchewan’s tourist destinations  the Temple Gardens 
Mineral Spa in Moose Jaw. 
 
The Focus on Trade show will be held at the Hillcrest Sports 
Centre. And at the trade show there will be over 130 exhibitors 
with everything from agricultural services, financial and 
personal services, home and yard improvements, along with 
great food and even child care for parents who want to browse 
through the displays. 
 
There will also, Mr. Speaker, be a moving display by the Moose 
Jaw 5, 6, 7 Car Club and the Tired Iron Car Club, and even a 
high-tech kites display, Mr. Speaker. Visitors to the show will 
be able to enter for a number of door prizes. A free shuttle 
service will operate between the shows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would want to congratulate all of the organizers 
in our community for this event and remind everyone that it’ll 
be held this afternoon, Saturday, and Sunday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Langenburg Achievements 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
town of Langenburg in the east side of the Saltcoats 
constituency is the home of many leaders and talented 
individuals. 
 
Claude Desnoyers, a history and English and core French 
teacher from Langenburg High School was recently selected to 
participate as a monitor at the Terry Fox Centre in Ottawa. 
Canada’s youth will gather to demonstrate their leadership 
abilities and learn more about our country. As Claude spends 
April 13 to 27 in our nation’s capital as an exchange teacher, 
the core of his stay will be focused on arts and culture as well as 
Canada and the world. I wish him good luck for the challenge 
that awaits him to be a leader among leaders. 
 
Also Ms. Sharla Andrews, a student from Langenburg High 
School, will also go to Ottawa to spend the week at the Terry 
Fox Centre, and Sharla’s week will be focused on technology in 
Canada and the world. 
 
Ms. Kerri Buchberger, also from Langenburg and sister of 
Edmonton Oilers Kelly Buchberger, has recently been named as  
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

a member of the Canadian National Women’s Volleyball Team 
and is now destined to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, 
Georgia. The Buchberger family are proud of their children, and 
many hours of dedication on behalf of the parents and the 
athlete are the only reason that this young lady has achieved 
such a remarkable goal. 
 
I congratulate these three individuals by saluting their 
accomplishments and wish them the best of luck as they rise to 
new challenges on a level beyond their home community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maymont’s Award-winning Centre 
 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Twice in recent weeks I 
have mentioned the new multi-use facility in the village of 
Maymont, a facility that includes the new school, a skating 
arena, a seniors’ centre, doctors’ offices, a regional library, and 
the town office. I mentioned the innovation and the cooperation 
and the nature of this facility, and I praised the people of 
Maymont for their smart planning and their energetic 
fund-raising which brought this facility into being. 
 
I am happy to announce today that I am not the only one that is 
in recognition of this facility. Last night in Saskatoon, the 
Saskatchewan Recreation Society and the Saskatchewan 
Recreation Facility Association held their annual awards 
meeting. Winner of the Cec Nobes facility award of excellence 
was the Maymont School and Community Centre, an award I 
obviously think is richly deserved. 
 
I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that in giving this award, the 
Saskatchewan Recreation Facility Association made special 
mention of the volunteer effort of the people of Maymont in 
providing both labour and fund-raising. Also singled out was 
their cooperation method by which all the interested groups 
came together to plan and complete the project. 
 
So once again, Mr. Speaker, hats off to Maymont, which is 
leading the way into the new era of cooperation and shared use 
of facilities. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ukrainian Easter Greetings 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
most MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) present in 
the House and people in Saskatchewan, last week was Easter 
weekend and everyone celebrated that event. 
 
I would like to bring to the attention of members, and of course 
I know many people in Saskatchewan, especially those who are 
of Ukrainian Orthodox faith, that of course this weekend is 
Easter weekend, today being Good Friday.  
 
So to all residents in Saskatchewan who are celebrating Easter 
this weekend, to any of the MLAs opposite who are celebrating 
Easter, like myself, I would like to wish them a Happy Easter, 
and a traditional greeting, Xyryctoc Voskres. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Aboriginal Tourism Strategy 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, recently the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley mentioned the Saskatchewan 
aboriginal tourist strategy, a plan to assist the development of 
first nations tourism in our province. I want to mention an 
attraction which is rapidly become the lynchpin of this strategy. 
 
In my constituency just outside Saskatoon on the banks of the 
South Saskatchewan River is Wanuskewin Heritage Park, a 
recently developed site which has already gained national 
attention, has now received international recognition. 
 
Wanuskewin Park was featured as the international attraction at 
the Maori Tourism Federation’s first conference and trade show 
held in Auckland, New Zealand last month. The Maori 
community has a vast tourist experience, so recognition of 
Wanuskewin’s unique operating partnerships and interpretive 
approach is particularly significant. It is because of this that the 
Saskatchewan park, which exhibits and dramatizes traditional 
first nations life on the Prairies, was selected for the 
conference’s international component. 
 
The chief executive officer of the Maori Federation, Roana 
Bennet, said that for many delegates, meeting with and hearing 
from the Wanuskewin delegation were the highlights of the 
conference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate all members of the Wanuskewin 
board and staff for their work in bringing this world class park 
into being and to world attention. And if members have not yet 
visited it, I urge them to do so soon. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ukrainian Easter (Velykden) 
 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise this 
morning to offer congratulations to Canadians of Ukrainian 
descent on the Orthodox Easter celebration. 
 
I’d like to inform the Assembly, as the hon. member from 
Canora-Pelly, that this weekend many Canadians of Ukrainian 
descent will be observing the Easter weekend. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, is actually known as strasna pyatnytsa, which means 
frightening Friday. Easter Sunday, which is called Velykden, 
which translates to, a very significant day. 
 
In the Ukrainian tradition, Mr. Speaker, Easter begins with a 
morning high mass which happens very early in the morning. It 
is then followed by an exchange of greetings amongst those 
attending church. The traditional greeting is Xyryctoc Voskres, 
which translates to, Christ is Risen! And the response given is 
Voyeesten Voskres Indeed He Has! 
 
People then go back home to have their Easter feasts. After the 
church service, decorated baskets of traditional foods are  
  



846  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

blessed. These include Easter breads called babka and kolach 
which are beautifully decorated; as well as Easter eggs known 
as pysanka, which are essential to the Easter celebration. In 
many cases these foods are given to friends and relatives. 
 
Ukrainians in Canada treasure these practices, Mr. Speaker, and 
on behalf of all members of the Assembly I’d like to 
congratulate them on this their Easter celebration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Revenues 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question today 
is to the minister responsible for SaskTel. Madam Minister, 
SaskTel, according to your news release, made a record profit 
last year of $200 million. Now first, are we going to see the 
revenues from the sale of the LCL (Leicester Communications 
Limited) cable go towards paying down the SaskTel debt? And 
are we going to see the operating profits translate into lower 
power rates . . . or lower telephone rates, rather, for the people 
of Saskatchewan? Or are you going to continue to use the 
SaskTel rates as a form of back-door taxation the way you do 
with all of your other utility rates? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to have the 
opportunity to answer that question. Let me say that in the 
annual report for SaskTel which was tabled yesterday, which 
showed a profit of some $190 million for the year 1995, of that, 
114 million was a net gain on the capital sale of the assets of 
LCL, and 10.5 million was another capital gain on the sale of 
ISM (Information Systems Management Corporation) shares. 
SaskTel, I would point out, their actual revenue from the 
telecommunications company has reduced from 88 million in 
1993 to 55 million in 1995  a reduction of some 40 per cent. 
And this has been a pattern since the deregulation of long 
distance telephone rates. 
 
So SaskTel has diversified its operations in order to make up 
some of the lost revenue from long distance and has done very 
well. I would also point out that in terms of the local service, 
SaskTel is the only telephone company in Canada which did not 
increase its local rates by $2 last January 1, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplemental 
question to the minister responsible for SaskTel. Madam 
Minister, once again we have to accept your assurances that 
your long distance rates are fair. Of course we have no way of 
knowing this for sure because there is no independent body set 
up to review the utility rates. And with SaskTel making a record 
profit of nearly $200 million, it seems like customers might be 
getting just a little bit gouged here. Madam Minister, we need 
some way of knowing that your government isn’t simply using 
the utility rates as a form of back-door taxation. That’s our 
point. 
 
Immediately after question period, my colleague, the member  

for Cannington, will be introducing a private members’ Bill to 
establish an all-party committee to review utility rates. 
 
Madam Minister, if you’re so sure that your phone rates will 
stand up to independent scrutiny, then, Madam Minister, will 
you support this legislation that we will introduce today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I think it’s curious that 
the member opposite would raise this subject when it was the 
Mulroney government in Ottawa, their Progressive 
Conservative friends  an oxymoron if I ever heard one  that 
introduced the deregulation of the telephone industry. 
 
And just before SaskTel won, just before SaskTel won, if you 
like, a five-year temporary immunity from the new regime of 
deregulation, I asked the minister in charge at the time, then 
Perrin Beatty, who is now the minister responsible for the CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), what is your vision for 
the telecommunications industry in Canada? Where is 
deregulation going to lead? 
 
Where did it lead in the airline industry? They’ve deregulated 
that. What did we get? Higher fares, rotten service, and a bunch 
of bankrupt airlines. I asked him, is that your vision for the 
telecommunications company? Is that how we’re going to 
worship at the altar of competition — to all end up broke? 
 
And we were granted the immunity. Our rates are competitive 
throughout Canada. Our service is bar none. And we are the 
only telephone company in Canada  in the United States and 
Canada  that has digital, individual line service to every 
subscriber, when there’s 370,000 people in the rest of Canada 
still on party lines, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Casino Development 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the minister responsible for the Gaming 
Commission. Mr. Minister, now that the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) has gotten a taste for the gambling business, it seems like 
you want to take the whole thing for yourself. And now we see 
that you’re even taking steps to get rid of the competition. 
 
With the new government- and Indian-run casino now open in 
North Battleford, you are forcing the North Battleford 
exhibition association to cut back its hours of operation by 75 
per cent. And there is no plan in place to compensate the 
exhibition association for this loss of revenue. 
 
Mr. Minister, aren’t you already getting enough of the gambling 
action? Why is it necessary to use strong-arm tactics to force 
exhibition-run casinos out of business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 
member for his question. Under the agreement on the  
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

development of the new casinos, it was always understood, and 
this was discussed with the exhibition associations, that there 
would be some scaling back of their activity. They would still 
be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We could complete the whole 
answer; just a minute here. 
 
And I’ll point out that on those agreements, we made a 
commitment to keep the exhibition associations whole in their 
revenues. Now whether it is that exhibition association, the 
Regina one, we have discussions with them on what constitutes 
keeping them whole in relation to their gaming activities and 
related activities. 
 
So this is a discussion that’s taking place. It’s not completed, 
but the commitment is there, and always has been there, to keep 
the exhibition associations whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Well, Madam Minister, your 
government is both a player and a dealer in this game, and 
you’ve stacked the deck against the exhibition associations. 
 
The North Battleford exhibition association says this comes as a 
complete surprise to them; not any negotiated stance that you 
say. They had no idea you and your casino were going to come 
into town and start muscling them out of business, just like 
some sort of Vegas mob-run outfit in the 1930s. And they also 
see no confidence that you’re . . . They have no confidence that 
you’re ever going to see any compensation for their loss of 
revenue. 
 
Madam Minister, why is your government so greedy when it 
comes to gambling revenues? Why do you have to be the only 
game in town? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Again this is an agreement that 
involved consultation with the local community, with the local 
business community, with the municipal councils. It involved 
all the business community and the areas affected. 
 
I would have to say that . . . All I can really say to the member 
today to reassure him is that there will absolutely be 
compensation. The only thing in question is the discussion of 
how much and the method of delivery of payment. But he can 
reassure the people in North Battleford at the exhibition 
association that there will be compensation as we committed to. 
And I presume that that will be resolved in the near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Effects of SaskTel Strike 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister in charge of SaskTel indicated in this House yesterday 
that SaskTel will save about two and half million dollars in 
wages for each month its Crown employees are on strike. 
However the minister also admitted that management personnel 
are being paid $50 for each hour of overtime they work. Using 
only a 28-day working month as an example, the overtime bill 
will total $2.6 million each month. Will the minister explain to  

me her math and indicate where the savings are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like 
to apologize to the House. Reflecting upon Hansard, I realize 
that I made an error yesterday where I said that the regular 
payroll was two and a half million dollars a month, where in 
fact it’s two and a half million dollars a week. And so I just 
wanted to make that correction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I say that you cannot determine ahead of time exactly 
how much overtime will be paid because it will depend on how 
many emergencies arise and how many hours are actually spent 
in service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the meantime, I do believe that when those 650 management 
employees left their homes on short notice, were deployed all 
over the province in order to keep the service up and running to 
provide continuous service to people of Saskatchewan, which 
two days ago in this House that member said that he had 
concerns about, which side is he on? He was concerned about 
service. Now the management personnel are providing service; 
now he’s critical of the cost of that. Which side is he on, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the minister’s 
numbers are completely out because in many cases we’re 
getting reports that two managers are riding together at one time 
in a truck  so that’s a hundred dollars an hour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal opposition has consistently stated that 
the number one priority during the strike with SaskTel 
employees is to ensure that telephone access to emergency help 
must not be jeopardized. Today’s Regina Leader-Post contains 
an article which indicates that technical problems knocked out 
the phone system at the Regina General Hospital three times 
before the outage was finally repaired early yesterday. Regina 
Health District spokesman Bob Allen is quoted in the article as 
saying: 
 

For some periods you could call locally, but not dial out 
. . . and no-one could dial in . . . 
 
We were actually without our entire communications 
system. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is apparent that there are problems and the 
emergency access is being jeopardized. How does the minister 
explain . . . minister plan to address the situation that is clearly 
putting people’s lives at risk? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, when the member 
opposite talks about the cost of maintaining the service in the 
form of wages to the employees, I wonder if he’s advocating 
the same as his friends beside him yesterday, of replacement 
workers, which is their vision  Alabama north in 
Saskatchewan — which is not our vision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



848  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

We respect the collective bargaining process. We respect the 
rights of the employees to take job action if they feel that’s 
necessary, although unfortunate. We feel the appropriate 
response in the circumstance is for management to do the best 
they can to keep the service running and to protect the integrity 
of the service of communications to Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is no laughing matter, Mr. Speaker, but when they talk 
about economies and they criticize two people riding in a truck 
 this is car pooling, Mr. Speaker. Would they want them to 
each take a separate truck? That would cost more yet. When 
they make criticisms, Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to answer 
questions in this House or anywhere about the rationale for our 
decisions, but we ask that the members opposite be consistent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wildlife Damage Compensation 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday a number 
of farmers travelled to Regina to meet with government 
officials to discuss the crop damage caused by big game. 
Following the meeting, the Minister of Environment indicated 
to the media that it appears as much as 200,000 crop acres have 
been wiped out, counting for at least $8 million in total damage. 
The minister also stated, and I quote, “We’ve never had the 
circumstance before with so much crop out.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, if the level of crop damage is as unusually high as 
the minister contends, will he agree that the equally unusual 
step of providing special compensation must then be taken? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for the question. With respect to the 200,000 acres 
of crop out, if I did quote that this has all been damaged by 
deer, this is not the case; only a small portion has been 
damaged. We gather there’s approximately 600 landowners that 
have contacted us, either with haystack, bale damage, and crop 
damage combined. There’s no real sure estimate yet, but we’ve 
heard anywhere from 3 to $8 million of potential crop damage 
in the fields. And until the crops are harvested we will not have 
a final figure on that. 
 
But as I indicated to the people, who I really appreciated 
coming in to meet with us yesterday, that we simply do not 
have a pot of money that we can dip into to pay out several 
million dollars of damage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Quoting from a 
headline in today’s paper, the headline reads: “Gov’t speeding 
demise of rural Saskatchewan?”. It appears it’s another step, 
Mr. Speaker, in that process. 
 
The Minister indicated to the media yesterday, that his 
government will continue to look at this issue and are working 
on solutions for future plans and for future years.  

Unfortunately, as the minister so aptly puts it, and I quote again, 
Mr. Speaker: “We’ve never had the circumstance before with so 
much crop out”, but the fact is the farmers are in need of a 
commitment for assistance now. These farmers’ livelihoods are 
at stake, Mr. Minister. 
 
We need to address the current problems, not a promise that 
will take place for next year or two years down the road, Mr. 
Speaker. Will the minister make a commitment today in this 
House to take the request back for a special compensation 
package to the cabinet for consideration? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In response to the 
hon. member’s request, certainly we have gone around this 
subject many times in caucus and cabinet. A number of my 
colleagues met with the landowners yesterday. We’re well 
aware of the situation. We are looking at a number of programs, 
which many landowners appreciate, for the coming year 
earlier seasons, increased bag limits, potential lure crops, and 
the establishment of a fund in cooperation with groups like 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. 
 
So we are doing a number of things for the . . . none of us have 
experienced this before, as the hon. member indicated. We’ve 
never had a situation with so much crop out, relatively high 
deer numbers, and a long, severe winter. So all of these factors 
did come together to create a situation we have not seen before. 
But again, as far as a pot of money for this year, we simply do 
not have several million dollars to provide this year for 
compensation. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Teacher Stress 

 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday at the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation 
convention, teachers identified workplace stress as one of the 
major problems facing our education system — stress caused by 
overcrowded classrooms and inadequate funding from this 
government for counselling, resources, and extra staff. 
 
The STF strongly believes the government cuts to education 
funding are hurting our children. Mr. Speaker, teachers are 
asking the provincial government for help. The problem is too 
big for them to handle alone. Will the Minister of Education tell 
the people of this province what plans her government has in 
place to help teachers to cope with stress. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. On behalf of 
the Minister of Education, allow me to make a couple of 
comments. One, there is stress in the classroom. There is stress 
in many occupations, and it’s not . . . There are stress among 
government workers. There are stresses among private business 
people and probably stress among our educators. And the 
Department of Education is trying to work with the school  
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

boards to deal with this problem. 
 
It’s not at all self-evident that a lot more resources would make 
the stress any less. Stress is caused by a changing world, a 
changing environment. Education is changing; they’ve got to 
learn to live with it. 
 
The Department of Education is concerned about it, is working 
with them, and is doing, I think, all that is reasonable and 
probably all that can be done at the moment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) has stated that there are 
over 40 teachers who were forced to take stress leave last year, 
and there are countless others who continue to work despite the 
stress they are under. Mr. Speaker, for 12,000 teachers in our 
province, there are only six STF counsellors. STF president 
Dwain Drew said: “We have reached a breaking point”. 
 
Will the minister tell the people of Saskatchewan, and 
especially the 12,000 teachers, why her government has stood 
back and watched the situation get so bad that our teachers are 
at a breaking point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Again, the question is largely 
repeated, and I suppose I’ll largely repeat the answer. The 
answer is that there’s stress in all occupations, this one 
included. It’s caused by a changing world, changing conditions. 
 
I want to just say in passing, that when we’re dealing with the 
question of stress, that we’ve been certainly getting some varied 
responses from members opposite. I don’t know if they caucus 
at all. You’ve got the member who just asked the question 
suggesting we should spend more, constant refrain from the 
member from Thunder Creek suggesting we spend less. The 
public servants and teachers are really going to know stress if 
you people ever form government and provide that sort of 
confused leadership. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  The government’s good-news stories haven’t 
fooled anyone yet. And I would like to point out, in their own 
public opinion poll released to us last week, the people of 
Saskatchewan confirmed what we’ve been saying all along  
education cuts are a very serious problem, Mr. Speaker. The 
poll states, and I quote: 
 

Almost everyone in Saskatchewan today thinks that the 
most important issues facing the province’s education 
system are generally related in some way to cut-backs or 
decreased program spending in this area. 
 

According to your own poll, people are unhappy with 
post-secondary education, downsizing, and the elimination of 
facilities, curriculum changes, high student-to-teacher ratios, 
and the quality of education. Will the minister please explain  

why the government is ignoring the concerns not only of 
teachers, but of Saskatchewan people, and still planning deep 
cuts in 1997-98? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  As I think the member well knows, 
there has not been deep cuts in provincial spending on 
education; there have been deep cuts in federal spending on 
education. I can see the member’s voice ringing with sincerity. I 
know that he’ll want to help. I know that you’ll want to join us 
in trying to bring some influence to bear on the federal 
government, who are the direct authors of the problem and at 
whose door the solution lies. 
 
So I invite the member opposite to join us in going to the 
federal government and doing what we can to stem the cuts to 
health, education, and social services in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Low Income Housing 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
attended a meeting in Saskatoon this week to hear concerns 
from many low income renters, and the Muttart housing units in 
which many of these tenants have lived for years have recently 
been sold to a Calgary firm. The new owners say that they will 
begin raising rents as of October 1 until market value is 
reached. 
 
Unlike Social Services’ tenants  and the question will be 
directed to the Minister of Social Services  who can turn to 
government for help, most of these tenants are on fixed incomes 
and they will not be able to afford higher rents. If they have to 
move at a time when there are already zero vacancy rates in 
Saskatoon, rents for everyone will surely be forced upward. Mr. 
Minister, has your government measured the financial 
consequences to your own Social Services’ budget if the 
shortage of affordable rental housing forces rents up? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m glad of the 
opportunity to respond to the question by the member opposite. 
Members of our caucus, including the member from Eastview 
in Saskatoon, were in attendance at the meeting which the 
member opposite attended briefly on Tuesday last. As we speak 
in this House, the member for Broadway is meeting with this 
group. The tenants in the housing complex, which has been sold 
by the Muttart Foundation to liquidate part of an estate, have 
formed a self-help group and they are exploring some 
alternatives of turning it into a cooperative, of changing the 
mode of ownership, in order that the tenants who live there, 
whose rent is now pegged to their income, Mr. Speaker, will be 
able to maintain reasonable and adequate housing for 
themselves in their circumstances. 
 
But I would add that if the federal government had not totally 
abdicated their responsibility ever since 1993 for social housing 
in this country, the low income renters in this province wouldn’t 
be in the situation they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



850  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think most of 
the people in this province are getting very tired of a 
government that has abdicated its responsibilities and 
accountability for the last five years that it has governed the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rental units are being converted into 
condominiums; rental units are being sold for private housing; 
low income units are being face-lifted and rents are being raised 
as a result; quality low income units are deteriorating because 
of an inadequate security deposit compensation. 
 
Now landlords have been telling this particular government that 
higher rents . . . or pardon me, the government has been telling 
landlords that higher rents are the solution if security deposits 
are inadequate. All of these things are warning signs, and 
they’re warning signs of an impending crisis. By refusing to 
work with responsible landlords to stop the erosion of quality 
rental units, and by ignoring the housing concerns of 
responsible tenants, it is this government that is forcing higher 
rental prices. 
 
Now I would like the Minister of Social Services please, to 
respond to this question, since it was directed to him in the first 
place about his own departmental budget. Mr. Minister, tell the 
thousands of people, the landlords and the tenants in our 
province, what is your strategy to avert this crisis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to respond to the 
more general question that the member puts now. And I would 
want to reassure her on the first point of the Gladmer tenants, 
that members of this government have been meeting 
extensively with that tenants’ association and will continue to 
do so. The Minister of Education is meeting with them even as 
we speak in the House, as opposed to a short visit by herself 
with those same people. 
 
On the question of housing for low income people across the 
province, this circumstance is not assisted  not assisted when 
certain landlords and their associations take irresponsible 
actions. It is our goal as government, Mr. Speaker, it is our goal 
as government to work with tenants, to work with landlords, to 
work with several departments of government, to strategize an 
appropriate response to the low income housing needs of our 
province. And there are needs, Mr. Speaker  there are needs 
 and we are, in the processes of government, working with 
the community, working towards solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just 
to correct the minister, indeed the landlords’ association has 
attempted to meet with both the Minister of Justice and yourself 
and it was the government that cancelled that meeting after 
assurances that it would take place. 
 
There are responsible people in this province. There are 
responsible landlords. There are responsible tenants They want 
solutions for quality housing in which to provide to people and  

for people to live in. And if landlords continue to sell their 
properties  many because they’re not prepared to subsidize 
inadequate security deposits  and if people who buy them 
continue to raise rents, your Social Services budget, Mr. 
Minister, is going to have to absorb higher shelter allowance for 
recipients. 
 
So please do answer two short questions. First, would it not be 
simpler to deal with the reasons behind the shortage of quality 
low rental housing. And secondly, would it not be simpler to 
deal with the security deposit issue, which is causing much of 
the problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I think the member and I 
will have a disagreement on the causes of the issue of low 
income housing. And I repeat, as the Minister of Municipal 
Government indicated to the House only moments ago, if the 
federal Liberal government had not pulled out of social housing 
across this country . . . Now the member smiles and shakes her 
head  the Liberals of course are embarrassed. What else 
would they be? Mr. Speaker, they’re at much of the root of the 
low income housing shortage across Canada. 
 
There will need to be further discussions about the matter of a 
security deposit, but the matter of the security deposit is not 
going to bring the solution, Mr. Speaker, to the needs of low 
income housing across our province from north to south. Nor, if 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, are the antics of certain former 
candidates for the Liberal Party who now head the landlord 
association. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 68  An Act to amend 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act  

(Legislative Utilities Review Committee/“LURC”) 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 
reading of a Bill to amend the Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act (Legislative Utilities Review 
Committee/“LURC”). 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 35  An Act to  
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

amend The SaskEnergy Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
discuss the amendments put forward by this government 
regarding this SaskEnergy Act. This Bill is short and contains 
few amendments. Still, the amendments proposed may have a 
significant impact on SaskEnergy and on the entire natural gas 
industry in Saskatchewan. I feel that some key issues must be 
raised in the House today before the debate is passed into the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the natural gas industry in Saskatchewan is 
expanding at a significant rate. A growth in the industry should 
create new jobs and, as the members opposite know, we are 
badly in need of job creation. Therefore I feel that any Bill 
affecting the industry in any way must be discussed. We as a 
Liberal caucus definitely don’t want any Bill to pass through 
this Legislative Assembly if there is concern that it may 
adversely affect the profitability of the natural gas industry, an 
industry that provides jobs for the people of this province. 
 
With the stifling tax policies of this NDP government, we as the 
official opposition must do everything in our power to make 
sure the industries that have set up shop in Saskatchewan stay in 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is part of an extremely important 
business sector in Saskatchewan. Amending the Act that 
regulates this industry has some stakeholders concerned, and 
those concerns are not unfounded. 
 
This Bill, for the most part, deals with TransGas, the wholly 
owned subsidiary of SaskEnergy. Currently TransGas has the 
exclusive right to transport gas within our province. With the 
amendments proposed in the above-mentioned Bill, this right to 
transport gas will no longer belong exclusively to TransGas. 
Mr. Speaker, the stakeholders we have talked to fully support 
some of the amendments proposed in this Bill, which chip away 
at TransGas’s exclusive rights to natural gas transportation. 
 
Maybe you remember, Mr. Speaker, that our caucus brought 
some of these very concerns to the public last fall. We were 
particularly upset that TransGas was increasing transportation 
rates to the direct purchasers of natural gas. This caused a 
financial strain on health care facilities, schools, and private 
businesses. Even at that time, I criticized the NDP government 
for trying to regain a monopoly at the expense of small direct 
purchasers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some particular amendments in this Bill 
which give producers more flexibility in field operations — 
more flexibility because it relaxes the regulations dealing with 
the transportation franchise in two vaguely defined situations. It 
appears from this Bill that TransGas will no longer have a 
monopoly when the gas is transported to a production facility 
from a gathering and processing system, if they are both owned 
by the same individual or corporation. 
 
The second situation in which TransGas will no longer have a 
monopoly is when gas is transported to and from a storage 
facility that is integrated into the processing system of a  

company. In our view, this is a step in the right direction. We 
see this relaxation of the franchise as an action to encourage 
more natural gas recovery projects by various producers across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
More importantly, many stakeholders in the natural gas industry 
are happy. They see the movement to encourage producers to 
do more gas recovery work in Saskatchewan as a positive step 
towards enhancing and promoting the natural gas industry in 
our province. They seem to agree that the second section of the 
Bill is positive even though TransGas is not giving up much of 
its monopoly to these isolated cases. Many projects that will go 
ahead with the new capability to transport one’s own gas would 
not have gone ahead with the current system. 
 
This is for the simple reason that TransGas has prohibitive rates 
that do not make gas transportation by TransGas economically 
feasible. Stakeholders seem to feel that constructing their own 
pipelines will be more economically feasible than TransGas’s 
current postage prices.  
 
Currently producers pay the same rate to transport gas through 
TransGas’s pipelines no matter how far the gas must travel. The 
stakeholders and our caucus share the view that the first part of 
this Bill and its first amendment seem to be somewhat 
irrelevant. The definitions have changed somewhat, and 
pipeline pressure is no longer to be used in defining TransGas’s 
franchise. But apart from that, there just is not much there. 
 
As I’ve stated before, we feel strongly that all Bills with 
relevance on industries that keep this province viable need to be 
discussed. This is the only way all members of this Legislative 
Assembly can be made aware of the impacts, both positive and 
negative, on stakeholders and the public alike. 
 
We would all like to see the natural gas industry flourish now 
and in the future. That is why we as legislators must work today 
to ensure that legislation that we allow to pass through this 
House will not adversely affect the private companies involved 
in the natural gas sector. 
 
We all want to see jobs created through the growth of industries 
in Saskatchewan. Whether it’s in forestry, oil, potash, uranium, 
natural gas, or any other natural resource, we all need to work 
together as interest groups, as stakeholders, and as legislators, 
to ensure that the companies that invest in Saskatchewan today 
will still be investing in Saskatchewan tomorrow. 
 
Not only will SaskEnergy change the way it does business, but 
so will all companies and individuals involved in the natural gas 
industry. And this will happen not only in Saskatchewan but 
across this vast country. 
 
We as a caucus have had some time to discuss this Bill with 
various stakeholders involved, and they are in favour of this Bill 
and its proposed amendments. We see no reason to hold up the 
debate on this Bill any further. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we have also examined this Bill and we find it to be mainly a 
housekeeping Bill. But we do praise it for the elimination of red  
  



852  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

tape and for allowing business to get on with the job of 
business. 
 
We see the main effect of this Bill as to clarify the definitions of 
TransGas and its transportation monopoly by removing 
references to specific pipelines’ pressures and changing it to a 
reference of the purpose of the pipeline. Obviously across this 
province, pipeline pressures vary in different services, and the 
definition of a high-pressure pipeline is rather an arbitrary 
decision, depending upon what TransGas is trying to 
accomplish at that particular time or what lines it’s trying to 
gain control over. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the Bill relaxes the 
transportation franchise, giving flexibility to producers in 
instances of transportation of gas to an oilfield production 
facility from that person’s gas-gathering and processing system. 
In a number of locations, Mr. Speaker, gas is transported from 
the production area to the same company’s, say an oilfield 
treatment centre, where gas is used to heat the oil or used to run 
compressors. In those cases, there’s really no reason for 
TransGas to be involved in that transportation since it’s 
basically an in-house thing. This will eliminate that difficulty, 
Mr. Speaker, and we agree with that. 
 
It also relaxes TransGas’s transportation franchise in cases of 
transport of gas to and from storage facilities that is integrated 
in a gas-gathering or processing system. In these circumstances, 
the company is producing the gas, storing it for . . . generally 
production in the summertime and store it for winter use. 
Again, it’s an in-house system and no reason for TransGas to be 
involved in the transportation of the gas to and from the storage 
system. It’s simply when that was occurring is another means 
for TransGas to gain some revenues off the movement of gas 
not only just the one time, but on a continual basis as it 
transports back and forth. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an effort, and a rare effort I 
might add, by this government to reduce the red tape to 
business. And as I said earlier, we applaud that move to 
eliminate red tape as it hinders business in the process of 
business in this province. And we would certainly encourage 
the government to do more of that rather than put impediments 
in the road of business. We applaud that effort and we know 
that the producers appreciate having this legislation remove the 
confusion. 
 
In general, Mr. Speaker, we do not object to this Bill and we 
acknowledge the positive effects that it will have. Of course it’s 
a particularly technical aspect in this particular Bill dealing with 
various gas transportations, and the clarifications of that, I 
think, will be needed when we get to Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have no problem in allowing this Bill to 
proceed at this point in time, and we would encourage the 
minister to come back with it so that we can debate the 
technical points that need to be clarified. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

(1100) 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 
Bill No. 34  An Act to amend  

The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his official 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Chairman, I have with me today 
from SaskPower, Dennis Felgate will be with me to help answer 
any questions the opposition may have. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to 
you, Dennis. We have a few questions on this. We recognize 
that this is a largely housekeeping Bill, but there are a few 
things that we’d like to have answered. For example, will there 
be any additional cost to corporations or to the general public to 
have the permits and notices delivered by the electronic system 
other than or different than what is currently the cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Chairman, the cost should actually 
be less if you consider the time and the convenience by using 
electronic means. There will be no additional fees or charges. 
The permit fee will be required to be submitted, and of course 
the cost of the fax transmission if that’s the mode of electronic 
transmission. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you. Minister, can you tell me as 
well what is the proposed implementation time line on these 
changes after the Bill is proclaimed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  We will be starting this year with the 
implementation, and it will be available to the entire province at 
the start of 1998, so it will take some time to get the entire 
province onto stream with it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Can you . . . I don’t quite understand what 
the problem would be to almost do the whole province 
instantaneously if we’re talking about faxes or electronics. That 
network system is largely in place. So what are the impediments 
to quicker implementation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well what seems like a very simple 
question got a little bit complicated because I wanted to 
understand it quite well; because I wondered myself why it 
would take until the beginning of ’98 to get the entire province 
onto stream. It’s not the same system as if you would fax a 
transmission to me where I manually pick it up and read it and 
put it into a process. The software and the system has to be 
modified at SaskPower to some degree because the 
transmission will be received directly into the computer system. 
And it will take some time to put the hardware and the software 
into place to accomplish that. 
 
The initial target area will be the Regina area. And SaskPower 
just wants to make sure  the electrical inspection division 
wants to make sure  that there are no bugs in the system 
before they open it to the entire province. 
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Well maybe I was assuming that there was 
something different implied here, but are these the permits that 
would go out to electricians that would actually be working on a 
house or a shop or anything of that nature? Is that the kind of 
permit we’re talking about here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, that’s they type of permit we’re 
talking about. Instead of the old legislation requiring it to be 
delivered by some means in hard copy, we’ll now receive it 
electronically without people actually having to handle it at the 
electrical inspection division. It’ll go directly into the computer. 
And because of that technology, it’ll take some time. We want 
to make sure that the system is operating correctly for everyone. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Now I’m really getting confused because it 
strikes me is, what you’re implying is that every electrician that 
wants to operate with a system not only will have to get a 
computer, will have to get this software in order to receive these 
permits. Is that what’s implied? Like, it seems silly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well if that’s what was implied, it 
would be rather silly. But that’s not what’s being implied. In the 
interim you can still use the traditional means to get your permit 
into the electrical inspection division. 
 
So if you were an electrician in Humboldt and didn’t want to 
invest in the equipment for the electronic transmission of the 
permit, you could bring it to Regina yourself. You could mail it 
by registered mail; you could send it by courier. And those 
traditional means are still available to get the electrical permits 
into the electrical inspection division. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  But I maybe don’t understand. If the permit 
is a piece of paper now, that’s delivered physically, why can not 
that physical piece of paper be transmitted over a fax machine? 
Why do we have to go to this very expensive, very elaborate 
computerized system, which seems to be a great additional cost 
somewhere in the system, when a simple faxing has been 
accepted in many legal quarters as a proper method of 
transmitting documents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’m sorry that I confused you. I’m more 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Be polite. I may have 
misunderstood the member. Upon the proclamation of this 
amendment to The Electrical Inspection Act, you can in fact do 
that from any area in the province. So that if you’re an 
electrician in Meadow Lake and you want to get a permit into 
the electrical inspection division, once the Act is proclaimed or 
this amendment to the Act is proclaimed, you can fax that to the 
electrical inspection division; it will then become a valid 
document, a valid permit for you. 
 
The other system I’m talking about is electronic transmission as 
well, which would go directly into the computer. So there 
would be . . . there’s actually in the way you describe it, the 
way you’re asking questions, there’s two additional approaches 
that can be used by electricians to get their permits into the 
division. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  But then surely when we’re talking the 
implementation time line, the fax system that you just described  

to me could be almost instantaneous rather than 1998. And I 
guess I don’t quite understand if the fax system, which I agree 
is very efficient and very practical because almost every 
electrician has those kinds of technologies available, why do we 
need the dual system? Like what’s the advantage of the fancier 
computer system that’s going to be implemented later? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I said to you, on proclamation of 
the Bill you will be able to do that. That doesn’t have to wait 
until 1998. Upon proclamation means as soon as this Bill 
passes, it becomes law. Therefore as soon as that happens, those 
that want to use a fax, can use a fax. What we want to do is 
reduce paper burden to businesses and the administrative kinds 
of burdens that are there. 
 
The Act that was just discussed previously, the SaskEnergy 
amendment Act, has the reduction of regulation and paper 
burden in mind for businesses in the Saskatchewan community. 
And it’s keeping up with technology. I think that businesses 
will be excited about being able to use either the fax system as 
soon as this Bill passes, as soon as you allow it to go through. 
And they’ll also be excited, I think, in larger electrical 
companies where they do have the computer equipment, that it 
will further reduce the paper burden for them. And because they 
have in some cases, the computer systems already at the 
sender’s end, it will be even a greater savings to them. And 
certainly the direct access into the computer is a savings for the 
people at the electrical inspection division. 
 
So immediately, you can fax it when the Bill passes. It’ll take 
some time for the entire province to get on to the electronic 
direct into the computer system, but no one has to be obligated 
to do that. You’ll still have all the traditional methods. You’ll 
have the availability of the fax as soon as this passes. And in the 
future, people will have the access of direct electronic 
communication to transmit the permit. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  In the computerized system that you’re 
going to build for the future, are you looking or considering the 
possibility of using the Internet connections that seem to be just 
mushrooming across the province and across the world? Is that 
part of your consideration in this new electronic transfer media? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The system that is being put into place 
for electronic communication certainly will be compatible with 
that in the future. In the immediate . . . because we are dealing 
with the Saskatchewan community for the most part, I don’t 
think that we get electrical permits from outside of the province. 
I don’t see an immediate use for the Internet where you wanted 
a broader, global audience. This is confined domestically within 
the province of Saskatchewan. The system is compatible, but I 
don’t foresee a use of the Internet into the system that we’re 
talking about. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  In the software development, there are all 
kinds of softwares from $69 software to 6 or $700 software. Is 
there any indication of what type of software, and more 
generally what the cost of this software may be for the electrical 
contractors that would want to install it at their end? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I don’t have a breakdown for you of the  
  



854  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

hardware and the software program. It’s an oracle program 
that’s contemplated being used. The hardware and the software 
combined would be about $500,000. There is no cost to the 
sender. The cost will be borne by the receiver. And there won’t 
be any additional charge. It will be picked up with the 
efficiencies of the electronic system. 
 
So it’s worked in through efficiencies. It will be a positive 
situation, both for electrical inspection division as well as the 
people who require electrical permits within the province. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  When we talk about cost savings and 
efficiencies, quite often and almost always that really means job 
losses. Are you contemplating or have you contemplated how 
many administrative or technical jobs that are currently there 
with the existing system that will be reduced in order to gain 
those cost efficiencies back that you outlined? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No, we don’t anticipate any change in 
the staffing component in the inspection division. There’s 
various roles. The division is getting up to speed with the 
technological era and we don’t contemplate any change in the 
staffing. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Then would you please outline where the 
cost payback will be on the 500-odd thousand dollars that you 
say have to be spent in terms of capital cost and that this would 
be recovered from efficiencies, I think you said. Would you 
please outline where those efficiencies may come from, if it 
isn’t people? 
 
(1115) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well it was found a short while ago that 
many people who require electrical permits were not submitting 
them. And the electrical inspection division now has an audit 
program, and the increased number of electrical permits that 
will be coming in through the electronic system over time will 
make up for the initial cash outlay, the capital costs for putting 
the electronic system into place. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Minister. That 
answers the questions that I had. Thank you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr . . . the Chair of the 
committee is I guess what your official title is today. 
 
I was interested in the comments and the questions that the 
previous member was asking, particularly dealing with e-mail. 
And I was wondering why you wouldn’t include e-mail into the 
system, because a large number of people are starting to use 
e-mail addresses through the Net, through the Internet; and 
since they already have the software in place to do that, why 
you wouldn’t accommodate them in that manner. What kind of 
an e-mail transmission system are you talking about that would 
not be able to access the Internet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I think you may have 
misunderstood me. I said that the system is compatible with 
electronic mail. It is compatible with the Internet. What I was 
saying to the member that was asking the previous questions is  

that I don’t foresee us getting onto the Internet with the system 
because our permit submitters, the senders of the permits, are 
confined within the geographic area of Saskatchewan and 
therefore not in need to get into a broader scope such as the 
Internet. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  But your department will have an e-mail 
address that people can call. So in that sense you are already on 
the Internet then if you have that capability. People will have 
your address and can then send it to you through the Internet if 
they so desire. 
 
I was wondering then, if since you have this capability now to 
use e-mail to submit your permits or to send the permits back 
out to the electrical contractors, what type of security measures 
do you have in place? What kind of fire walls do you have in 
place to ensure that there are no false permits applied for, or 
that the person receiving the permit knows that it comes from 
your department and not from some place else? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The oracle system is designed to 
provide that fire wall. Some financial institution will provide 
that service for us. It’s not yet been tendered but there are 
discussions with financial institutions to provide the actual 
service. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you very much. You 
mentioned hardware would be needed within the department or 
SaskPower to provide this service. What are the hardware costs 
going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I don’t have the breakdown of the actual 
hardware costs, as I mentioned to the previous questioner. The 
entire package, software and hardware, will be in the area of 
about $500,000. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  And what is your expected savings then 
if you’re going to spend $500,000 on this system? It’s obvious 
any savings from the contractors’ point of view is going to be 
absorbed by themselves, so the savings can only be handled by 
your department, you know, that’s the only savings you have 
the opportunity to gain. So how much savings is there going to 
be in place? 
 
You’re going to have to have a person who reviews the 
application for the permit, somebody who inputs it into either 
the fax machine or the computer for an e-mail system. So other 
than actual printing of paper, how much savings is there going 
to be? Because now you’re going to have, rather than the 
45-cent stamp that you would pay to Canada Post, you’re going 
to have a charge to SaskTel for the transmission of that 
information down the telephone line at least for a minute. I’m 
not sure how big the permits are, if they’re just a simple one 
page or if they’re multiple pages, but it seems to take about a 
minute per page to transmit. So how much actual savings are 
you going to have in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The projected payback for the 
investment in the hardware and to get the system up and 
running is a four-year period for the payback. 
 
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

Mr. D’Autremont:  What do you expect to be the 
elimination of man-hours to generate your savings? Man-hours 
and paper? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The man-hours, which we refer now to 
in state of the art language as person-hours, would be not 
reduced but more often used for other functions. 
 
As I mentioned previously, there is an audit system. Once the 
electronic system receives the permits, the function, instead of 
people in the electrical inspection division actually handling the 
paper, there will be periodic audits done to ensure that people 
are complying, businesses are complying, with the 
transmission. 
 
So there won’t be a reduction in the person-hours, but the 
function of what the people within the electrical inspection 
division are doing will change somewhat. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well they won’t have a piece of paper in 
their hand, but surely they have to review the application to 
determine what’s being applied for so that you can issue a 
permit on that. So you’re still going to have the inspector at 
your location at your department is going to be reviewing the 
application. The computer simply can’t say, well I’ve got an 
application from Joe’s Electric, and turn around and send him 
back out a permit to do . . . to put a blank in there and do 
whatever you want. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I need, I guess, to explain the 
system a little bit. Once the transmission is received from the 
sender, there’s not a permit that’s sent back out. You would . . . 
the electricians have the permits already. They’re sent out to 
them by the electrical inspection division, I believe, and we 
trust that they comply with the laws and the regulations. 
 
The repetitiveness of the customers is quite standard. The 
people that are sending in the electrical permits, for the most 
part, are the same people doing the electrical work  the 
electrician in towns within your constituency, the larger 
electrical companies that do large commercial work. So they’re 
people who are used to dealing with the system; the electrical 
inspection division is used to dealing with them. There’s some 
trust relationship built up. 
 
When the electronic system is all up and operating, there will be 
periodic audits done that are drawn from the computer to make 
sure that people are continuing to comply with the regulations. 
 
We trust the electrical contractors within the province. We have 
an audit in case there’s new people coming onto the system to 
make sure everyone’s complying. We feel that that audit 
periodically will be sufficient to make sure that Saskatchewan 
people who require electrical permits are in fact following the 
law, and we trust that the vast majority of Saskatchewan people 
are law-abiding citizens. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  So your system then, is not in fact . . . 
Issuance of a permit is simply the notification that a permit has 
been issued by the contractor to perform a duty at some place. 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  That description is correct. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you very much. You 
mentioned that this will be in place in 1998, that people have a 
choice until that point in time of submitting a paper copy of the 
notification, faxing it in, or e-mailing it in. Will that choice 
remain after 1998? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, that choice will remain, but we 
expect that the vast majority will use electronic means. But for 
example, if there is someone in a remote area of Saskatchewan 
who has not been doing electrical work or does not expect to be 
doing much electrical work, may have a situation where a 
permit may be sent in, and they would have the choice of using 
that. 
 
But we want people to have choices. And so the wide range of 
options that are there now, which will become cumbersome for 
the vast majority of businesses, will still be in place as well as 
the fax transmissions and the electronic transmissions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you very much. I believe 
that people across this province want choices, and we can 
certainly discuss other policy initiatives that this government 
has in place that would certainly deal with choices, but that the 
government seems to be most reluctant to discuss. 
 
How have the contractors reacted to this? Have they been 
asking for this type of a system, or is this something that was 
initiated by the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I think it’s almost safe to say that all 
contractors, all electrical contractors in the province, are 
anxiously awaiting the introduction of this system and the 
passage of this Bill in the legislature. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, you say that this is going 
to be more efficient. You expect a payback on your hardware 
and software costs in four years. What studies have you done to 
determine that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I haven’t done any studies. I trust that 
the people in the electrical inspection division are professionals. 
Some of them are very long-term employees. They know their 
business. They’ve asked for assistance from the supplier of the 
software. They’re a reputable company as well. I trust the word 
of the officials within the company. 
 
If at four years we don’t have a payback, then maybe you can 
raise that question again, but I’m very confident in the word of 
our people who are dealing with this system that there will be 
the anticipated payback in four years. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, if in four years there 
hasn’t been a payback, it’s going to be a little tough for the 
taxpayer of Saskatchewan to get their half-million dollars back 
because we already have the software and the hardware. 
 
Now surely someone within your department, within the 
electrical inspectors branch, has done a study to determine 
whether or not there is a cost savings to be had here, and that’s  
  



856  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

what my question is. 
 
Not whether you personally. . . I don’t expect you to do much 
other than sit in your chair. But when it comes to doing some 
determination of expenses and whether or not there are 
inefficiencies . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And not even the 
member from Regina Albert South do I expect to do much more 
than sit in his chair and holler, which is basically all he’s good 
at. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, has there been a study done, and if so, will 
you provide that study to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  ISM did a study. We’ll provide it to 
you. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I look forward 
to that study. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and his official for their answers today. 
 
Bill No. 37  An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act 
 
The Chair  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Chairman, I have with me today the 
vice-president of Sask Water, Wayne Dybvig, and behind me 
the general counsel, Micheal McDougall. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, and welcome to the officials. Mr. 
Minister, I have a couple of questions for you today on this Act. 
The first one, if the bed shore leases will be allowed for Crown 
mineral and land leases, why will they not be allowed for 
private and public land leases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  There’s not an anticipated problem in 
that regard. The mineral leases that we’re referring to, to find a 
remedy through this legislation, deals with mineral dispositions 
in the North. There’s a particular case where there was some 
jurisdictional concern with a mine in northern Saskatchewan 
where the mine actually went out into the water. What this Bill 
does is correct that. So I don’t think that private lands are at 
issue here. 
 
Ms. Draude:  What protective clauses are in place or will be 
in place to protect the environmental concerns with regards to 
these Crown water beds and shores? 
 
(1130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Everything is still subject to the  

environmental assessment process, and if there was a project 
wanted to proceed and they could not meet the environmental 
specifications or environmental concerns, the environmental 
assessment approval would not be given. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Are there any environmental, political, or 
financial impacts of this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Not really. There has been concern. The 
joint panel that looks at mining in northern Saskatchewan is 
aware of this; they are not opposed to it. The environmental 
process or processes that are in place, they’re aware of this. 
There’s been consultation; there’s no objection. 
 
If anything, in terms of financial there would be a financial 
benefit to it, a financial benefit to  in the particular case of 
why this Bill originated  a mining company able to mine an 
ore body, which in turn brings revenues into the province, jobs 
for people in the North, and hopefully profits for the company 
that’s doing the development. So the financial side is a positive 
financial side, not a negative one. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Since one Act has already allowed for these 
proposals, will there be any real, discernible impact on the 
mining industry by the implementation of this Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, there will be an impact on the 
mining industry in such cases where there are mineral 
dispositions that are overlaid by bodies of water where they 
may want to dam the body of water, move back and be able to 
mine the ore body. And so it’s a positive benefit where there 
could be cases where you might not be able to mine it because 
of the water. There’s full remedial measures in cases where that 
would happen, and once the ore body would be mined the water 
would be allowed to come back to its natural state. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m just wondering if the shores of water 
bodies, do they belong to all the people or just to the people that 
you grant the lease to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  In terms of this legislation, the shore 
bodies, unless it was on private land which this doesn’t apply 
to, it belongs to everyone. However the system we have both 
for oil and gas and hard rock minerals are mineral dispositions 
whereby the company applies for a mineral disposition through 
a process. There’s prospecting and claims filing, and it takes 
quite some time from the identification of an ore body until the 
ore body is actually mined if there’s sufficient material within 
the ore body to make it commercially viable. 
 
And so the shore line technically is owned by everyone, but 
sometimes there is temporary access by a company because 
they wish to develop something along that shore line. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Have you ever had a case where a company 
may be requesting this easement or this lease agreement, have 
you had at the same time a farmer who may also want this 
lease? Is there now an opportunity where you would have to 
decide between the two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well if the farmer owned the mining  
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

company I suppose it might affect the farmer. But I don’t 
foresee any particular case where what you described would be 
applicable. 
 
On Wollaston Lake there used to be a mine there owned by 
Gulf Minerals, and Gulf Minerals eventually sold it to Eldorado 
Nuclear. Eldorado Nuclear joined the Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation, became the company Cameco, 
which incidentally was just listed this week on the New York 
Stock Exchange. They had a situation where this would apply, 
where they wanted to take the ore body out into the lake, into 
Wollaston Lake. It was cumbersome because of overlapping 
regulations that seemed to contradict each other. 
 
This legislation streamlines that so that there’s no overlap of the 
jurisdiction from one Act to another. And as I said, they still 
have to pass all the environmental regulations, all the other 
hurdles that we’d have to go through. 
 
And I can’t see any application where you talked about, for 
example a farmer competing with a mining company for access, 
under the changes that we’re making. I just don’t foresee any 
situation like that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, this Bill, how will that impact on native reserve lands 
that may be abutting up against the shore line or on native 
entitlement lands that are being contested at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the situation as I see it would be 
that if there was a mineral disposition sought on treaty Indian 
land, they would have to make that arrangement with the Indian 
band that had treaty land there. And it would not be with the 
province that that would rest, so that would be a determination 
made by two other parties. 
 
Sask Water may have some involvement because of a shore 
line, but basically what you describe I think would be more a 
situation between the band and the company that wished to do 
the mining. And there would also I think be some concerns as to 
where the water body was in proximity to the treaty land. 
 
In terms of treaty land entitlement where there’s been selections 
made, it’s not the practice of the Department of Energy and 
Mines to issue mineral dispositions until such time as the treaty 
land entitlement process has been concluded, either with the 
land put into place or with the land not put into place. So the 
mineral dispositions in a case like that, if it was questionable, 
would not be issued, so therefore this Act would not be an 
issue. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Would this Act have jurisdiction on the 
reserve lands that may abut up against the shore line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  A couple issues. If there were 
jurisdictional questions, those would be dealt with before it 
would go to a lease. The lease wouldn’t be issued if 
jurisdictional issues could not be resolved. 
 
The issue of this particular legislation we have before us today 
does not apply to federal Crown lands, does not apply also to  

treaty lands. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to again thank the minister and his officials for answering our 
questions today. 
 

Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and 
Safety Act, 1985 and to make related amendments to 

The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Chairman, I have beside me today, 
Wayne Tiefenbach from the Department of Labour; and behind 
him, Jeff Parr, also with the department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and 
welcome to the officials from the department. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have a great number of questions to ask you 
in relationship to this Bill because we think it’s a very important 
Bill in terms of clearing up the uneasiness that many people 
have in regard to the whole radiation technology and some of 
those things that requires particular attention. 
 
One of the concerns that we will have, and I would just like to 
make notice now so that you’re aware of it I’ve asked the 
Clerk to distribute  the fact that we are going to propose an 
amendment in regard to regulations because we think, as a 
matter of course very often, that the devil is in the detail and 
regulations are something in many Bills that are absolutely 
essential and key to understand as part of the whole process that 
we as legislators have to be held accountable for. 
 
And so under section 12, I do make notice now that we will be 
proposing an amendment that will allow us to make sure that 
this Assembly is held responsible and fully understands the 
regulations in regard to this Bill for your consideration. I’m 
very much optimistic that members opposite will see their way 
clear to support that initiative. 
 
Section 1 . . . in section 2, (1) is repealed and replaced to make 
the level of radiation that occupational workers can be exposed 
to the same as the level of exposure of the general public, as we 
understand it. My questions are these: was this change made in 
a proactive attempt to ward off undesirable effects of radiation, 
or have there been health concerns on the part of occupational 
workers in the field of radiational therapy and radiology? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No, the motivation for this amendment 
to The Radiation Health and Safety Act is not one that was 
moved forward by a question of worker or employee or user  
  



858  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

safety. The whole intent of this Act is to clarify the 
qualifications of workers who are allowed to operate ionizing 
radiation equipment, X-ray equipment. 
 
And so this legislation, as far as I’m concerned, only deals with 
X-ray equipment and ionizing radiation equipment. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  In order to ensure that no person will be 
exposed to radiation over the new allowable doses, are there 
changes that are going to be required to the equipment that is 
currently in use? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The answer to that would be no. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I believe under the current legislation, 
occupational workers can be exposed to limits of 10 per cent 
above allowable doses for the general public. Does there have 
to be changes to monitoring equipment, or any adjustments, in 
order to make sure that that 10 per cent is not allowed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The answer to that is no. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I’ve got to go to longer questions. 
 
Section 6 has been repealed and substituted in order to clarify 
requirements to be able to operate radiation equipment. Under 
section 6(1)(b), a person can own ionizing radiation equipment 
as long as a qualified person is there to operate that equipment. 
 
If any person can lease or purchase this type of equipment, is it 
. . . can anyone own the stuff as long as they have a qualified 
operator for that equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  There are no restrictions on who can 
own the equipment — and you’re correct  as long as there is 
someone who is operating the equipment that is trained to do 
so. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  So that the . . . If, for example, in a dentist’s 
office or things of that nature, the owners of the equipment 
wouldn’t . . . it would not be necessary for them to have any 
special qualifications or things of that nature as long as the 
technician had the approved qualifications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No. If you’re a dentist or I was a dentist, 
I could own the X-ray equipment. If we’re not trained to operate 
it for some reason, we wouldn’t be able to operate it. We would 
have to have on staff someone who is trained to operate the 
equipment. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you. I understand in section 6(2) as 
well that the owner of the equipment must ensure that each 
operator is qualified. Are there penalties or things of that nature 
or things that would ensure that there’s enforcement for the 
owner to make sure that they have employed qualified 
technicians? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  If someone is in violation of the Act, we 
will enforce it. And there are penalties prescribed within the  

Act if a person is found to be guilty of an infraction of the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Can you share with us, please, the 
magnitude of these penalties? Are they related to the size of the 
equipment or the size of the physical operation that the 
equipment is installed in, or how does the penalty structure 
work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well it’s a safety issue, and section 21 
of the Act says that: 
 

Every person who: 
(a) fails to comply with an order or direction of an officer; 
or 
(b) contravenes this Act or the regulations; 
is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to 
a fine of not more than $15,000 and, in the case of a 
continuing offence, to a further fine of not more than 
$1,500 . . . each day during which the offence continues. 

 
Mr. Gantefoer:  And I understand that that would be . . . the 
owner would be the person penalized rather than the technician 
that would be in violation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  It would be the owner who would be 
penalized. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Again, under section 6, a person who is 
trained to use equipment and seems competent may operate this 
equipment. What are the demonstrated standards of 
competency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The answer to that question would be 
that, in consultation with the associations affected by this  it 
would be dentists and obviously physicians; the college of 
physicians and surgeons, likely  there would be consultation 
between them and the department to establish what it is that 
would be a person who has the qualifications to run the 
equipment. And the approval, once there’s agreement on what 
those qualifications are, the approval will be done by the 
department. 
 
You see, this is a good example, if I might allude  and I don’t 
want to say this as anything other than advice  but your 
amendment that you wish to submit to us is a very good 
example as to why this amendment is problematic. And I know 
it’s frustrating  it was when I sat in opposition  to not see 
the regulations and yet you’re approving something in a Bill. 
 
The Bill gives my department officials the authority to then go 
out and develop these regulations with the professional groups 
who are in a good position to determine what those 
qualifications are. So I hope that’s an answer to your question 
and some guidance on why the amendment you propose is 
problematic. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I don’t think it’s appropriate to debate the 
merits of the amendment, but I do want to say this, that I am not 
at all taking anything away from the necessity of the officials to 
make those kinds of negotiations. The concept here is that once  
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

those negotiations are completed, it’s the responsibility of the 
legislature to understand the full ramifications of the Bill, and 
while it would have some time considerations. And that’s why 
it’s introduced in terms of coming into force that we think it’s 
an essential thing to do. 
 
I’d also suggest that you could negotiate with these bodies and 
say standards that are set by these bodies as minimum levels of 
qualifications for handling this would be sufficient in 
regulation. 
 
I want to know if we’re dealing like with the College of 
Dentistry or the college of physicians and surgeons, or do we 
deal with the radiation technologists’ association? Is there an 
association or a body that deals specifically with the operators 
of this equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  All of those that you mention. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  In terms of meeting these new standards, 
then who monitors the training? That’s done through that 
associations on an ongoing basis so that as equipment and 
technology changes that the people are constantly upgraded to 
meet the challenges of new equipment? It would seem to me 
that this technology probably is moving forward on a rolling 
rate that may require upgrading. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I guess the ultimate responsibility 
for monitoring lies within the division of the Department of 
Labour. 
 
We would hope, through consultation with the associations that 
you’ve mentioned and I’ve mentioned today, that they would be 
of great assistance in terms of making sure that the ongoing 
safety and the ongoing qualifications are updated and in fact 
complied with. I would believe that the associations would deal 
with a dim view of members of theirs, for example, who were 
violating standards that have been developed in conjunction 
with them. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Section 18 is amended to acknowledge the 
establishment of a new association for certified lab and X-ray 
technicians. Are the association . . . is this new association 
going to be bound with similar standards and criteria as 
currently in place for other associations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The section 18 that you refer to, the 
association already exists. It’s just to identify a name change 
with the association. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  A new section has been added after section 
18 that deals with ministerial approval and issues of codes of 
practice. With regards to consultations with the committee and 
interested person that the minister may deem important, the 
minister may issue or repeal codes of practice. Are these 
consultation processes open to the general public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, I think it would be a standard 
practice. The government has put into place, upon coming to 
office, that did not exist before under the previous 
administration, a code of . . . a consultation code which requires  

us to do consultation when undertaking such contemplated 
changes. And I don’t think anyone on this side of the House 
would want to try and make any kind of a change like that with 
the ministerial authority that’s vested in us without doing 
consultation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Would the timing of this consultation be 
immediately after the proclamation of the Bill or before 
implementation, or how would that process relate to the coming 
into force of the Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the department has done some 
consultation already. A more formal consultation process is 
done as soon as the Bill is proclaimed and becomes part of the 
Act. And at that point it’s when the officials of the department 
start developing the regulations. 
 
And I don’t get involved in it until such time as they report back 
to me that they’ve done consultation  this is where there’s 
agreement; this is where there’s disagreement. 
 
Hopefully in a process like this there’s general consensus on 
what it is that the regulations are that are coming forward, and if 
in fact there is general consensus on the regulations that have 
been developed, then the process is for me to move it on to the 
Regulations Committee. The Regulations Committee then 
report it to cabinet and the regulations come into effect at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Section 20 is amended to allow for the 
maintenance of government standards in order to protect the 
reproductive health of any person. Current legislation only 
protects the reproductive health of women of reproductive age. 
Have there been complaints and complications to the 
reproductive health of men and women of any age affected by 
radiation, as they are not protected by current legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  It’s just to bring into line gender neutral 
language. It’s not been complaint driven or not been experience 
driven. It’s just a state of the art language, I guess. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Section 20(h) is amended to require the 
development and implementation of procedure manuals. What 
is the cost of this development and implementation of the 
manuals? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The manuals are already in place with 
the appropriate institution or governing body that have been 
complying with the legislation as it is to date. If there were 
changes it would be the responsibility of the individual 
institution to update their manuals, and I believe that in the case 
of the dentists, the dentists’ association would have a role in 
that. If it was in a physician’s clinic, the college of physicians 
and surgeons I assume would have some role in that. 
 
So each profession that would be associated with using X-ray 
equipment would have their manuals in place and update them 
as necessary. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Under section 20 as amended as well, 
which allows the Lieutenant Governor in Council to be able to  
  



860  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

establish categories of occupational workers and persons and 
prescribe which rates of radiation these people can be exposed 
to, what criteria are going to be used to establish categories of 
occupational workers, and what doses of radiation are going to 
be acceptable for each category? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  International standards are what is used. 
The change of the wording from occupational workers to a 
category of persons allows the public in general to be brought in 
to the limits. And I think that answers your question. If it 
doesn’t, please ask any further clarification of what it is you’re 
wanting to know. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I think if the answer is for these categories 
that there is an international scale or an international set of 
standards that we would then implement as well, is that the way 
it would work? And if that’s the case, then I was concerned 
about how we would find these standards  if it was done 
arbitrarily or internationally. And I accept your answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to thank you and your officials for 
the answers to my questions this afternoon. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
propose an amendment. Mr. Chairman, I was going to forgo 
giving a long speech about this amendment, and if the members 
opposite would like me to change my mind about it, I’m 
certainly quite prepared to do that . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Do you want the good speech or the short one? 
 
What I’d like to propose, or move, is that: 
 

Clause 12 of the printed Bill be amended by deleting the 
words “on proclamation” where they appear therein and 
substituting the following words therefor: 
 
upon consideration and acceptance by the Committee of 
the Whole of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of 
regulations proposed pursuant to this Act. 

 
I so move. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Rod, give us the weekend to think about 
this. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Oh no. This isn’t real difficult. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34  An Act to amend  
The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Bill No. 37  An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and 
Safety Act, 1985 and to make related amendments to  

The Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Department of Labour 

Vote 20 
 
The Chair:  Mr. Minister, will you please introduce your 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Chairman, I have beside me the 
deputy minister of the Department of Labour, Mr. Brian King. 
To my left is Noela Bamford, the executive director of labour 
support. Directly behind me, John Boyd, the director of 
planning, policy and communications. And beside him, behind 
Mr. King, is Jeff Parr, the executive director of occupational 
health and safety. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Welcome to the officials from the department. I know that we 
will have an enjoyable 45 minutes and look forward to the next 
session somewhere in the future. 
 
I guess the first question I have is sort of timely, and that is 
particularly the Department of Labour and the Minister of 
Labour, and that is how did you manage to cross the picket line 
outside the legislature this morning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’m not in the habit of crossing picket 
lines. My parking stall is not in front of the buildings. Some 
day, if you ever get to be in cabinet, you will find that you  
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

don’t park out front any more then either; you have a different 
parking spot. 
 
I crossed no picket line. I did enter the building, and the door I 
came through, there were no picketers present on my entrance 
into the building this morning or yesterday. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. I am sure that the 
employees will be glad to hear which entrance you’re using and 
they’ll rectify that for Monday. 
 
I guess I have some general questions. And first of all, I’d really 
like the minister to outline what he sees as a vision and 
direction of your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I view the department historically as 
being one to react to situations. My goal is to take the 
department into a direction for the future whereby they are 
proactive in the work that they do; that they try and promote 
good harmony between the workers and the employers of the 
province; to be a department that helps compliance with 
legislation; and as a last resort, if there is not compliance with 
the legislation that’s under our direction, to provide fair 
enforcement of the legislation for which we’re responsible. 
 
It’s not been an easy task. I don’t pretend it will happen in a 
short period of time. But we do want to take the department 
from one of being reactive to proactive, to serve working 
people, for the most part, and to have good harmony with the 
employers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  What are the specific public policy 
objectives that drive your department? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well there are various divisions within 
the Department of Labour. I can’t point to any one policy that 
drives the department. There’s certainly specific legislative 
statutes that we are responsible for making sure there’s 
compliance with within the province. 
 
For example, The Occupational Health and Safety Act gives the 
basis for the activities of the occupational health and safety 
division. And the person who is responsible for that that’s here 
with us today would be Mr. Parr, who is sitting behind the 
deputy minister. 
 
We also have The Labour Standards Act and the labour 
standards branch. The Labour Standards Act provides the basis 
for particular activities within that division. 
 
We also have a number of other areas. One I would like to 
mention, I think is the best example of where we can be 
proactive and provide a good service to Saskatchewan people, 
is within the labour relations and conciliation. 
 
Too often, I think, in the past, the department has reacted to a 
crisis situation. The labour relations and conciliation, I believe 
should be out there in the workplaces, working with employers, 
working with employees, to prevent situations from coming to a  

crisis situation; being out there in a proactive way to make 
better and safer workplaces for the working people of 
Saskatchewan; and having realistic goals in which all 
employers can comply with; and in some cases, unfortunately, 
if an employer does not comply, to have the teeth to enforce the 
legislation of which we are responsible for. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  When you’ve established these general 
directions and objectives, how are those objectives and 
standards communicated to the employees within the different 
branches? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well that’s the responsibility, first off, 
of discussions between myself and the deputy minister. We 
have to look at what is there presently, not only within the 
department but at the legislation. We have to look at and 
consider who the groups are that we affect in society. In our 
case, it’s mainly employees and employers. We then have 
discussions amongst ourselves. 
 
It’s then Mr. King’s job, as the permanent head of the 
department, to call together his managers and directors and 
work out a system whereby the employees work within the 
department to carry out the policies that we have asked to be 
put in place. And of course an important part before policies are 
changed or a direction is changed and the system is put into 
place, so to speak, that there should be consultation with all the 
employees by the directors and managers and the deputy 
minister so that there’s a fair degree of understanding, so that 
everyone within the organization knows the direction in which 
we’re proceeding. 
 
There’s nothing more demoralizing than for employees to lack 
direction, where they would feel demoralized or afraid to make 
a decision, not knowing whether they have the backing of 
people who are above them within the department or being 
backed by the minister in that case. 
 
So it’s important to have everyone involved in trying to forge 
new relationships, to be proactive, to protect the interests of 
working people in Saskatchewan, and at the same time to 
provide a good deal of harmony out there in the workplace. We 
try to accomplish that through discussions. 
 
And we know it’s not easy to move from a department that is 
reactive to a department that is proactive, to provide what I 
think would be better service. But I think that we’re working 
toward accomplishing that. In answer to your question, 
everyone has to be involved in this process, but there are stages 
that it goes through. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Minister, I appreciate the way you’re 
outlining the objectives and involving employees in the whole 
process. 
 
Is there a standard or a set sort of measurable criteria that you 
have to see if these objectives and things are being met? Have 
you established any objective criteria that actually determines 
from time to time what progress you’re making in terms of 
meeting these objectives? 
 
  



862  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I have some personal standards 
and I know that the directors here and the deputy minister have 
standards. If you’re talking about standards from what I would 
use for the employees within the department, when everything 
is working well and employees are happy within the department 
you know you’re achieving your objectives, at least internally. 
 
Your external objectives, to affect the employers and the 
employees throughout the province, I use as a standard there is 
that if there have been a lot of complaints coming to me as the 
minister, things aren’t going well. If the complaints taper off 
and there are not a lot of complaints coming to me, there’s not a 
lot of issues on day-to-day within the electronic and the print 
media, then I have to assume that things are going well. 
 
We also, I think, have some standards in whereby if you look at 
the stability of the workforce in Saskatchewan for example, 
Saskatchewan has less strikes than any other jurisdiction in 
Canada. We have a very, very stable workforce within 
Saskatchewan and I think there are measuring sticks, statistical 
measuring sticks, like that that we can use and certainly we’d be 
aware of within the department. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I appreciate that you say that we all have 
standards and we all do. I guess I’m looking for more objective 
measurement of the objectives being realized. Quite often that if 
you’re being proactive you look at the objectives that you lay 
out for a department or a project and that you actually have then 
a measurable sort of way of seeing if that has been met or 
realized, other than just sort of a subjective feel-good that 
everything is going wonderful kind of a thing, or waiting for the 
media, or us, to beat up on you. And the media seems to me to 
be pretty subjective standards, in terms of measuring if your 
objectives are actually being met. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I think feel-good is a pretty good 
measure. If people are feeling good, whether it’s in the 
workplace or whether in the department or my own personal 
office, if people are feeling good, things are going fairly well. 
 
But there are other statistics, and I know what you mean by 
measuring sticks. For example the numbers of accidents in the 
workplace. If we’re being proactive in the occupational health 
and safety division of the department, there should be a 
corresponding number of reduction of lost-time accidents 
within the workplaces in Saskatchewan. 
 
If you had a industry, for example the mining industry, if you 
put some emphasis on occupational health and safety and have 
success at it, you should see the number of accidents within the 
mining industry decrease. 
 
There are a number of cases whereby employees will feel that 
they’ve been wronged by an employer. They’ll make a 
complaint to the labour standards branch of the department. If 
the complaints are going up, obviously there’s some reason why 
employers are not complying with the labour standards 
legislation. We would then have to determine what that is. 
 
On the other hand, in terms of complaints by employees against 
their employer, we would look at statistics such as whether or  

not our labour standards officers are able to determine whether 
the employee has a valid complaint. And if the employee does 
in fact have a valid complaint and it’s monetary issue, does in 
fact our labour standards officer have the capability of 
recovering the money for the employee who has made the claim 
against the employer. 
 
So there are a number of statistical issues like that that we use 
as measuring sticks. And we can tell beyond just feeling good 
whether or not what we’re doing within the department is 
working, whether or not it can be improved upon, or in fact in 
some cases whether it’s not working very well and what we 
have to do to remedy the situation. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I note, Minister, that in your examples that 
you make a number of references to representing the concerns 
and the issues of employees. Do you also see your department 
as having a very important function in terms of looking after the 
interests of employers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well we have to be fair within the 
Department of Labour. If someone makes a vexatious complaint 
against the employer, in the case of a labour standards 
complaint, we would have the labour standards officer 
investigate. The labour standards officer does the investigation 
to determine what the true facts are of the situation that has 
arisen and then make a judgement as to whether or not the facts 
dictate that the employee is right or the employer is right. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Does the minister see any program or 
services in your department that overlap with other areas of 
government that could perhaps be more appropriately dealt with 
in other areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well we’re going in, in the fiscal year 
that we’ve just currently entered into, in doing some planning in 
terms of how our department is organized and whether or not 
we have overlapped with other agencies or departments, or 
whether or not there’s some better way in which to provide 
services that are currently provided through the Department of 
Labour. 
 
In regard to your previous question, we also have the 
conciliation/mediation that I think is fairly effective. And I 
guess it applies to both of your questions, in that the 
conciliation/mediation does in fact help both sides. It’s a neutral 
issue. It’s trying to keep a situation from getting out of control. 
 
We believe, and I think the vast majority of Saskatchewan 
people believe, that employers want to comply with the law. If 
an employer doesn’t know what the law is, and there are some 
cases like that, we first want our people to make sure that the 
employer knows the information, knows what the law is, knows 
what the regulations are, and ask for compliance by that 
employer. If the employer at that point refuses to comply with 
the legislation, we in fact will enforce it. 
 
But we firmly believe that the vast number of people in the 
province want to comply with Saskatchewan’s laws, and in fact 
do comply with Saskatchewan’s laws. 
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

Mr. Gantefoer:  In terms of looking at the efficiencies and 
the best way programs can be delivered, I appreciate an 
inside-department review that I understood is what you were 
suggesting. Have you looked beyond that to see if there are 
certain things that maybe would better served to be delivered 
through the Justice department, for example, as compared to 
your department and vice versa perhaps? I guess I’m thinking 
of a larger picture that would reflect more of the general 
government’s operations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  That’s a large part of what our planning 
process is all about. In days gone by, you would know that 
within the Department of Labour they had the apprenticeship 
program. They had the electrical inspection. They had the gas 
inspection within the Department of Labour, and the previous 
administration chose to change all that. 
 
The internal review we’re doing will in fact look at overlap and 
duplication and whether or not we can better serve some 
program for the province or maybe some program we have that 
can be better served with another agency or department. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. That sort of 
covers the general area that I’m at, and I would like to ask some 
questions later, but I can see that the Tories are very interested 
in asking some questions, and I’d like to give them the 
opportunity. 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
surprised that they don’t find estimates today to be of 
importance in asking questions. Perhaps they’re well on their 
way home to their constituencies. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, there was a set package of questions  
and I don’t have them with me, and you’ll know what I’m 
referring to  that have been asked in previous years in regards 
to employees’ in-scope and out-of-scope benefits. And it was 
standard practice to just bring the packages forward at the 
beginning of estimates. And I was wondering if you brought 
your package forward at this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I didn’t bring a package because I didn’t 
get the questions. I’d be more than happy to guess at the 
information you want, based on previous years. And I’d give 
you my undertaking that I would in fact provide that to you. But 
I didn’t receive a list of questions. If I had received a list of 
questions, I am sure that the package of answers would’ve been 
here for you today. So it’s either something has gone astray 
somewhere . . . so if you have the questions with you, send 
them over, and I’ll answer them. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Actually I guess 
it should’ve been a question more directed to the House Leader 
because this was an agreement of previous years. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, it had to do with the number of employees 
that are in scope in your department, out of scope; all of their 
benefits, their complete packages; the date of hiring; contracts; 
consultants’ fees; legal fees, and a description of what those  

fees were being paid for. Do you have any of that information 
with you today, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No one has seen your list of standard 
questions for this year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Excuse 
me, could we continue on the conversation and maybe the 
House leaders can get together a little later and sort this out. 
 
The Chair:  Order, order, order. I’d just remind all members 
that the process here is, questions will be directed through the 
Chair from opposition members, through the Chair to the 
minister. The minister will answer questions through the Chair 
to the opposition and we recognize one hon. member at a time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you for referring to me as an 
hon. member, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, through you to the 
hon. member opposite, we would be more than happy if you 
want to use last year’s questions and just give them this year’s 
answers. We can comply with that. I just wanted to make the 
point that we had not received those packages of questions and I 
would anticipate that we would have had the answers here had 
that happened. 
 
That information is readily available. I do not believe that we 
have it all with us here today, but if we had it all available I 
would provide it. I’ll give the member my undertaking we will 
provide it if in fact that’s what he wants. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  All right, then we won’t have to deal with 
that again. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I will ask the questions 
through you. 
 
Mr. Minister, looking on page 81, administration has risen quite 
an amount of money. Could you just give me a quick reason as 
to why that has increased? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The answer would be that the increase 
in that particular line in the budget is because other services, 
other functions, have been amalgamated within that vote. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. 
At this point I think I’ll pass a few questions on to the 
Conservatives or perhaps another member. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just have a few 
questions here. With the construction season starting . . . And 
my questions are more to do with SaskTel, but with the 
construction season starting and the SaskTel employees are 
often required to come out and find cable or lower cable in the 
case of rural municipal road construction and others, is there 
any contingency plan being made if this strike continues on into 
the summer months to take care of things like this, or will this 
strike hold up construction in the rural? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  That’s not really a question that I can 
answer through the estimates perspective. You’d be better to 
put that question to the minister in charge of SaskTel or 
minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
The only function that our department would have within a 
situation where there is a lockout or a strike is to provide  
  



864  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

conciliation or mediation or, in some cases, arbitration. And 
what I mentioned to the member who was doing the initial 
questioning from your side of the House is that we want very 
much to try and be proactive in Saskatchewan so that the labour 
relations and the conciliation branch of the department tries to 
spot trouble areas and get out there to prevent the situation from 
escalating to a strike or a lockout. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Chairman, then I’m not sure if I have 
any more questions for the minister . . . but is what I’m being 
told is really you don’t want to . . . you’re not in a position to 
answer SaskTel questions. I mean that’s satisfactory if that’s the 
way it is, but all of my questions are to do with the SaskTel and 
possibly the strike implications of. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’m sorry I’m not responsible for 
SaskTel. I’m not avoiding you. I’m not the person responsible 
to answer those questions. I could maybe give you some 
opinions, but I don’t know if it’s productive to the good 
functioning of the House in estimates. The position I laid out in 
terms of the department, that is what in fact the role of this 
department would be. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Okay, I guess the only counteract I would 
have . . . that you said your department reacts to situations, and 
I would call a strike a situation, and it’s a labour situation. But I 
guess with that, Mr. Chairman, then I have no questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Chairman, through you to the 
hon. member, is that both parties in this case know of the 
services of the Department of Labour. We, in a case where a 
situation has got to this stage, using the example that you bring 
up, we do not impose what it is that we have at our disposal to 
use. We have to be asked to come into it. 
 
The collective bargaining process can become very complicated 
on its own without having other parties imposing actions or 
other remedies upon them. So they’re aware of our role. Our 
department has not neglected its role in the specific situation 
you bring up, and we’ll continue to be as proactive as we can to 
trying to prevent situations like that from happening in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Chairman, then, for the minister, just 
one more question then. Is there a point at which your 
department may be asked to come in and try and get these 
people back to the table? I think that’s all our biggest concerns 
right now is to get these people back to the table. Would this be 
something that your department would get involved with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Yes, at some point the department could 
be asked for . . . and I list them in orders of the less severe, so to 
speak. It’s not a term I like very much, but it’s one that comes 
to mind. First off, the parties could ask us for conciliation. They 
could ask us for mediation. They could ask us for arbitration. 
And any of those three could be requested from either side or 
both sides. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, last 
spring I told members of the Canadian Union of Public 
Employees that pay equity was a woman’s issue and not a  

labour issue. I’m asking you if your department . . . if you’re 
telling me and every other woman in this province that 
women’s concerns should be dealt with differently and 
separately from men? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No. Your interpretation of what I said to 
CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) last year is a 
interpretation that has plagued me for some time by articles in 
the paper and letters by people who have written to me to 
inform me of my lack of knowledge on the particular subject 
that you mention. 
 
What I was saying to the CUPE convention was that the pay 
equity agenda does not fall within the Department of Labour. 
The responsibility for pay equity in Saskatchewan rests within 
the Women’s Secretariat which is an agency of the Government 
of Saskatchewan. I wasn’t trying to elevate or to lower the 
issue. I was only stating a fact that I’m not the minister 
responsible. The minister responsible is the minister in charge 
of the Women’s Secretariat. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I guess my main concern with that is the 
Women’s Secretariat is, I think, the second-lowest funded 
department or area of government. And it seems to me that this 
concern, along with many other women’s concerns, should be 
dealt with a budget that’s much larger than the few thousand 
dollars that they have available to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well all across departments, through the 
Crowns and through the executive government, there are 
movements towards pay equity, and really what you’re talking 
about is equal pay for work of equal value. Where the Women’s 
Secretariat would be responsible is that if there was actual 
legislation, legislation to be brought in to require everyone to do 
at a certain date, to do equal pay for work of equal value. 
 
So just to clarify that a bit further, there’s a job classification 
system taking place right now. It’s been completed in some of 
the Crowns. It’s at various stages in other Crowns. The first step 
to having equal pay for work of equal value is to do a job 
classification system. 
 
And you have to be careful as to whether or not you do it 
through collective bargaining or whether you do it through 
legislation. In Saskatchewan, what we’ve chosen to do is do it 
through collective bargaining. So all of the responsibilities for 
seeing something that people want to have happen doesn’t fall 
within the Women’s Secretariat, but the legislative 
responsibility would fall within the Women’s Secretariat. So I 
assure you it’s an issue that’s on the top of all of our minds. It’s 
an issue that we’ve been pushed to move forward in different 
ways on it. 
 
But I would point out to you that I think we’ve successful in 
terms of equal pay for work of equal value. If you look at the 
gap in Saskatchewan between what women earn and what men 
earn, in most years . . . well in all years we’re in the upper half 
of the other jurisdictions in Canada of being closer in the gap. 
In fact in 1994, I believe that the only province in Canada that 
had a better ratio of pay equity, equal pay for work of equal 
value, was the province of Prince Edward Island. 
  



April 12, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

And within Prince Edward Island, of course, you have 
industries that are traditional to no gender. There are industries 
there that are pretty well gender neutral. Whereas if you look at 
traditional industries in Saskatchewan, some of the very 
traditional industries such as mining, hard rock mining, you 
don’t see many women working in that industry. So that throws 
our figures out of balance a little bit. 
 
But I assure you that in terms of equal pay for work of equal 
value, Saskatchewan has a very good record. We should have 
nothing to be ashamed about in Saskatchewan other than 
continuing to work to make sure that people, regardless of their 
gender, get paid for the value of the work they do, not who it is 
who’s performing the work. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, when we look at the average 
salaries here in Saskatchewan then, are the average salaries of 
women substantially lower than that of men? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I think that where you should ask 
these questions actually is when the Woman’s Secretariat 
comes before estimates, and the minister would have those 
statistical types of things readily available to her. We can get 
them through the department. We have them within the 
department, but it’s not something that we would be 
traditionally prepared with to bring the information here today. 
So I would suggest, unless you want to keep pursuing it, that 
you wait until the minister in charge of Women’s Secretariat 
comes before estimates, and that’s the place to ask the statistical 
information. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Okay, that’s when I’ll ask it. But I just want to 
let you know that I don’t feel that having questions like this 
transferred to a different department . . . I think we’re all one 
group of people, and this really does concern me. 
 
Could you tell me what the ratio of female to male employees 
are, particularly in non-clerical positions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well I’ll repeat again. I thought that I 
told you we do have all the responsibility for equal pay for 
work of equal value, for pay equity, for ratios, for gender 
parities. But those statistical types of things  I tell you again 
 we wouldn’t normally be prepared to bring those forward in 
estimates even though we have them within the department. 
 
The agency that would come forward before this very floor of 
the legislature that would have the statistical types of things that 
they would normally bring with them without any forewarning 
would be the Woman’s Secretariat. For example  I’m trying 
to be helpful to you  is that if you would have told us in 
advance that you were going to ask those questions of a 
statistical nature that we wouldn’t normally bring here, we 
would have made sure we had the information here. We just 
don’t have that information here with us today. 
 
(1245) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Okay, I do have a question about the Minister 
of Education. Pat Atkinson said that she’d support the 
government setting aside a pool of . . . 

The Chair:  Order. I remind the member it is not acceptable 
to use other members’ names. Refer to the minister 
appropriately. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I’m sorry. The Minister of Education stated 
that she would support the government setting aside a pool of 
funding for pay equity. Is there a pool like this included in the 
figures for Labour for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  No. The Department of Labour 
wouldn’t have that pool of money. The money would be 
bargained separately within the different collective agreements 
within government. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to 
begin to go into some of the questions about your senior 
management personnel of the departments and things of that 
nature, if I could. 
 
And what I’d like to first of all talk about or ask you . . . the 
question is, would you please describe the senior management 
structure of your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Currently there’s a deputy minister. 
There’s an executive director of occupational health and safety 
who is with us here today. There’s an executive director of 
labour services who is not with us today. And there’s an 
executive director of labour support who is with us here today. 
Beyond that, there is the labour relations, mediation, and 
conciliation which is a branch or a function of the department as 
well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Can you explain to me the senior managers 
of these different areas within your department? Could you 
outline how many of these people would come with union 
backgrounds, either by belonging to unions or having positions 
on union executives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The only one of the . . . there’s four key 
people in the department, in my mind, besides the deputy 
minister even though everybody’s key to the functioning of the 
service we provide. 
 
There’s Jeff Parr, who has no labour background that I know of 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Have you ever worked for a 
labour union? Ten years ago Jeff Parr worked for a union for a 
short period of time  four months. Graham Mitchell, I don’t 
believe has ever worked for a union. 
 
Noela Bamford has been with the public service in 
Saskatchewan for 21 years. She is a public employee, not a 
union activist. Brian King has been a public employee. How 
long have you been a public employee . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . since 1973. He’s never worked for a union. 
 
There’s Terry Stevens, who would be the only person at that 
kind of a director level who has actually worked for any 
substantive amount of time. For many years Terry Stevens was 
a director  would it be?  of the steelworkers, which was an 
elected position within the steelworkers’ organization. 
 
  



866  Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 1996 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Minister. Since taking 
responsibility for the department, by your government in 
‘91-92, what organizational changes if any have you 
implemented within the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well that’s difficult to answer because 
organizational changes are ongoing, and they will be. 
 
I think it was in answer to your questions earlier this day . . . is 
that we’re taking a focused review of the organization of the 
department, how it relates to our client group, and how it relates 
also to other government departments and agencies to make 
sure there’s no duplication or whether or not there can be better 
ways of delivery of the program. 
 
So if you want to know something more specific, I wish you’d 
just ask the question because it would be a cumbersome task to 
explain organizational changes from 1991 until 1996 over a 
five-year period or so. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  I guess if we’re looking at specifics . . . and 
I note in the budget that there’s 13 full-time equivalents that 
have been removed from your estimates for this year compared 
to last year. Can you tell me what areas specifically then that 
those full-time equivalents are being removed from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  In answer to your question, I believe 
that there were 12 people. My officials inform me, 12 positions. 
Six of those were in-scope positions. Six were out-of-scope 
positions. And I think that pretty well all of them were within 
either communications or administration. In terms of the 
reduction in the number of positions, no front line service 
delivery people were affected by this. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  What kind of cost saving was resulted in 
terms of the . . . Your budget decreased. How much of the 
decrease in expenditures of your budget would be represented 
by these full-time equivalent reductions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  The approximate breakdown in terms of 
percentages . . . our budget in the department was reduced by 
about 8 per cent. We were obligated, I guess, to reduce our 
budget because we wanted to focus on health care, education, 
and social services where there were fairly large retreats in 
terms of the federal funding that was put into place. We wanted 
to protect those programs in health, education, and social 
services, so all other departments got decreases. 
 
Our decrease was about 8 per cent. Of that, 5 per cent of the 
decrease would be an employee component as the positions you 
described. The other 3 per cent to make up the 8 per cent would 
be other items that we had to form efficiencies in to find the 
total 8 per cent reduction. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker:  I want to wish all members a good weekend 
and particularly those of you are celebrating Easter with your 
families. Happy Easter to you. Have a good weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:56 p.m. 
 
 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 843 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 843 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 843 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 844 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Palliative Care Week  

Koenker ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 844 
Closure of Royal Bank Branches  

Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 844 
Focus on Trade/Tourism in Moose Jaw  

Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 844 
Langenburg Achievements  

Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 844 
Maymont’s Award-winning Centre  

Jess ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 845 
Ukrainian Easter Greetings  

Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 845 
Saskatchewan Aboriginal Tourism Strategy  

Whitmore .................................................................................................................................................................................... 845 
Ukrainian Easter (Velykden)  

Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................... 845 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

SaskTel Revenues  
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 846 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 846 

Casino Development  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 846 
Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 846 

Effects of SaskTel Strike  
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 847 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 847 

Wildlife Damage Compensation  
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 848 
Scott ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 848 

Teacher Stress  
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 848 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 848 

Low Income Housing  
Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................. 849 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 849 
Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 850 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
Bill No. 68  An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Legislative Utilities Review 
Committee/“LURC”)  

D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 850 
ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act  
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 851 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 851 

 
 



 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  
Bill No. 34  An Act to amend The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993  

Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 852 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 852 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 854 

Bill No. 37  An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act  
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 856 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 856 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 857 

Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and Safety Act, 1985 and to make related amendments to The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993  

Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 

THIRD READINGS  
Bill No. 34  An Act to amend The Electrical Inspection Act, 1993  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 
Bill No. 37  An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 
Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and Safety Act, 1985 and to make related amendments to The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Department of Labour  Vote 20  

Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 
Gantefoer ............................................................................................................................................................................ 860, 865 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 863 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 863 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 864 
 

 


