
























































June 20, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2913 
 June 20, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Privilege 
 
The Speaker:  Before proceeding to government orders, the 
Speaker would like to make a statement. 
 
Yesterday morning after having provided notice under rule 6, 
the member for Thunder Creek raised a question of privilege in 
which he claimed the Conflict of Interest Commissioner’s 
position on the board of directors of a corporation which had 
criticized him served to impair the performance of his 
parliamentary duties. I have had a chance to consider the 
member’s case as well as the comments of the Government 
House Leader and the House Leader of the official opposition. 
 
The crux of this case is the member’s confidence in the 
commissioner’s ability to remain impartial. The member for 
Thunder Creek stated the following to the Assembly, and I 
quote: 
 

I must be assured beyond all doubt that the commissioner 
will treat any matter relating to myself with complete 
impartiality. The commissioner’s duties beyond this House 
leave this in doubt. 

 
From this statement it is apparent that the member for Thunder 
Creek has a concern or doubt about the commissioner’s ability 
to perform his duties impartially. However he has not identified 
or demonstrated any present or past improper conduct of the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner. In order for a breach of 
privilege to be found, the actions complained of must constitute 
interference with the member’s ability to carry on his functions 
as a member. It must be demonstrated that the member has been 
obstructed or interfered with in his parliamentary work. 
 
The member for Thunder Creek has not produced any evidence 
to suggest the commissioner has acted improperly. What the 
member for Thunder Creek has demonstrated is that he has a 
doubt given the circumstances. 
 
The Speaker can only decide on matters when they arise and not 
in anticipation. For this reason, the Speaker has no grounds on 
which to deal with the matter as a question of privilege. I 
therefore rule that the member for Thunder Creek has not 
established a prima facie question of privilege. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his  

officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today, as 
before, is Terry Scott, the assistant deputy minister; Jack Zepp, 
director of admin services; and Ross Johnson, the budget 
officer in admin services. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I’d like to welcome you here, and your officials, this morning. I 
look forward to a long and fruitful discussion on the items in 
Agriculture for today and tomorrow so that we have an 
opportunity to fully review the agriculture in this province. 
 
We got off to a reasonable start this year. Crops seem to be 
progressing fairly well, although seeding was somewhat late 
this spring and I know that a number of the Liberal members 
have been out doing their seeding so they should be . . . doing 
their spraying, so they should be able to give us a report on 
whether or not . . . what the weeds are like and what the bugs 
are like out there. 
 
I hear that flea beetles are becoming a problem in some of the 
areas and some disease is becoming a problem, so perhaps the 
members of the official opposition would like to give us a crop 
report at some time today on what they’ve found in their field 
work. 
 
I’d like to bring forward though at the present time, before we 
get into the current circumstances in agriculture around the 
province, an issue that was important last fall and throughout 
the winter. Mr. Minister, there was a number of crops that were 
left out because of the late harvest last year. That may be a 
problem again this coming year because of the late seeding. It 
all depends on how the summer goes and the fall. 
 
But deer were a major problem. There was quite a number of 
crops that were destroyed by deer over the winter because they 
had to lay out, particularly crops such as lentils and peas, but 
there was also a number of flax crops that suffered severe 
depredation, along with a number of cereal crops. 
 
What provisions has your department made to compensate 
those farmers that had crop insurance that had their crops eaten, 
destroyed by wildlife, particularly by deer? And can you give us 
some indications as to where that . . . those damages were 
occurring, what localized areas were particularly affected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you for that question. The last 
year . . . When I heard the number, I was quite surprised. There 
was 198,000 acres unharvested, that laid out over winter. 
Which is very significant, specially if you’re the one that has 
some of those acres out in your field. 
 
And because of the cold winter and the abundance of snow the 
deer did pile up. As far as locale, it varies. There was no . . . 
like the east side of the province had a number of deer piling 
up, bunching up, and eating, you know, crops. And then there 
was spotty areas right across the province, depending on where  



2914  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

you were, I guess. 
 
But the wildlife people tell us that there are actually fewer deer 
now, which is a bit of a surprise to me because it seems as 
though there are more, but I guess the problem is that they’re 
bunching up and they were doing significant damage. 
 
What coverage there is, of course as you know, there’s crop 
insurance. Now the problem is crop insurance doesn’t . . . If 
you have a decent crop but you didn’t get all of it harvested and 
you’ve got 80 acres out, or 160 acres or whatever, and the deer 
move in, because of your other production, crop insurance 
doesn’t kick in. 
 
There is no compensation this year, as there was no 
compensation last year. I don’t think that’s right, and between 
the Minister of Environment and myself we’ve been working to 
try to figure out what we could put in place. 
 
What we’re working on, and hopefully can succeed in doing, is 
incorporating spot-loss big game damage in crop insurance so 
that those people who had . . . of those 196,000 acres of 
unharvested crop in the province, if a deer herd move into a flax 
crop — and deer like flax in the winter time — and, you know, 
destroyed 40 acres of the 80, then they could apply. They would 
have a claim for spot-loss big game damage. 
 
So despite the fact that there is no compensation this year, I 
understand there’s a problem and I think, I’m almost positive, 
we can get a spot-loss wildlife or a big game damage in crop 
insurance that will help these folks. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, that’s an 
interesting concept. When you use the term spot loss, it reminds 
me of spot-loss hail coverage. Under these circumstances, if 
you were to work something out with the Minister for the 
Environment, who would be paying for this, I guess would be a 
major question on this. 
 
Would farmers be able to buy insurance and therefore have to 
pay extra as they would for spot-loss hail? Would it be covered 
under their spot-loss hail claim, under their fees, their premiums 
that they pay for spot-loss hail? Or would it be monies coming 
out of the Department of the Environment that would pay for 
this compensation? 
 
I know that the Minister for the Environment has talked of 
providing compensation for agriculture for big game damage, 
and that compensation being paid for by a fee tacked on, added 
to the hunting licences in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, already the hunting licences in this province are 
too high, and that’s part of the reason why we have a large deer 
population. Because of the cost of the hunting licences, hunters 
are less willing to pay those fees and therefore spend less time 
out in the field and less deer are harvested. 
 
(1015) 
 
If that simply is what is going to happen here, I think you’re 
causing more harm to the problem than you are providing a  

solution to the problem. What has to happen is, because the 
wildlife of this province, because in particular the deer of this 
province, are owned by the Queen, they’re owned by the 
Crown, that the Crown has to bear some of the responsibility 
for the damage caused by that wildlife, not simply the hunters 
of this province. 
 
We all have the opportunity to enjoy that wildlife, whether 
you’re a hunter, whether you’re a bird-watcher, whether you’re 
someone who goes out and simply takes pictures on Sunday 
afternoon of Bambi running across the field. We all share in 
that resource, we all share in the enjoyment of that resource, 
therefore we should all be sharing in the cost of that resource. 
 
And when that cost includes compensation for agriculture 
producers who have suffered a loss because of incidents like 
last year where we had a long, cold, hard winter with a more 
abundance of snow than we have had for the last 10 years . . . 
the deer have congregated into larger herds  herds of up to 
150, 200 animals. They make very short work of a farmer’s 
field under those circumstances. 
 
A friend over at Moose Jaw was saying on the section next to 
him which had been unharvested, there was over 500 deer and 
antelope out on that field with coyotes circling around the edge 
looking for the weak ones. And certainly there are less deer 
than there were last year because of predation by the coyotes, 
also because a large number of them starved over the winter 
because they couldn’t get access to food. So we do have less 
deer, but if we have a good year this year and we have a high 
survival rate in the fawn population, we’ll be back to the same 
problem we were before, Mr. Minister. 
 
I think when it comes time to paying compensation to the 
agriculture producers for their losses, it has to be a system by 
which the entire society pays. Hunters can pay a share, 
agriculture producers can pay a share, but society also has to 
pay a share. So when you envision some sort of a compensation 
form, a spot-loss big game damage form, I think you also have 
to throw into that, spot-loss damage caused by migrating 
waterfowl. 
 
Most prairie chickens or pheasants or Hungarian partridges 
cause very, very little damage to any crop. I have not heard of a 
single complaint of large flocks of prairie chickens moving in 
and destroying some farmer’s field, but you certainly hear that 
about geese, and you certainly hear that about ducks. So, Mr. 
Minister, when you talk of a spot-loss situation for big game, I 
think you need to also consider spot-loss for waterfowl as they 
migrate through our province to go south, or in the spring when 
they come back again, because our crops that are left out in the 
fields will be just as vulnerable at that time. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when you talk of a spot-loss compensation for 
big game, hopefully you’ll throw in the migratory birds, but 
who do you envision paying for this process? How do you 
envision it working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think you made some good 
points. As far as the . . . I think your main point was, who pays 
for the spot loss. Well you’re making an argument that the  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2915 

Crowns pay for the spot loss. I don’t totally disagree with that, 
except that I’ve heard the argument that the Crown should pay 
for all the highways to get fixed, all the schools to be open, and 
there isn’t enough money. 
 
We have some options, and that’s what we’re exploring. The 
options are to have the farmer pay for it by working the value of 
the anticipated loss into the premium for crop insurance; we can 
have the Crown pay for it; or you can have the hunters pay for 
it. And I understand your point about the hunting licences being 
quite high. But those are the options that we’re looking at, or a 
combination of the three. 
 
The point remains that we have to have spot-loss damage, I 
believe. And that’s why we’re working hard to try to implement 
it. Because without spot loss  let’s forget about who pays for 
it  the farmer loses if you don’t have it. Now you might worry 
about the hunters paying more on their licences, and I’m 
concerned about that somewhat myself, but I’d sooner have the 
hunter pay a little bit more for his licence to ensure the farmer 
got his compensation for his wild big game damage. 
 
So we’re looking at a number of options. And you’re right, 
that’s one of the options, to have the licence increased a little 
bit across the board to help pay for this. And despite the fact 
that the licences are high, I think it’s more important to have the 
compensation in place in order that farmers might get the 
money they deserve, rather than not having it because we don’t 
want to increase licence fees. 
 
At the end of the day, I think what we’re trying to do is sit 
down with the wildlife federation and the Department of 
Environment and the Department of Agriculture to try to work 
this out. 
 
Now as far as the deer dying, that’s also correct. However, what 
I wanted to say was that I would like to see  and we’ve talked 
about this somewhat  all wildlife involved, ducks, geese, big 
game. And I think that might come at some point in time, but 
right now we still have the waterfowl compensation package in 
place, and we’re putting in the . . . we’re trying to incorporate 
the big game. And at some point in the future, hopefully we can 
push them all together so that farmers are covered for any 
natural loss by animals or birds. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
farmer who suffers a loss from big game suffers a loss equal to 
that of waterfowl damage and vice versa. So I think they both 
need to be compensated in the appropriate manner. 
 
When you’re looking at that compensation though, Mr. 
Minister, coming from the fees paid by hunters, I think you’re 
looking at an area of diminishing return, because as the price of 
licences increases, fewer hunters buy; therefore there will be 
less overall money going into a compensation package. When 
you look at the circumstances in hunting today, particularly 
dealing with Bill C-68, that’s already an incentive to remove 
yourself from the hunting scene. That means in that area there’s 
going to be less compensation. 
 
Who is going to pay the compensation, Mr. Minister, if at some  

point in time, there is not enough money being provided into 
the fund by the sale of licences? Who is going to pay that 
compensation? If there is a loss in that position, surely the 
Crown is going to have to then provide some assistance to that. 
Well why not provide the assistance up front initially, and that 
encourages more hunters to remain in the field to decrease the 
number of game animals that will be causing the problems. 
 
What’s happening in a large number of the areas where those 
problems developed is that there has been discouragements put 
in place that reduce the number of hunters rather than 
increasing the number of hunters to control and to harvest the 
game that is available. That reduction in the harvesting has 
caused the problems, has caused the large numbers of animals 
which have preyed upon the crops of farmers across this 
province. 
 
I’ve had many, many complaints over the winter in my area. I 
know that the member from Moosomin has had similar 
complaints because of the large number of white-tailed deer 
along the valleys there. The member from Arm River says that 
he’s had a large number of complaints. 
 
I’m sure that everyone other than the urban MLAs (Member of 
the Legislative Assembly) in this province have received a large 
number of complaints. And I am suspicious perhaps even that 
some of them will have received complaints, because I got 
complaints from people living in some of my larger 
communities; said that the deer were coming into town eating 
their trees, and they were quite upset about that. 
 
While I’m not quite sure that we can provide compensation for 
every rosebush that may have been nibbled on, I think when 
you suffer a significant loss, Mr. Minister, somebody has to pay 
the compensation, somebody has to provide the assistance for 
that loss of income. 
 
Because obviously, Mr. Minister, the farmers have no means by 
which to gain any income or any compensation from wildlife 
itself. If the wildlife department was to issue every farmer 10 
licences that he turn around and sell and generate some income 
off of it, then perhaps they would be less upset and more in tune 
to allowing wildlife to continue. 
 
What happens, Mr. Minister, if no compensation is to be paid, 
farmers will take matters into their own hands and will simply 
eliminate any bush on their lands in which wildlife can survive. 
That not only has a very, very severe impact on white-tailed 
deer but on every other living creature that would normally 
inhabit those potholes and that brush, Mr. Minister. And I don’t 
think any of us want to see that kind of incident happening 
across this province. 
 
There’s been too much bush pushed already for anyone’s good. 
The fact is we see a large number of people out there pushing 
their bush and then turning around planting trees in long, skinny 
rows which do not encourage much wildlife. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think what has to be done in this particular 
case is the Crown has to provide at least some of the 
compensation if not all of the compensation to support the  



2916  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

agriculture in this province. Because when hunting stops — as 
is Allan Rock’s full intention in his Bill C-68, the intention of a 
large number of urban groups in the major metropolitan centres 
of this country: Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver — when that 
happens, Mr. Minister, who will provide the compensation to 
agriculture for the ever-growing depredations by wildlife on the 
crops of farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well first of all I want to say that any 
increase to a licence fee for a hunter would be very, very small 
compared to the cost of hunting. And I understand what you’re 
saying. I mean I hear others complain as well. But the fact of 
the matter remains that the few dollars it would cost to increase 
a licence fee for a hunter would be of tremendous benefit to the 
farmer who suffered a loss because of wildlife or big game 
damage. 
 
Now as to who pays the compensation? If your theory is right, 
that any increase in the cost of licence is going to diminish the 
participation to such a level that you won’t raise enough money 
to compensate farmers, well then we’ll have to look at some 
other method of payment. 
 
Now as I said before, the Crown can pay — the taxpayers can 
pay; farmers can pay in the premium; or hunters can pay with 
their licence fees, or a combination of that. But the underlying 
fact here is that we, I believe, that we have to compensate 
farmers for loss due to wild game, due to big game. 
 
And on that premiss, I don’t know where the money is going to 
come from if your theory is right, but I know the money will be 
there because it has to be there, it has to be there. And it will be 
there  whether it’s through taxpayers’ dollars, through big 
game licence fees, or through the farmer themselves paying a 
little bit higher premium. 
 
Because spot loss also could be optional. If you want to have 
premium for the farmer then you’d have to say, well do you 
want to pay, you know, 2 or 3 per cent more for your premium 
in order to be covered for spot-loss wildlife and big game, or 
don’t you? And then the farmer can make his decision. 
 
Like all these things are wide open. Right now we’re looking at 
those three areas, and we believe though that farmers have to be 
compensated because in the last few years there’s just too much 
damage being caused. So we have to make sure that there’s 
compensation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. When 
you look at the cost of hunting licences today, you’re looking at 
a fee of $11 for a wildlife habitat. In all likelihood that is the 
area in which you would tack on a big-game compensation fee. 
Deer licences are $33. Draw licences for elk and moose are 
either 38 or 55. 
 
And then you have bear that are also a problem. Bear really do 
love oats and they go into your oat field, gather the oats up into 
a bundle and eat the heads off of them. And it’s not like they’re 
munching up all the leaves; they simply eat the productive part 
of the oat that the farmer needs to sell. 
 

So I think you’re going to see, if you raise those fees very 
much, you’re not going to affect the urban hunter who wants to 
go out to my area 160 miles out of Regina and go hunting for a 
week. You’re not going to affect the American hunter coming 
up to hunt in the forest areas or the forest fringe areas of this 
province who is already spending a couple of thousand dollars 
to come and visit. 
 
But the person that you’re going to affect, Mr. Minister, by 
raising these fees, is the guy who goes out and stands on his 
back porch and shoots a deer, who does not spend a large 
amount of money but is simply providing meat for his table. 
That’s the person who will no longer buy that licence when 
those fees go up. They’re already in the position where a 
number of them have stopped buying licences because the fees 
have gone from $20 to 33. Or when I was younger and hunting, 
the fees were $5. 
 
(1030) 
 
Those fees have increased very dramatically. And I’m not that 
old, Mr. Minister, so it wasn’t that many years ago . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I know that the minister for Gaming 
there disputes that fact, but I won’t make too many comments 
on that area other than to put her on notice that my comments 
do go out over the air, and she will have to stand up and answer 
questions in agriculture if she wants to be able to rebut. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I believe that there is . . . that you should be 
concerned and the minister for the Environment should be 
concerned, that if you raised the fees too dramatically that 
hunting numbers will decline. I’m not going to say that all of 
those hunters will no longer be taking deer because I suspect 
that some of them will continue to do so, but they will do so 
without providing the Crown with the proper compensation for 
enjoying that resource. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think you have to have a plan in place, and 
you might as well have that in place up front rather than having 
it be after the fact that the Crown will have to share in the 
compensation. 
 
Farmers can buy insurance today for hail because no one has 
control of that. Nobody can say, well you’re going to have hail 
this year or you’re not going to have hail this year, but the 
government has some ability  limited perhaps  but some 
ability to regulate the numbers of wildlife. You have that ability 
by the number of licences you issue for sale for the 
management of that resource. So the government does have 
some control of it. When a hail cloud develops, when hail is 
present, nobody benefits. Nobody is receiving any 
compensation in any way shape or form for that hail. But with 
wildlife the government is receiving compensation. The 
government is receiving an income from that wildlife, from that 
resource. So the government has to be prepared to share some 
of that income with the producers who are being harmed by 
this. 
 
If my neighbour’s cattle, Mr. Minister, get into my crop and eat 
it, I have some recourses. I have some avenues to get 
compensation. I can go to court because my neighbour’s cows  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2917 

are in my crop and destroy it. 
 
But when the Queen’s cows are in my crop, I have no recourse. 
I can’t turn around and sue the government to say, your cows 
are eating my crop and therefore you have to pay me 
compensation. So the government has to be prepared to provide 
that compensation up front, Mr. Minister. 
 
I believe at one point there was compensation for big game 
damage in this province under The Crop Insurance Act. That 
compensation was eliminated by your government a couple or 
three years ago, perhaps about 1992, I believe. And that needs 
to be reconsidered, that needs to be put back in place, and that 
needs to be funded in whole, or at least a significant portion, by 
the Minister of Finance from the Crown. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I don’t disagree that it has to be 
funded. I’m telling you it will be funded. We’ve had talks with 
the wildlife federation, who are very helpful in understanding 
the problem and helpful to us to find a solution. The wildlife 
federation has . . . we’ve talked about the option of increasing 
fees to cover some loss  with some trade-offs. I mean there’s 
some other things that the wildlife federation want the 
government to do and maybe we can work some deals out. 
 
The fact of the matter remains, and I won’t make a long speech 
here, but the fact of the matter remains that we are going to 
compensate somehow farmers for wildlife, for big game 
damage. I think spot-loss big game is the only way to go, 
because we can’t, with the number of acres that are left out 
every year . . . this year was fairly high, but there’s crop left out 
every year. And the farmer has to be able to receive 
compensation for loss from elk or deer damage. 
 
So all I can say is that I hope to be in the position, with the 
Minister of Environment . . . in fact, the Department of 
Environment has taken the lead on this. They work very closely 
with the wildlife federation, done good work, I think. And I 
hope to be able to make an announcement in the next little 
while on this program. 
 
And where the funding comes from is important, but the only 
thing I disagree with you in that, is you say, as the Liberals say 
time and time and time again, well just put more money into it, 
just take more taxpayers’ money and do this. Well we can do 
that. I’m not going to rerun the ‘80s here, but we took 
taxpayers’ money in the ‘80s, and then some, to do a lot of 
things. At the end of the day we ended up with $860 million of 
debt. 
 
So what we’re trying to do now is provide compensation for 
farmers without increasing the tax burden for the general public 
and without increasing the debt. That’s why we sit down with 
the Department of Environment and sat down with the wildlife 
federation and said, okay folks, we’ve got a problem here, how 
are we going to fix it. I think we’ve had great negotiations and I 
think that everybody understands and believes and is 
contributing to a solution of having spot loss. 
 
Now I say I agree with everything you say except the fact that 
you just can’t keep saying, let the taxpayers pay for it. I mean  

taxpayers are taxed up to here; they’re taxed to the max. And 
we’re not going to increase taxes to pay for spot-loss wildlife, 
to pay for, you know, name your area. 
 
So I think at the end of the day we agree, but we just sort of 
disagree a bit on whether or not we should be increasing taxes 
to provide compensation. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, when it comes to 
paying the compensation, I think those who benefit from it 
should be paying. And those that benefit directly from wildlife 
is the government. They are the ones who receive the financial 
remunerations from the sale of licences. They are the ones who 
get the tax money from the tourists coming into this province to 
look at our wildlife. They are the ones who collect the fuel taxes 
and the alcohol taxes and the hotel taxes and the food taxes and 
whatever, Mr. Minister, from the tourists from outside of this 
province, outside of this country, that come in to enjoy the 
bounty of our resource. 
 
It’s the government, and only the government, who receives the 
compensation, Mr. Minister, and therefore it should be the 
government and society that helps to pay for the compensation 
and the maintenance of that resource. 
 
You say that because of some of the things that happened 
during the ‘80s we don’t have the money today to provide that 
compensation. Well, Mr. Minister, a large number of the 
programs that were put in place under your previous 
administration in the 1970s were very expensive programs that 
were carried on in the 1980s at a time when world prices were 
declining in most of the production of Saskatchewan. 
 
As a farmer you well know what happened to the prices of grain 
in the 1970s and what happened to the price of grain in the 
1980s. We went from 5, $6 dollar wheat down to $2 wheat. 
You take a reduction of that kind of scenario and you create a 
great deal of hardship across this province. 
 
And the government of the 1980s tried to assist farmers to 
remain in place on their land, as some of your past colleagues in 
the House were certainly encouraging them to do so, such as 
rural farm coalitions, Mr. Minister, that were demanding that 
the government support small farmers to remain on the land. 
And that government responded to those demands and assisted. 
 
When you look at other prices throughout the 1970s  oil 
prices increased up to $40 a barrel, Mr. Minister, in the 1970s 
and dropped back down to $15 in the 1980s. Nothing to do with 
the Government of Saskatchewan, but certainly the Government 
of Saskatchewan suffered the economic income and the impact 
of that reduction. Same with potash prices, Mr. Minister  
high prices in the ‘70s, low prices in the ‘80s, and a return to 
higher prices today. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the governments of the 1980s did what they 
had to do to preserve the rural Saskatchewan way of life and 
indeed the economy of Saskatchewan to the best of their 
abilities. 
 
But that doesn’t address the issue of wildlife compensation  



2918  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

today. It may address your desire not to provide compensation 
from the coffers of Saskatchewan but it certainly doesn’t help 
to address the issue. The Government of Saskatchewan, as I 
said earlier, is the only ones who is benefiting economically 
from wildlife in this province. 
 
Certainly outfitters do gain some economic benefit; certainly 
hotels and gas stations gain some economic benefit. But that 
benefit is in turn passed on to the Government of Saskatchewan 
through taxes, either direct taxation such as fuel taxes, or 
indirect taxes such as property taxes and income taxes, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So since only one party  only one party  is benefiting 
financially, and that being the government, that is the only 
party, Mr. Minister, that has the financial wherewithal to pay 
the compensation that is needed for farmers. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, it’s up to you to convince both the minister 
for the Environment and the Finance minister to provide some 
of that compensation, because we’re not, and I admit, we’re not 
talking small dollars here, Mr. Minister. There is a significant 
amount of dollars that is going to be needed. 
 
And I would like to read to you from a letter that says: 
 

Ladies and gentlemen, my name is Bruce Dunsmore. I 
farm along with my son and son-in-law, approximately 
9,000 acres in the Rocanville area. 
 

Which is in my colleague for Moosomin’s constituency. And 
perhaps the minister for the Environment is also aware of these 
circumstances because he doesn’t live that far away, and may 
indeed even know some of these people. 
 

Over the past five years I estimate I have lost $5 per acre 
on 8,000 acres of crop for a total of $40,000 a year, which 
we feel is a very conservative figure. For example, this past 
year we had 1,000 acres of peas, 800 of which was hailed 
100 per cent. 
 

Well hopefully this gentlemen had crop insurance and hail 
insurance on that crop. 
 

Of the remaining 200 acres at least 40 per cent were taken 
by white-tailed deer, for a loss of 8,000 bushels times 40 
per cent, or 3,200 bushels at $6 a bushel, or $19,200. 
 

That’s $19,000 on only 200 acres. Mr. Dunsmore goes on to say 
that: 
 

I realize deer love peas; however, do we have to jeopardize 
our cropping program just because we’re overrun with 
deer? 

 
So I think here is an example, Mr. Minister, of a very 
significant amount of money that is being lost by a farmer 
because of wildlife predation upon their crops. 
 
The gentleman in question here suffered a major loss because 
of hail. That was an act of God. The deer though, Mr. Minister,  

are the responsibility of your government, of the Minister of the 
Environment, and it’s his responsibility and your responsibility 
to ensure that those who suffer losses when you’re making 
economic gains on this resource, receive some of the 
compensation that is needed. 
 
Mr. Dunsmore goes on to say: 
 

There were at least 50 to 60 deer shot on that 100 acres by 
black powder, season hunters, and other means. When this 
was brought up to the local wardens their answer was: you 
know deer like peas, you should have sown something 
different. 

 
Well I think the farmers of this province, Mr. Minister, should 
be allowed, should have the option, and the right indeed, to 
grow whatever crops they feel are most appropriate for their 
land, for their rotation and for their own economic benefit. 
After all, if farmers of this province don’t make a profit, we 
certainly won’t have farmers for very long. 
 
And our grocery stores, while most people in the cities may 
believe that all food, milk, chickens, beef, whatever, comes 
from grocery stores and not think any more of it than that, 
certainly those of us from rural Saskatchewan understand very 
clearly that if you’re going to have food in the grocery store, a 
farmer some place has to produce it. 
 
And unless we’re prepared to pay compensation to these 
farmers, unless we’re prepared to allow these farmers to make a 
profit on their lands, to make their own management decisions, 
they’re not going to be there and we’re not going to have the 
food in our grocery stores. 
 
Mr. Dunsmore goes on to say: 
 

This $40,000 per year we are losing is bottom-line money. 
Our costs to grow these crops will remain the same, deer or 
no deer. I say if you don’t want to accept responsibility for 
the province’s deer and pay farmers a reasonable sum for 
our losses, then we will have no choice but to look after 
the problem ourselves. 
 
I feel we are totally in the right to demand damage 
payments for our losses. 
 

That’s one letter, Mr. Minister, from one farmer who is very 
upset about these circumstances, who believes that he has 
suffered a loss of approximately $40,000 a year of deer damage 
over the past five years, for a total of $200,000. And, Mr. 
Minister, farmers can’t remain on the land and continue to 
suffer those kinds of losses, particularly when your government 
is benefiting financially from these deer. 
 
When you look at 100 animals taken on that one 200-acre piece 
alone, Mr. Minister, you’re looking at the Minister of 
Environment getting a significant amount of income off of that 
 100 times $44 is . . . you’re looking at $4,400, Mr. Minister. 
Not enough to pay the compensation in this particular case . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. Order. To bring the members of  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2919 

the Chamber’s attention to Beauchesne’s, paragraph 336, to 
attempt to discourage loud conversations in the Chamber and 
have those wishing to carry on such exchanges to do so outside. 
 
There’s a real roar in here that we’re having a great deal of 
difficulty hearing what’s going on. So I would ask the members 
to, no better way to put it than, to quieten down, please. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can speak 
fairly loudly but even I was getting drowned out by the noise. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think that it’s important that you and your 
government seriously reconsider your proposals on the spot-loss 
big game damage and that the society, therefore the 
government, needs to pay a significant portion of that 
compensation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I don’t want to go into a lecture about 
this whole thing, but I want the member to understand . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . He wants me to lecture him; well I 
could do that. 
 
Who is the government? You keep saying, the government, the 
government should pay. Who is the government? Who is the 
government? The government is the taxpayers. 
 
So I think you have to just take that little next step and don’t 
just say the government like it’s the government in power’s 
problem. It’s the taxpayers, it’s the taxpayers who have to foot 
the bill at the end of the day  for roads or schools or hospitals 
or whatever. Same thing for compensation. So I don’t think you 
can just say, well the government should pay, because what 
you’re saying then is the taxpayer should pay. I think, I happen 
to think, the taxpayers have paid enough. They’re taxed to the 
maximum. 
 
(1045) 
 
And I won’t say anything else except to say that just for your 
information  maybe you know this  the wildlife federation 
has passed a resolution indicating that they think that increasing 
the fees to hunters marginally in order to pay for compensation 
is a good thing. I mean all I’m doing is repeating to you what 
their decision was, and I think that they understand the taxpayer 
is taxed to the max right now. So when the wildlife federation 
say it’s okay, I think it’s okay. 
 
Will there be some unhappy hunters if the fees go up? 
Absolutely. But when you’re hunting, what’s the licence in 
relationship to the cost of hunting? I don’t know if you’re a 
hunter, but you know the dollar per pound of the meat of that 
antelope in your freezer or that white tail in your deep-freeze 
can be probably more expensive than your best cuts on the shelf 
of any other meat product. 
 
And the licence fee proportion is very small. By the time you 
travel to wherever you’re going to go hunting, pay for your gas, 
your lodging, and entertainment, whatever you do, the licence 
fee is very small in relationship to the total cost of the package. 
 
The wildlife federation said, you know, yes, we can bump up  

the licence a bit, that’s okay, because it is a small ratio or 
proportion. And they understand the taxpayer doesn’t want to 
be taxed any more. They understand the farmers have to be 
compensated — and let’s not forget that — that’s the bottom 
line here; the farmers have to be compensated. So we may 
differ on how to do it, but I think we agree that it has to done. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. We certainly 
do agree that it has to be done, but when you’re talking about 
those large dollars, you’re talking in the main about urban 
hunters. 
 
For me to put venison in my deep-freeze cost me some wear 
and tear on my shoes and about 20 cents for a bullet because the 
deer are eating on my lawn virtually every day. So it’s a matter 
of stepping out of my door at the right time and dispatching one 
and putting my tag on it. For that I pay 20 cents for the 
mechanics to do the job and $44 to the government for the 
licence. 
 
So the government is the only one who gained financially from 
it. The salesman who sold me the bullet made a very, very, very 
limited profit, and paid you some taxes on that besides. So, Mr. 
Minister, indeed if I go antelope hunting, the cost of my 
antelope meat is very expensive. And when it comes to paying 
an extra couple of dollars on my antelope licence, I would be 
prepared to do that. But when it comes to paying an extra 
couple of dollars on top of my white-tailed tag, which is already 
very expensive, I would be more reluctant to do that, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Because, Mr. Minister, the tax . . . you talk about the taxpayer. 
Well indeed the taxpayer, if it’s paid for by the government, is 
the person who is going to be supplying the funds. But the 
government is the representative of that taxpayer, and the 
government is the one that is benefiting from the sale of those 
hunting licences, from the taxes that are collected on this, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
If you don’t want to compensate farmers in the manner of other 
than simply putting it on the back of hunters, what about 
allowing farmers to benefit directly from the wildlife on their 
land, allowing them to gain some direct compensation for the 
use of that resource. 
 
If that was to happen, farmers would feel more akin to the 
problem, more akin to a relationship to that resource and could 
start then to manage that resource in a manner that would 
benefit them directly, rather than simply trying to convince the 
government that they have had a wildlife problem, that they 
have a big game loss, and therefore should be compensated in 
some manner. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, perhaps that’s an area in which you could 
converse at cabinet table with your colleague beside you, the 
minister for the Environment. 
 
Under this big game spot-loss procedure, Mr. Minister, what do 
you see being paid out as compensation? What kind of 
percentages of loss  100 per cent, 80 per cent, 50 per cent? 
And what kind of determinations on the values of the crops?  



2920  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Obviously a wheat crop is going to have a different value than a 
pea crop is. What kind of dollars do you envision, what kind of 
mechanism is in place for the determination of that loss? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the member knows that in your 
case you might have some shoe leather to . . . your only 
expense. Now I want to differ, though, with you in one respect, 
that I’ve talked to some of your neighbours and 20 cents for a 
bullet, 20 cents for a bullet is a bit of an exaggeration. 
 
In fact the rumour in the deer population is, go to Dan’s place 
because he can’t shoot that very good, and you’re pretty safe 
there. That’s why the . . . you know, if you find a lot of deer on 
your property, I think that’s probably why. You know, it’s a 
well-known fact that your accuracy with a gun is limited. 
 
So anyway I don’t know what else I can say on this. We’ve got 
a process in place, it’s ongoing and I hope to have some resolve 
in the near future. 
 
We’re not going to increase taxes to pay for it. The farmers 
need the compensation. They may have to pay some premium. 
We don’t know that for sure. The wildlife federation has agreed 
that the fees could be increased to cover the compensation. So 
at the end of the day, I think we’re doing the right thing. And if 
you will continue to argue that taxpayers should pay more taxes 
to cover this, I will continue to disagree with you. 
 
But when we make the announcement, I’m sure that there will 
be some people who don’t like the fact that licences are going 
up. But I believe it’s more important for a small increase in 
licence fee to the hunter who is . . . there are a lot of urban 
hunters who don’t farm. I think that’s fair. I just think it’s fair. 
We have to have some responsibility. 
 
Like I said before, the proportion of the licence fee compared to 
the cost of . . . If you get drawn in an area that’s away from 
your home, it’s fairly expensive. Anybody that hunts knows that 
it’s fairly expensive. But it’s entertainment, it’s holiday, it’s 
something that people like to do. And you know, for a few 
dollars more on the licence, I don’t think that we’re going to see 
any drop in the number of people hunting. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I don’t 
think any of those who know me very well question my abilities 
with a firearm, Mr. Minister, and I have a number of trophies to 
prove that point. I also have perhaps a more limited ability with 
a barb, but nevertheless, Mr. Minister, you’re simply ducking 
the issue. 
 
Farmers will pay the cost; they’re paying the cost already 
through their crop losses. You’re going to ask them now to pay 
the cost through their insurance costs, so the farmer pays either 
way. Yes, maybe it’s spread over a larger base, but the farmer 
pays. You’re asking fewer hunters to pay up some 
compensation, Mr. Minister, which I disagree with because that 
simply means the problem is compounded. 
 
And what about the rest of society? What about those who drive 
out of Regina or out of Saskatoon or out of Alida simply to see 
the wildlife in the field? Do they not bear some  

responsibility for supporting that wildlife? It shouldn’t simply 
be the hunters and the farmers of this province that are paying 
for the cost of supporting all of the wildlife in this province. 
And that’s what you’re asking them to do. 
 
You’re asking the farmers and the hunters of this province to 
pay the entire support for wildlife compensation in this 
province. And I believe that’s wrong, Mr. Minister. The rest of 
society benefits equally with the hunters in this particular case, 
Mr. Minister, and they bear some of the responsibility to pay for 
those costs; they should be paying some of those costs. 
 
So how are you proposing to bring the rest of society in to pay 
their share, their responsibility, in those costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think you’re oversimplifying this 
thing a little bit. The Department of Environment right now  
in fact you could probably ask these questions more validly on 
the part of Environment, but I’m here as long as you want me to 
be  Department of Environment right now uses taxpayers’ 
dollars, money they get from licence fees. And in their general 
budget, no matter where they get their money from, whether it’s 
taxpayers or licences, they spent many, many dollars on fencing 
to stop elk, especially elk but some deer, from getting into 
haystacks, blood meal, intercept feeding programs, and the list 
goes on. 
 
I mean they spent a tremendous amount of dollars on wildlife. 
And the taxpayer is paying for that. There is some that comes 
from the hunters and some of it comes from the taxpayer. 
 
But I just simply disagree with you that we should increase 
taxation in order to pay compensation. It’s not a large dollar. 
And I think in this case the user has agreed through . . . the 
wildlife federation have agreed, through policy, through 
resolution, that increasing the fee would be acceptable. 
 
So I don’t know what you’re . . . I guess I’m just going to have 
to disagree with you that we should increase taxes in order to 
pay for the damage. I think that the key here is we’re addressing 
the problem  we’re addressing the problem to the . . . for a 
resolve that will be beneficial to the farmers of this province. 
 
And as I said before, if we didn’t have $860 million of debt to 
pay . . . or interest to pay on the debt, we could do a lot of these 
things, but we don’t. 
 
It’s the same with all the members on your side of the House. 
You want the government to do everything for everybody. 
Those days are over . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
Liberals are especially bad at that. I think maybe you’ve learned 
your lesson in the Tory Party from your previous leader. At 
least I hope you have. 
 
But you can’t do that. I mean time and time again I see people, I 
hear people, stand up and say, well Highway 15 is bad, you got 
to fix it. You got to twin No. 1. You got to twin No. 11 . . . or 
the Yellowhead between Battleford and Saskatoon. We’re 
doing some of that. But name it. Say the government should, 
and then fill in the blank  keep my school open, keep my 
hospital open, build my road, you know, the list goes on and on.  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2921 

You can’t do that, I’m sorry. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that people in Saskatchewan 
understand you can’t do that. I’m not quite sure why the Liberal 
Party is so bent on trying to fashion themselves after the Tory 
Party of the 1980s, but it seems to be that they haven’t learned 
the lessons of history, and I think maybe that you have the new, 
improved Tory Party here. 
 
So I don’t know what else to say except that we’re providing a 
service to the farmers that they desperately need. There’s 
nothing worse than seeing a field that hasn’t been harvested, 
through no fault of your own, you know, whether it was too wet 
or didn’t mature, wasn’t maturing on time whatever. A field of 
flax . . . I think many of us have had flax that because of the 
weather conditions didn’t mature and laid over winter. But 
there’s nothing worse than seeing that field out there with 25, 
30 bushels to the acre of flax at 7 or $8 a bushel now being 
trampled down by deer. 
 
So we’re addressing that problem. I think we agree on 
everything except where the money should come from. And I 
just think that the taxpayers are taxed high enough. The wildlife 
federation has agreed that licence fees could be increased 
without . . . Let me ask you this question. Would the wildlife 
federation agree through resolution to increasing fees if they 
thought it would reduce the number of hunters? I don’t think 
so. Maybe you can tell me what you think. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The idea 
that the government should pay for . . . blank, I think was a 
song sheet you yourself were singing from in the 1980s. If you 
go back and look over the Hansards of you and your colleagues 
who were in opposition at that time, that was indeed the song 
that you sang  always more, always better, always higher 
dollar costs from the government to support whatever program. 
 
And I certainly agree with you, Mr. Minister, that our 
colleagues in the official opposition have now picked up your 
songbook and are indeed singing from it. And I think perhaps 
that’s because there are a couple of rejects from your party over 
there leading the group and that they have . . . in their mindset, 
they’re still back in the 1970s. So I can certainly understand 
why that is happening, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I’m glad to see in some cases that you have dropped that 
songbook. But in some areas, Mr. Minister, you’re the only 
person benefiting from this. You say that the Minister of the 
Environment is putting a large amount of money  all of the 
funds that he collects from hunting fees and fishing fees  
back into the support of wildlife. Well I look at the Estimates 
book and I don’t know, I can’t tell from the Estimates book on 
the revenue side how much money the Minister for the 
Environment collects for hunting and fishing fees. But he puts 
about . . . he’s estimating about $4.7 million back into wildlife, 
and wildlife and fish development in this coming fiscal year. 
 
And I suspect that the hunting licences generate more money 
than that. If there are, I think somewheres in the neighbourhood  

of 40,000 deer licences sold every year at a cost of, let’s say just 
for easy numbers we make that $50, you’re looking there at 
over $2 million right there, Mr. Minister. And that’s just on 
white-tailed deer, and there may very well be more than 40,000 
licences sold. I don’t know. The minister could perhaps . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  10 million 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  How many? 
 
An Hon. Member:  10 million. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Ten million dollars generated. Thank 
you very much. So half of the money being generated is actually 
going back into those programs. It sounds like the Department 
of Highways that collects $400 million, $450 million in 
gasoline taxes every year and puts 150 back into road 
construction. You know I really have to wonder about that, 
particularly in the shape that our roads are in, Mr. Minister. And 
we will be discussing roads here after a little bit, so perhaps you 
can call the Minister of Highways to come and consult with you 
as we’re going through this. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, we have spent a great of time on this 
particular issue. I believe that the government has to participate 
in the compensation. Compensation is certainly needed. I’m 
glad to hear that you’re prepared to bring something forward. 
But society as a whole has to bear some of that cost and some 
of that responsibility. 
 
I’m going to table for you these letters, because what they are is 
a large number of petitions, but they’re not filled out in the 
official area, so I can’t turn them in in the normal manner that 
we would deal with petitions in this House. 
 
These come from . . . there must have been a meeting some 
place or they had them out on the table for awhile, because 
these petitions come from over a significant portion of the 
province, in the east, in the area of the Minister of the 
Environment’s home area or neighbouring constituencies  
Wapella. 
 
And these people are listing what their problems were, the crop 
damages they suffered. And there are pages of them, Mr. 
Minister. Some of this was done by Harvey and Dawn 
Holloway in preparing these things, from down in the Arcola 
area where there was quite a bit of damage from wildlife also, 
Mr. Minister. I see Stoughton as one of the names here, 
Lampman areas, Arcola, Kisbey — pages of names here. Most 
of them didn’t put their addresses down so it’s hard to tell just 
where they’re all from  especially when I’m not wearing my 
glasses. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I’d like to table these so that you can have a 
copy of them and hopefully you can deal with these problems. 
You consult with the minister for the Environment to find a 
solution before next year’s harvest comes off. Hopefully it 
comes off successfully; we won’t have this problem again. But 
if it doesn’t, that you will have something in place to deal with 
it. 
 



2922  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

You didn’t indicate though, Mr. Minister, as to what levels of 
compensation you were thinking about in this. Was this going 
to be comparable to spot-loss hail where you could get up to, I 
believe 80 per cent coverage for your losses? Is it going to be 
dealt with in the same manner as crop insurance deals with 
spot-loss hail, that you would buy a particular dollar value? Or 
how do you envision this working, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We don’t know exactly, you know, 
because we just haven’t finalized it. But it’s going to be run 
similar to the waterfowl compensation program. And there will 
be a maximum. Like right now with crop insurance you can get 
70 per cent coverage in spot-loss hail or 80 per cent without 
spot-loss hail. But it won’t be a hundred per cent compensation 
because it’ll run similar to the insurance system that we have 
right now. 
 
Thank you for tabling those letters. I just want to say one thing 
for the record. When I was kibitzing with you earlier about your 
accuracy with your shooting, one of my colleagues came up and 
said that, I understand, that you’re a champion target shooter. 
So just for the record so that people don’t really think . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Oops. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, oops. Just for the record, I want 
people to know that the hon. member is very accurate. 
 
An Hon. Member:  He’s good at something. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  He’s good at something. That’s right. 
 
So anyway, the program will be run in similar fashion. There 
won’t be 100 per cent compensation of course, because the 
expense after 70, 80 per cent just goes through the roof. But 
that will be decided and announced at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
if you could describe for us then how that migratory game 
compensation works. 
 
I could be wrong on this but I believe that some of the 
compensations have a dollar cap on them of the total pool that 
is available, and then that pool is distributed amongst the 
claimants. And if that is the case, in a year like this past year 
with big game problems, that pool could be very small to the 
individual farmer. So could you describe how that claim factor 
works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, as with waterfowl, it provides 
compensation up to 70 per cent of your average yield. I don’t 
believe there’s a cap on it. And with this too, the damage will 
be paid for. There will be no pooling . . . (inaudible) . . . a 
certain amount of money to be divided amongst the farmers. It’s 
just that if you have a claim you’ll be paid on the basis of that 
claim and if there’s . . . well everybody will be paid equally. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We look 
forward to seeing what kind of a program you bring forward  

when you get all your ducks in a row and when you have the 
bucks to finance it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could perhaps answer a few 
questions dealing with the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) pay-outs and the controversy that was surrounding 
that. I think we have already gone over our opposition to the 
moves that were made first in cancelling the GRIP contracts, 
and second, in demanding repayment of any overpayments that 
were in place. 
 
I’d like to bring to your attention an ad that was placed in 
newspapers across this province. This one was in The 
Heartland Newspaper, which I believe is published out of 
Rosetown or over in that corner of the province but goes across 
the province, Mr. Minister, and this advertisement says: 
“Attention farmers. Don’t pay your GRIP bills.” 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I have a great deal of concern about that. I 
believe that farmers have a duty to pay the bills that they owe, 
be that to the government, be that to their fertilizer supplier, be 
that to their local grocery store, whomever it might be. If you 
enter into a contract to accept something for which you provide 
remuneration, while you may not have signed on any dotted 
lines, you have entered into a common-law contract, a verbal 
contract, to meet your obligations if the other party meets theirs. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, this bill is paid for, it says here: 
 

Advertisement paid for by the official opposition. Send 
your bills to the Liberal opposition in the legislature of 
Saskatchewan and we’ll return them to the NDP 
government where they belong. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, what are the legal ramifications of 
counselling farmers not to meet their obligations, to not pay 
their bills? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I too am concerned about that 
piece of advertising. It’s too bad that there are no Liberal 
members in the House. Seeing that there’s no Liberal members 
in the House, it seems as though they think the session’s over. 
 
The Chair:  Order. I would warn the member that he knows 
the rules of whether he can refer to whether members are in the 
House or out of the House. And I would bring his attention to 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  After 10 years in the House, Mr. Chair, I 
don’t know how I could have forgotten that. But I’m sorry for 
saying that. 
 
Anyway, the ethics that are involved here are very questionable. 
In Canada, it’s my understanding that it is not illegal to counsel 
somebody to not pay their bills. I believe in Britain it is. That’s 
what I’ve been told; I’m not a lawyer but I’ve been told that. 
Maybe something the Government of Canada should be looking 
at. 
 
But the fact of the matter here is that there is a number of things  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2923 

that are going on. The Liberal Party, the Liberal members, by 
counselling someone to not pay their GRIP bill, are really 
saying that well, it’s okay to be irresponsible. 
 
The fact of the matter is that I think the majority of the farmers 
out there are responsible  overwhelming majority. And they 
believe that they have to pay a bill to the best of their ability as 
soon as they can. And I think that’s witnessed by the fact that 
we’ve got what, 70 per cent of the GRIP bills, over 70 per cent 
back in now. And even though the prices are up for products, 
which is great to see, input costs have risen dramatically and 
you know, there’s still a limited margin. 
 
But I know that most farmers were going to be paying their 
bills. If they haven’t already, they’re going to make 
arrangements to pay them or they’re going to be doing it when 
they can. 
 
But for the Liberal Party to publicize, to pay for, an ad in the 
paper encouraging farmers to disrespect the law, that really 
brings the attention to . . . really raises the question of what 
does this party stand for? A party who would be government, a 
party who would want to run this land, this province, to govern 
this province, counselling people to break the law. 
 
I don’t know exactly what you think of that, but I think it’s 
disgusting, I think it’s irresponsible, and I think it’s deceptive. 
Because the people who . . . and I’ve received, I’ve received a 
number of bills that have been sent to the Agriculture critic, and 
he has forwarded them on to me. I’ve received a number of 
GRIP bills. 
 
And they say . . . Well we flushed somebody out of the woods 
here. 
 
Well the member . . . the Liberal Agriculture critic says we stole 
the money. That’s about as responsible as saying to people you 
should break the law and not pay your bills. 
 
For a party who would be government, I think you should sit 
back, you should sit back and assess who your new leader 
might be. Because I think you want a new leader of the Liberal 
Party who may want to change, who may want to change some 
of the ethics of this Liberal Party. Because if you don’t change 
the ethics, if you keep counselling people to break the law, I 
think that maybe you will be in trouble coming the next 
election. 
 
(1115) 
 
Counselling people to break the law is probably one of the . . . 
Well I’m not sure exactly how to put this. Immoral is a good 
word for it. But it’s just totally irresponsible, totally 
irresponsible. 
 
But the worst part of it all is this: if I’m a farmer and I have 
trouble paying my GRIP bill legitimately, I’ve got . . . Yes, 
prices are up, but I’ve got input costs dramatically rising, I’ve 
got bills to pay, I’ve got loans to pay, and then I get the GRIP 
bill. Am I happy? No, I’m not happy. So then you have to ask 
yourself, if you’re a farmer in that position, well what do I do? 

What we’re counselling people to do is phone Crop Insurance 
and make arrangements to pay if you can’t pay now. But what 
the Liberal Party is doing is saying, don’t pay. Break the law. 
You don’t have to pay. Be irresponsible. 
 
But you know what the worst part of that is? If I’m a farmer in a 
financially strapped position, the Liberal Party is supposedly 
giving me a little bit of light that I can reach out to. It’s false. 
It’s deceptive. It’s immoral and irresponsible to put people who 
are in a tough financial position, to put them in a position where 
you put out some false hope. 
 
An Hon. Member:  And to use them for political . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  To use them for — exactly as my 
colleague says, precisely; to use them, to use people who are 
financially strapped — for cheap political gain. 
 
I could go on on this. But I’ll just end by saying this: it is not 
illegal for the Liberal Party to put an ad in the paper telling 
farmers to break the law. It’s not illegal. It’s illegal in Britain, I 
understand, but not here. But it’s irresponsible and it’s immoral 
and it’s usery. 
 
So all I can say is that I am as concerned as you are about that 
ad. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. They had 
some interesting numbers there that you were expounding on, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, 70 per cent of the bills have been paid, you said. 
How much of that 70 per cent . . . how many dollars did that 
represent and what percentages of the dollars that were left 
outstanding  I believe it was approximately $12 million of 
overpayments that were in place  how many of those dollars 
have been returned and what percentage of the dollars have 
been returned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  There has been 8,227 customers paid, or 
71 per cent. And the amount paid is $5,922,600, or 51 per cent. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What avenues 
are you then taking, since you’re bound and determined to 
collect this money, what avenues are you taking to recover the 
other 49 per cent that you have not yet collected? Are you 
putting some impositions on their crop insurance options this 
year? Are you foreclosing on them? What avenues are you 
taking to recover the monies that you seem to be determined to 
collect monies which in actual fact, Mr. Minister, should 
have belonged to the farmers initially. 
 
When we look at the circumstances in Alberta, when we look at 
the circumstances in Manitoba, those monies that were in the 
GRIP program were paid out to the farmers in those provinces. 
 
And it’s interesting to note, Mr. Minister, that last year at the 
auction sales along the border, farmers would go to the auction 
sales in an attempt to buy used equipment at a reasonable price. 
The Saskatchewan farmers could not compete for the used 
equipment being sold in Saskatchewan. They couldn’t compete  



2924  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

because Manitoba farmers were coming in with their GRIP 
cheques in hand to pay for Saskatchewan equipment. 
Saskatchewan farmers were disadvantaged because 
Saskatchewan had not paid out the GRIP funds whereas 
Manitoba had. 
 
I’m sure that the same thing was occurring on the Alberta side 
— that along the border, Alberta farmers who had extra money 
in their pockets because they had received their GRIP 
payments, were able to come into Saskatchewan and buy 
Saskatchewan farmers’ equipment at auction sales at a little 
bigger price than what the Saskatchewan farmer could afford to 
pay because the Saskatchewan farmer didn’t have access to 
those GRIP payments, because your government had changed 
the contracts and then cancelled GRIP, which in turn removed 
approximately $800-plus million from the pockets of 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
A significant portion of that  I believe it’s $256 million  
was sent back to the federal government. Monies that was never 
returned to Saskatchewan. Monies that should have been 
returned but were not. Monies that you then in turn took your 
share out, $188 million; a very limited portion of that was put 
back into agriculture. But unfortunately, Mr. Minister, it wasn’t 
new money. 
 
You simply removed, I believe it was $78 million, from the 
agriculture budget and then back-filled it with $78 million from 
the GRIP monies, and put $110 million into the Minister of 
Finance’s Consolidated Fund and which farmers have never 
seen it again. 
 
Those monies should have been in the hands of Saskatchewan 
farmers. It certainly would have benefited them last year and 
they would have been in a better position last fall when a 
number of those crops didn’t come off, Mr. Minister. 
 
So what methods, what means, are you using to recover those 
dollars that you believe that you are demanding that the farmers 
repay? 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. To introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative 
Assembly here today, some 29 grade 4 students from the 
Assiniboia School, with their teacher, Mrs. McCrank, and some 
chaperons, Glenda Mayell, Sharon Juell, Kathy Santo, and 
Debbie Solberg. 
 
And I know that we’ll be meeting soon to have a discussion 
about how the legislature works and some of the happenings 
here today. And I would ask all members to give them a warm 
welcome here today. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just a couple of comments. As far as 
Alberta versus Saskatchewan goes, the formula was the same 
for the producers getting their share back in Saskatchewan as 
Alberta. They got thirty-three and a third per cent back to 
producers, their contribution, just like our producers got their 
thirty-three and a third per cent. 
 
As far as putting the provincial share, you said nominal or 
minimal, well that’s not true. We put nearly 70 per cent of the 
money, of our provincial treasury share, into agriculture 
programs. Yes, 30 per cent went into general revenue. That’s 
part of the help-clean-up-the-Tory-mess-from-the-1980s routine 
that we’re going through, without raising taxes. 
 
But I want, just for the record, to tell you, and I know you 
complain — and I don’t believe in governing by comparison, 
but sometimes you have to draw out of the arsenal some 
comparative notes — and I want to just draw this to your 
attention. 
 
In 1995-96, provincial government expenditures in support of 
the agri-food sector on a per capita basis, okay, guess who’s at 
the top of the list? Saskatchewan. Provincial government 
expenditures in support of the agri-food sector on a per capita 
basis: $412.11 per capita. 
 
Guess who’s second? Alberta. But Alberta is significantly a 
distant second at $181.13 per capita compared to $412 in 
Saskatchewan, compared to $170 in Prince Edward Island, and 
$151 in Manitoba. Or compared to the federal Liberal 
government of a whopping $89. 
 
So I think that despite the fact that you might have some 
complaints, and I know nothing’s perfect and we don’t do 
everything right, but we are putting a significant number of 
dollars into agriculture on a per capita basis in this province 
compared to other provinces. 
 
Can we do better? I don’t know. I don’t know if people want us 
to put . . . I know they don’t want us to put more subsidy dollars 
in. I’ve talked to the industries over the last number of months 
and nobody says we should continue to subsidize or start 
subsidizing, as the Americans are doing. But provincially, I 
think we do very well, thank you very much, of putting 
taxpayers’ dollars into the agri-food sector. 
 
I think that the days of GRIP . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well now the member from Arm River, the Liberal member 
from Arm River, says I’m patting myself on the back. 
 
As I started to say, I don’t believe in governing by comparison. 
But if I’m criticized for not doing good in the agriculture sector,  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2925 

I want to bring out some statistics, some statistics . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well one thing I won’t have to do is pat the 
federal government on the back, the federal Liberal 
government, for $89 per capita compared to 412 in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I mean there was times past when the federal government paid 
their share, paid their share  in fact paid 100 per cent of 
compensation. Then it went down and down and down, and 
now that the Liberal government is in there, it’s $89 per capita. 
 
So pat myself on the back? Well not me. It’s the department, 
the people who work with this government’s decisions of 
Executive Council, that do this. I happen to be in this chair at 
this time. 
 
But I’ll tell you: we do it because we know the importance of 
the agri-food sector. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I see 
we’re back onto our wildlife theme again. I’m not sure if your 
comments were a red herring or a smelly mackerel but you 
certainly seem to be passing the buck while you try to keep the 
doe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, what your figures 
are, Mr. Minister, don’t add up. Because after all, when you 
look at Alberta and start comparing agriculture numbers with 
Saskatchewan, you have to keep in mind that there are more 
people living in Calgary and Edmonton than there is in the 
entire population of Saskatchewan. 
 
So when you start talking about per capita expenditures on 
agriculture and comparing us between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan, I think you are indeed throwing out a smelly 
mackerel. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan agriculture is the number one 
industry  number one industry  and deserves to be 
recognized as such and compensated as such. While Alberta 
agriculture is very important to them, it is by no means the 
number one industry. We have many, many more farmers, more 
ranchers, than Alberta has. 
 
And the fact is I believe that we have just about as many cows 
as Alberta has, even though Alberta hates to admit that, because 
it takes less acres to raise a cow in Saskatchewan than it does in 
Alberta. It’s comparable in the south-west of Saskatchewan to 
Alberta, but when you get into the rest of Saskatchewan, while 
we may not have as many acres dedicated to the production of 
cattle, it takes fewer acres to produce that cow. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, you can’t simply compare the dollars per 
capita being spent in Saskatchewan on agriculture to the dollars 
per capita in Alberta. 
 
Now if you were to make a comparison as to the dollars 
generated in Saskatchewan to the dollars you put in, to the 
dollars generated in Alberta and the number of people and the  

percentage that is of Saskatchewan’s GDP (gross domestic 
product), you may very well have some numbers there that 
would have some meaning. 
 
So perhaps we could get those numbers from you. Production 
of agricultural products in Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, 
represents what percentage of the GDP of Saskatchewan’s 
economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Directly, about 10 per cent. Indirectly, 
with all the other spin-offs from ag activity, it’s about 40 per 
cent. So it’s a fairly significant number. Alberta is somewhat 
less than that, that’s right. Like, I think about directly 6 or 7 per 
cent. That’s not for sure but I think that’s about what it is, I 
think fairly close. 
 
But when you’re talking about per capita, there are a number of 
people living in Calgary and Edmonton; a number of people 
living in Regina and Saskatoon as well. But it doesn’t matter. It 
doesn’t matter because what you’re doing is you’re putting 
dollars into agriculture to support those cities indirectly and 
sometimes directly. So it doesn’t matter what your population 
is. 
 
The fact of the matter is that there’s a commitment whether 
your population’s urban or rural. There’s a commitment from 
this province to put more dollars into agri-food sector than 
Alberta has. 
 
(1130) 
 
An Hon. Member:  Per capita. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Per capita, exactly, per capita. But the 
fact of the matter is it doesn’t matter what your population is. 
It’s on an individual basis and it doesn’t matter where your 
population lives. The money that you put into agriculture 
supports you whether you’re rural or urban. And if you’re a 
doctor in downtown Calgary, you have some degree of 
connection with agriculture because of the rural base of that 
province. And you wouldn’t have your job. If you’re a teacher 
in downtown Calgary, how many students would be in the 
schools if you took the agriculture sector out? 
 
Don’t try to say that we’re not doing our share compared to 
Alberta, talking about per capita, because we are. And our GDP 
 and this is why we believe it’s important  indirectly 40 per 
cent of our economy is ag related. When ag’s down, as you 
know, the whole province goes down. That’s why we believe 
that it’s important; that’s why we put $412 per capita into the 
agri-food sector. 
 
So you can talk about Alberta but I just want to tell you 
something about Alberta right now. We in Canada have been 
working on agriculture programs for a number of years where 
every province including Alberta agreed that we should be 
reducing subsidies. The subsidies should be lowered as per 
GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), as per WTO 
(World Trade Organization) agreements, as per keeping our 
playing-field level in Canada. Everything was going along quite 
nicely. We decided we were going to have a crop insurance  



2926  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

program and we’re trying to improve upon that now in the 
five-year review, and NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account), under the crop sector program. 
 
Other provinces were doing similar things. But guess what good 
old Alberta did. Good old Alberta, good old Mr. Ag Minister, 
Mr. Paszkowski, against the wishes of the cattle sector, the 
cattle producers, the majority of people, cattle producers in his 
province, put in what’s called the FISP program, farm income 
stabilization program, subsidizing the cattle industry. 
 
I don’t know what the dollars are this year but up to maybe $80 
million in the cattle industry, going against the trend of all the 
country when every other province said yes, we think we should 
keep the subsidies down because with the new international 
trade rules we have to live in a real market-place  a real 
market-place. That means no subsidies. Because if you’re living 
in a subsidized market-place and the bottom drops out and all 
of a sudden the subsidies can’t be increased, guess what? 
You’re in big trouble. Bigger trouble than you would have been 
if you were in the real market-place. 
 
So Mr. Paszkowski has gone against  I call Alberta now, the 
Europeans, and not my line but a good line, the Europeans of 
Canada  going against everybody else saying okay, we’ll keep 
subsidizing you. And for Saskatchewan this is especially 
troublesome. B.C. (British Columbia) is upset as well; they live 
on the other side. 
 
Especially troublesome for Saskatchewan because let’s say that 
we said okay, we’re going to match Alberta with a subsidy 
program to our cattle producers. Cattle are down. There’s no 
doubt, I mean a lot of people . . . producers are having tough 
times. They will come back up. 
 
But let’s say we’re going to match the Alberta program. What 
would B.C. do? They’d have to match it, and maybe they’d 
make it a little better. And maybe Alberta would say, well boy 
we’ve got to keep our cattle guys going stronger so we’ll put 
more money in. 
 
If you take the cattle producing provinces  Alberta, B.C., 
Saskatchewan. Ontario  guess who is the most 
disadvantaged? Saskatchewan is because we haven’t got the 
financial base that B.C., Alberta, and Ontario do. So if we start 
anteing up the subsidy programs, as Alberta wants to do, we 
will lose. We can’t match them. They get . . . if we had 
Alberta’s oil revenue we wouldn’t have to have a sales tax in 
place. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s why they don’t have one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That’s why they don’t have one, because 
they got oil revenue. 
 
But I’ll tell you, we can’t in Saskatchewan . . . I mean I’ve had 
some producers say, well you know, you’ve got to match 
Alberta. You’ve got to put an ad hoc subsidy program in. I said 
no, I can’t do it. Because at the end of the day what you would 
accomplish is an unreal market-place, more taxes for taxpayers  

to pay. And when the price drops again, you’re going to be in 
bigger trouble because you will have this unreal market-place 
where you have the government subsidy capitalized into your 
operation. 
 
So I just want to ask you if you believe what Alberta is doing is 
right. Because I certainly don’t believe it’s right. Maybe you 
could comment on that. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  With leave, Mr. Deputy Chair, to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To you and 
through you to the rest of the members here this morning, it’s 
with a good deal of pleasure that I can introduce to you a rather 
distinguished looking group of grade 3 students from the 
Herbert School in the town of Herbert in my constituency, with 
their chaperons and their teacher, Judy Voth. 
 
And I do look forward to meeting with them a little bit later on 
and sharing some refreshments consisting only of drinks, for the 
benefit of the members opposite. And I would just ask you to 
join in welcoming them here this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, I find myself in 
strange agreement with you. I don’t believe that any 
government should be subsidizing. I believe that the 
market-place has built-in mechanisms that provide the returns 
or the disincentives, as the case may be, to the producers of any 
commodity, including cattle. 
 
I believe it does distort the market when one jurisdiction 
provides subsidies which other jurisdictions then have to try 
and match or simply lose. It’s like stealing jobs because you 
offer incentives such as we were discussing the other day with 
the Minister of Economic Development. I believe that’s wrong, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
But in light of your new free market spirit, which I commend 
you for, in believing that the market-place is the correct avenue 
to deal with these circumstances that the producers have the 
right and should be allowed to market without government 
interference, without the government providing, in this case, 
subsidies which some of the producers may not wish to have, 
so, Mr. Minister, in light of this new free market spirit that you 
have been exemplifying today and that you have been  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2927 

vigorously defending, how do you square that new free market 
spirit with your undying and unswerving loyalty to the 
Canadian Wheat Board, which sets market prices, which denies 
farmers the opportunity to exempt themselves from government 
interference, and supposedly, according to the supporters of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, protects them from the vagaries of the 
market? 
 
How does your new free market spirit in cattle square with your 
protectionist government interventionist monopoly stand on the 
Canadian Wheat Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well that’s a pretty easy question to 
answer and I thank you for asking it. 
 
I think it squares very well. Two points. The Wheat Board 
subsidizes farmers, if I can put it that way, to the tune of 
500-million-dollars-plus a year as documented by Mr. 
Tyrchniewicz out of Edmonton, Mr. Kraft out of Manitoba, and 
Mr. Furtan out of Saskatchewan, in a study where they looked 
at every sale of the Canadian Wheat Board for the last 14 years. 
Then they decided on the information, which is very clear, that 
the Wheat Board got a premium, got more money for the grain 
they sold than what the street price was during that sale. The 
difference is over $500 million a year to farmers. 
 
We talk about cattle. I’m talking about government subsidizing 
the cattle industry. The government doesn’t subsidize the Wheat 
Board. Because the Wheat Board structure . . . that institution, 
if you wanted to say, subsidizes, but gets a premium price for 
the farmers’ grain. 
 
Now let’s take it one step further. What if we had a national 
cattle marketing board? Would that give farmers an advantage 
or a disadvantage, like the Wheat Board gives them an 
advantage? I don’t know. 
 
An Hon. Member:  What is this, the Gettysburg Address? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, it’s not the Gettysburg Address. 
 
But I’ll tell you, there’s a significant difference between 
taxpayers subsidizing an industry, or the federal government, 
supported by farmers in this province and western Canada for 
the most part, wanting to maintain the Wheat Board that gives 
them an advantage of over $500 million a year. So I think that 
squares very well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, what you’re 
defending is a government body that is subsidizing not all 
farmers, but a limited sector of farmers  those in Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, and the Peace River country of British 
Columbia. Not all farmers are receiving these subsidies. 
 
Alberta, in subsidizing its cattle industry, is subsidizing its 
farmers in its jurisdiction. The Canadian Wheat Board is 
subsidizing the farmers in the jurisdiction it has been assigned. 
Two government bodies subsidizing their producers. You’re 
opposed to one; in favour of the other. 
 
Mr. Minister, to me that doesn’t square. If you say in your new  

free market spirit, that it’s absolutely wrong for Alberta  and 
I’ll agree, they shouldn’t be doing it  to subsidize their cattle 
producers, then how can it be right for the Canadian Wheat 
Board, in their jurisdiction, to be subsidizing the farmers that 
they are representing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well now it’s getting interesting and a 
little convoluted. When you talk about subsidies . . . it’s apples 
and oranges. 
 
I’m talking about, and as you know, taxpayer dollars going into 
the industry. I don’t think that should be true in the cattle 
industry or any other industry. In times of crisis, yes, absolutely. 
I think we’ll all agree, if there’s a disaster, then you have to use 
tax dollars to support the industries. 
 
What we’re doing in this province is putting in place a good 
crop insurance program. There’s a NISA program. And that’s 
about it. But if you have those two programs, especially crop 
insurance, if you have a program that’s effective and affordable, 
you don’t need anything else. 
 
And then you talk about the Wheat Board subsidizing. Well this 
is the same thing. It’s the real market-place. And here’s what’s 
happening. The Wheat Board is subsidizing farmers. I mean I 
use that term lightly . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  But you shouldn’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, maybe I started something I 
shouldn’t have started. 
 
But it’s a benefit gained. A subsidy . . . but do you know where 
they’re getting the subsidy from? The purchasers. They’re 
getting their money, not from the taxpayer as Alberta’s doing to 
subsidize their cattle program, the Wheat Board gets premium 
pricing. Why in the world would anyone want to do away with 
an institution that provides a premium of $500 million a year to 
those people who are using that institution? Why would you 
want to throw it away? 
 
This is superior marketing talent. When the street price, the 
open market that you advocate, is lower by $500 million on a 
yearly average than what the Wheat Board gets for the grain 
that they sell, where is the logic in trying to destroy that 
institution? 
 
In fact why wouldn’t we want to put every commodity in a 
position like that? Why wouldn’t every farmer want to take 
advantage . . . get the advantage of that? I don’t know, but 
maybe you can explain to me why you want to take away this 
advantage that we have. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, this is one of the 
areas where we don’t agree. And while we do agree that Alberta 
should not be subsidizing the marketing, should not be 
subsidizing the producing of livestock and cattle in their 
jurisdiction because it distorts the market and creates a great 
deal of hardship for their neighbours. We agree on that point. 
 
But we disagree on the Canadian Wheat Board. And I find it  



2928  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

somewhat amazing that you would disagree with Alberta’s 
subsidies while supporting subsidies in another area. And you 
say these subsidies come from outside sources that the . . . well 
the minister used the word subsidy. I didn’t use the word 
subsidy initially; the minister did. 
 
He’s saying that these $500 million worth of subsidies comes 
from outside sources; that this is benefits generated by superior 
marketing techniques of the Canadian Wheat Board. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I know of a large number of farmers who believe that 
they could generate those additional subsidies benefits 
themselves without having to go through the Canadian Wheat 
Board. But unfortunately, they are not being allowed that 
opportunity. 
 
You comment that the government, that the Canadian Wheat 
Board has a significant amount of ability to generate these 
additional funds. If that’s the case, why are not all wheat and 
barley producers therefore being given the opportunity to avail 
themselves of this superior marketing ability that the Canadian 
Wheat Board has? 
 
(1145) 
 
Why do the producers of wheat and barley in southern British 
Columbia not have the opportunity to avail themselves of those 
opportunities? Why do the wheat and barley producers of 
Ontario not have an opportunity to avail themselves of the 
superior marketing abilities of the Canadian Wheat Board to 
create some additional revenues for themselves? 
 
After all, Ontario, I believe, is the second largest wheat 
producer in Canada, behind Saskatchewan, but ahead of 
Manitoba and Alberta and British Columbia. And yet they don’t 
have the opportunity to avail themselves of the Canadian Wheat 
Board’s expertise. Neither do the people of Quebec or the 
Maritimes, where they do grow wheat and barley, Mr. Minister. 
 
If the Canadian Wheat Board does such an excellent job, is of 
such an advantage to farmers that farmers welcome it so 
open-handedly, why are not all the farmers of Canada being 
given that opportunity to avail themselves of that chance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Maybe they’re not as smart as we are, I 
don’t know; I can’t answer for them. I don’t know why they 
wouldn’t. I don’t know why they wouldn’t be banging at the 
door, because we’ve got the proof here. 
 
I just want to say one thing. When you talk about the open 
market system, let’s talk about the basis points that are involved 
in getting the grain from your farm to export position. If you 
compare canola, if it were under the board’s jurisdiction or 
under the current system it’s under right now, the basis points 
are the same basically  transportation, handling, and whatever 
else is involved in all the basis points. But one of the things 
that’s different, one area is different, significantly different, and 
that is profit. 
 
In this current system, when your canola moves to port, the 
basis points from Saskatoon or Regina to Vancouver are almost 
identical except for profit of the company who handles that . . .  

who markets that grain. Under the Wheat Board there is no 
basis for profit  no basis points for profit  because all the 
profit goes back to the producers. 
 
If you got rid of the board as you advocate, why? If you got rid 
of the board, who would market your grain? Would you do it 
yourself? I don’t think so. You might ship the odd semi- load to 
a feedlot or to wherever you might find a little market. But I’ll 
tell you, and you know this, there would be somebody 
marketing your grain for you. And would they take a profit? 
Would they ask a price for marketing your grain? Yes, they 
would. You’ll agree with that. 
 
Under the Canadian Wheat Board system, there is no need, 
because it’s an agency of government, there is no need for 
profit. They don’t take . . . all the money they get goes back into 
the pooling system and goes back to the farmers’ pockets. 
 
For the life of me, I don’t understand why you would advocate 
reducing the income of western Canada. Like this is some 
bizarre ideology. Why would you advocate reducing income in 
western Canada by $500 million a year? Why would you 
advocate farmers receiving less money because they had to pay 
somebody a profit margin to market their grain when the 
Canadian Wheat Board does it, and if there’s any profit it goes 
back into the farmers’ pocket through the pooling system. It 
behoves me to understand this. 
 
One more point about the Canadian Wheat Board. 
Administration costs  about 5 cents a bushel right now. And 
if you’re marketing it through an open market system, through a 
private trader, you’re going to pay the administration costs. 
Besides their profit margin, you’re going to pay some 
administration costs. 
 
Because the Canadian government guarantees the dollars of the 
Canadian Wheat Board. There’s about $6 billion that the board 
plays with on a daily basis, 5 to $6 billion. The way it works is 
this. The Canadian Wheat Board used to have to go to the banks 
to borrow their money. A few years ago they were allowed to 
go to the paper market to buy paper. They buy paper much, 
much more reasonably than they do loans from the bank. 
 
And whenever, on the other side of the sheet, whenever a 
country can’t make its payments to the board, they come to the 
board and they say, okay, we haven’t got enough money right 
now but we’re going to sit down and work out a repayment 
plan. The board says, okay, we’ll do that. But they charge them 
an interest rate. They charge them an interest rate when they 
reschedule their debt. 
 
Do you know that last year there was about $50 million made 
because the board bought their paper cheaper than what they 
were getting on their interest from the countries who default on 
their loans? 
 
Do you know what the administration costs for the Canadian 
Wheat Board was last year?  $43 million. So because the 
board is set up the way it is set up, because the institution is set 
up as an arm of government guaranteed by government, they 
made almost $10 million, and we got administration for  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2929 

nothing. Do you think that the private grain trade would get that 
for you? I don’t think so. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, you covered a 
number of areas there that interest me. One of the issues I think 
though that we need to take a look at is the measuring point. 
You’re measuring point on your $500 million figure, and I’m 
not exactly sure your $500 figure is correct, but for argument’s 
sake at the present time, we’ll use your $500 million. 
 
Unfortunately the measuring point where you start to measure 
whether or not the farmer has gained a benefit, is at the point of 
export  sitting in port ready for the ship. Unfortunately that’s 
not the entire cost to the farmer in this country. His costs start at 
his farm gate when he decides to load the grain onto the truck, 
and what happens to it after that point, and all of the costs 
associated with that have to be included in the farmer’s return. 
 
And the study that you are quoting, the Kraft study, takes that 
measuring point at export, not at the farm gate. And you have to 
measure that at the farm gate. When you talk about the 
government providing credit, that the Canadian Wheat Board 
benefited by that credit, I think you have to take a look at some 
of the other industries in Canada and how federal government 
credit aids those industries and whether or not the same thing 
could not be done outside of the Canadian Wheat Board rather 
than the Canadian Wheat Board being the sole avenue for that 
type of credit. 
 
I think of Bombardier selling locomotives and cars to 
Indonesia. The federal government provided credit to Indonesia 
to purchase those locomotives and those cars from Bombardier 
in Quebec. The same as the federal government provides credit 
to the Canadian Wheat Board to sell grain to Poland, or Russia, 
or wherever it might be, Mr. Minister. That credit availability is 
there for the government, the federal government, to exercise if 
they wish. In the case of Bombardier, they felt that there was an 
economic advantage to Canada to utilize . . . an economic 
benefit for Canada to sell those locomotives, therefore they 
provided the credit. 
 
The federal government believes that it is to the economic 
advantage of Canada to sell wheat and barley through the 
Canadian Wheat Board, so they allow credit through the 
Canadian Wheat Board to their purchasers. You don’t just have 
to be under the Canadian Wheat Board to get that economic 
benefit from the federal government, Mr. Minister. 
 
And that’s the part that most Canadian Wheat Board supporters 
refuse to recognize, that the Canadian Wheat Board is not the 
sole agency to provide credit to purchasers offshore, Mr. 
Minister. I’m glad to note though that in your commentaries 
though, you did point out some of the areas where the federal 
government is providing subsidies to farmers. And again I 
would have to ask under those circumstances then, why some of 
the other farmers in Canada who also sell and produce wheat 
and barley are not entitled to those same subsidies. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, when you’re looking at those areas, there is 
benefits available outside of the Canadian Wheat Board. You 
quoted that there was an advantage to the Canadian Wheat  

Board of some approximately 5 cents a bushel of benefit. Well, 
Mr. Minister, the study done by Colin A. Carter and R.M.A. 
Loyns, The Economics of Single Desk Selling of Western 
Canadian Grain, and I’d like to quote one sentence from it: 
 

The Canadian Wheat Board claims the cost to farmers to 
run the CWB is less than 5 cents per bushel. We find it to 
be much higher than that, perhaps 10 times higher. 

 
One of the things, Mr. Minister, that this study is pointing out, 
and that most farmers believe, is that the Canadian Wheat 
Board, because as you argued, does not have to generate a 
profit, also doesn’t have to run efficiently. Because farmers 
themselves, to date, have never been able to see the internal 
administrative costs of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
You threw out a figure of $43 million for the administration 
end of it. I think that’s the first time I’ve heard that number 
passed around. Because farmers, up until this point, have never 
had the opportunity to have a look at the books of the Canadian 
Wheat Board to determine whether or not they’re handling the 
farmers’ money  because after all, the cost to administer the 
Canadian Wheat Board are paid for by the farmers  whether 
or not those monies were being dealt with properly. Whether 
the administration was efficient, inefficient, nobody knew 
because they’ve never had an opportunity to have a look at 
them. 
 
And certainly our entire economy, Mr. Minister, is driven by the 
economics of profit. We only do things because we believe that 
we can get a return for ourselves, a return with which, if we so 
desire, we can support someone else. We can provide for 
someone else as well as ourselves. 
 
But without profit nobody stays in business. That is nobody, 
under your terms, except the Canadian Wheat Board. The 
Canadian Wheat Board can stay in business because they don’t 
have to generate a profit. And because they don’t have to 
generate a profit, they don’t have to be efficient. They can 
spend as they see fit without the scrutiny of farmers who pay 
the bills. 
 
We look at the Wheat Board Advisory Committee. Now a 
number of supporters of the Canadian Wheat Board believe that 
the Canadian Wheat Board Advisory Committee is the 
watchdog for the farmers. But unfortunately, Mr. Minister, the 
Canadian Wheat Board Advisory Committee has no authority, it 
has no power, it’s simply a means of advising the Wheat Board 
as to what they think farmers believe. 
 
Well I think farmers expressed that . . . their intentions towards 
the Wheat Board Advisory Committee by only 20 per cent of 
them voting. Obviously the belief was that they had no impact 
on the Canadian Wheat Board; that their advice was simply 
ignored or irrelevant. The commissioners did as they chose. The 
federal government, if anything, was able to direct those 
commissioners, and that the farmers had no input whatsoever, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
So when you say 5 cents a bushel, this study says it can be as 
much as 10 times that. And I believe that farmers are paying  



2930  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

perhaps more than they should because they haven’t had the 
opportunity to look at the books to make the determinations as 
to whether their best interests are being served by the Canadian 
Wheat Board. And until those books are opened up, farmers 
will never have the opportunity to make that determination. 
 
But the studies that have been done, the Canadian Wheat Board 
financed the Kraft study. And we all know, Mr. Minister, that if 
you hire somebody to write a report for you, they can write the 
report to bring forward the recommendations you wish to find. 
 
This report was done by a third party not directly involved in 
the Canadian Wheat Board; not directly involved in the 
production of grain. I suspect, Mr. Minister, that this report is 
more unbiased  I’m not going to say it’s totally unbiased 
because I don’t know  but more unbiased than the Kraft 
report would be when it is paid for by the Canadian Wheat 
Board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well first of all I want to straighten you 
out on the subsidy, just for the record. Taxpayers don’t 
subsidize farmers. The advantage of farmers come from the 
market-place. Your theory, your theory would make the 
market-place work; the wheat board is making it work. 
 
I want to make a comment on the administration. If you just 
were to zip out to the library and get the annual report for the 
Wheat Board for the last number of years  they file an annual 
report  and it breaks out the administration costs. It’s right 
there. And you can just determine in your own mind whether 
you think that’s too much or too little. 
 
Now you say you make this argument because you say that the 
books of the board should be open. Well I’ll tell you, as soon as 
you go to Continental, Bunge, or Cargill or any of the major 
traders and walk in and they open their book up for you, that 
will be the day that I start advertising that the Wheat Board 
should open up their books totally to the public, so that their 
competitors, the private trades of the world, know what their 
books are saying. It doesn’t make any sense. 
 
(1200) 
 
I know the argument is a philosophical argument that you’re 
making, because you don’t believe that farmers should . . . or I 
guess you believe that farmers should get $500 million a year 
less. That’s fine, if that’s what your party’s position is. I can 
live with that quite happily, thank you very much. 
 
Just want to talk about the Carter-Loyns study as opposed 
Kraft-Tyrchniewicz-Furtan study. Yes, the Wheat Board paid 
for the three very well-respected agriculture economists  one 
from Alberta, one from Saskatchewan, and one from Manitoba. 
Highly respected and highly known throughout Canada and 
North America. 
 
Mr. Carter, University of California  Berkeley? No it’s not 
Berkeley but it’s University of California  who a couple of 
years ago came out with a glowing report on the Canadian 
Wheat Board, a glowing report. All of a sudden now turns 
around and says, paid for, if you want to use your logic, by the  

Alberta government. Independent third party, right? 
 
Now my question to you is this. Why would you sooner believe 
somebody from the University of California in the United 
States, with all due respect to the person, but why would you 
sooner take their word for what’s happening with the Canadian 
Wheat Board when, by the way, they didn’t see the sales for the 
last 14 years like the people in Canada did? Why would you 
want to believe them instead of our highly respected 
economists? Or is it simply the fact that your logic says that the 
board has no place in western Canada, because I’m a free 
enterpriser and I can sell my grain even if I lose money. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s my right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That’s your right, exactly. But don’t 
inflict your narrow logic on the producers of this province. 
That’s why you’ve got five members over there. If you want to 
expand and compete with the stumbling Liberal Party, then you 
should have changed that logic. 
 
But don’t inflict your narrow logic onto the people of this 
province just because you have the right to sell your grain at a 
loss, or less, of what the Wheat Board can get. It’s not right. As 
an elected person you know that’s not right. And your 
responsibility is opposite of what you’re preaching. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I’m very interested in this debate this morning, and I 
think it’s a worthwhile debate. But as I listen to your comments 
here, you suggest that my colleague’s ideals are narrow and 
that, because his logic is narrow, then it should be overruled 
and not used in the equation. 
 
Okay, on the other side of the analysis, what if there are a lot of 
people that think that your approach is narrow. Then shouldn’t 
you also change your position? If your logic is considered to be 
narrow by a majority of people, wouldn’t you think then it’s 
time for you to change some of your logic if you would expect 
those in our caucus to change theirs. So I throw it back to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Absolutely. If I thought my logic was the 
minority, I would review that logic. Your colleague just 
complimented us for what he perceived as a changed opinion as 
far as subsidy to the cattle industry goes. At one time I believe 
that there should have been subsidies, but now I don’t. I think 
my belief was in the minority. 
 
And the logic that was put forward to me was that if you 
subsidize the industry, it’s capitalized into that operation, and 
when the bottom falls out and all of a sudden the government’s 
run out of money, that industry crashes 10 times harder than it 
would if it wasn’t subsidized. If there is a particular case, a 
year, for an extended period of time where the prices are 
devastating and you’re going to lose the industry, then you have 
to look at not just the provincial, but federal-provincial support 
for that industry whether it’s livestock, grain, or whatever. 
 
So I have changed. I admit that. If I thought that my position 
was in the minority of the Wheat Board, I’d reassess it. But  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2931 

there’s every indication to support  there were many meetings 
around this province by the western grain marketing panel who 
are going to report in a couple of weeks  overwhelming 
support for the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And everybody talks about the polls and the studies and they 
say, your numbers say this. And I say no, no, my numbers don’t 
say that; my numbers say something else about supporting the 
board. But there was a test, I want to remind you, there was a 
test of support for the board. 
 
The election of the Canadian Wheat Board advisory became the 
focal point for whether people supported the board or whether 
they didn’t support the board. Ten members were elected. Nine 
out of ten were ran on a support the Canadian Wheat Board 
ticket  nine out of ten. That’s all you have to tell. You don’t 
talk about . . . I don’t care about our polls or your studies or 
whatever. That’s the test  because people voted. 
 
And then somebody will come back and say, well only certain 
. . . 20, 25 per cent of the people voted. Don’t use that argument 
on me. Don’t use that argument on me. Because they had the 
right. Okay. They had the right. But the majority of the people 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  It accomplished nothing; they’re 
changing their minds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Majority of the people . . . And you say, 
they’re changing their minds. Well I don’t think so. 
 
So anyway, I think that there is growing support. I think I’m in 
the majority in my logic and I think you’re in a very small 
minority with yours. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, it 
is significant that only 20 per cent of the people voted in that 
vote. And while it equips you with good debating material to 
use these numbers and these analogies, the reality of life here is 
that only 20 per cent of the people voted because they did not 
consider that an advisory board had any real powers to do 
anything in the real world. And therefore they considered it 
insignificant and unimportant to bother to quit their farming 
operations to bother to sign up with a ballot and send it in. And 
as simple as that. 
 
People have come into a transitionary period where they no 
longer really seriously know for sure how they want to vote. 
And so because they are now starting to become confused about 
what they really want, because they are starting to challenge the 
concepts of the old ideas, they therefore didn’t bother to vote. 
And that you will always see happening in the democratic 
process just before people come over to another opinion, 
another side, which is vastly different than the one that they 
took in history, in the past. So we’re saying to you, Minister, 
that you’re misreading the results of what those votes really 
meant. 
 
And I want to take up the argument with you just a little bit 
further about what you say about the Canadian Wheat Board. 
And I do believe that most farmers do support the Canadian  

Wheat Board. No question in my mind about that. I personally 
support the Canadian Wheat Board. No doubt about that either. 
It does a lot of good work and has done a lot of good work. 
 
At the same time though, the dual-marketing concept does not 
mean the elimination of the Canadian Wheat Board. It only 
means that we allow individual producers the opportunity to 
make some of the deals for themselves. 
 
Now you can use the argument of course of eastern Canada 
where they’ve had what is effectively a dual-marketing system 
for all time. They have a wheat board, I understand, there but 
they’re also allowed to sell to local millers, and they can do as 
they please. Makes imminent sense to me that you can do that. 
 
Let’s talk about malting barley just for a minute. If I want to sell 
malting barley, I have to go and take a sample out of my 
granary. I have to submit it to a grain company who submits it 
to the maltster. If the maltster accepts it, he tells the grain 
company it’s accepted, and the grain company tells me it’s 
accepted and I can bring it when the maltster calls for it. 
 
The grain company hasn’t any say in this matter. They have to 
wait until the maltster calls for it. If my grain is called for, I 
deliver it to the grain elevator. The grain elevator in turn loads it 
back up onto another truck and takes it to the maltster. The 
maltster has the option still to refuse that grain. He can turn it 
back and say, it’s no good, I don’t want it. 
 
So why did we need the grain company in the middle of all this 
at all? Why did we need to have the Canadian Wheat Board 
involved at all? Because, quite frankly, the maltster decides 
who the customer is he’s going to buy from right from the start. 
He has discriminatory power. He does not . . . it has nothing to 
do with equality, nothing to do with fair play, nothing to do 
with giving everybody equal opportunity to that market. The 
maltster picks the producer he wants to buy from and he buys 
from him because every sample is identified. 
 
And if they don’t want it, they don’t have to take it. If they 
don’t like the colour of my eyes when I walk in there with that 
load of grain at the end, they don’t have to buy it. And they 
don’t have to explain that. They don’t have to tell anybody why 
they rejected that grain. They simply can pick out any number 
of things that they choose on a big long list and they can say, 
this is not good enough quality this year; we don’t want that. 
 
So why are we paying $800 a carload then to run this through 
the Canadian Wheat Board grain elevator system? That’s what 
producers are asking because they know very well that they 
could go directly to that maltster with their sample and either 
have it accepted or rejected, and then deliver it when it’s called 
with their own truck right to Biggar, Saskatchewan where most 
of our malt barley is going today. 
 
And all we are doing is subsidizing the Wheat Board, and in 
many cases, the grain elevator companies with handlings that 
they really don’t deserve to have and shouldn’t have with . . . 
the exception of course is the barley that goes overseas. 
 
Now that is where your dual-marketing system comes. Those  



2932  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

that can’t deliver to the local market now have to depend on the 
Wheat Board to ship that grain overseas if it’s acceptable. And 
usually the standards are lower in the overseas market. That’s 
the way it plays out. 
 
It wouldn’t be any different if you had a dual-marketing system. 
The local producers would fill up the local market, and 
everybody else that has barley left over would take theirs to the 
Wheat Board and have a sample accepted or rejected by the 
international market. 
 
What would be so much different about that and how could that 
be unfair to anybody? In fact how could it be anything but a 
positive thing for everyone who is in the barley business, when 
those who ship into the domestic market, everyone of them, 
have $800 more in their pocket for every car lot that is sold? It’s 
a profit-profit-profit situation for producers, and it changes 
nothing in terms of fairness, equality, and it does not affect the 
price whatsoever. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I challenge you to show us how the Canadian 
Wheat Board is benefiting us by taking 800 bucks for every car 
lot off of us simply to do a little bit of paperwork and to double 
handle the grain, which, you know very well as a barley 
producer, oftentimes the extra handling causes that barley to 
deteriorate in quality because of the cracking and the splitting 
and all of the things that go on when you elevate it in and out 
and back and forth. 
 
Not only that. Of course there’s always the chance of 
contamination every time you run grain through another 
person’s system. And when that contamination occurs, lots of 
times that’s why that barley is rejected. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you also defend the Canadian Wheat 
Board’s ability to handle all of our grains internationally. And 
you say that they do a good job of that, and you’re right in most 
cases but there are always exceptions. And we have to deal with 
some of these exceptions too. 
 
The reality of life is that the Canadian Wheat Board often 
creates a situation where there is grain being sold in Canada at 
lower prices than we could be receiving in the export market. 
And they do that deliberately in order to shore up other parts of 
the industry according to the politics of a cheap food policy in 
Ottawa. 
 
And I’ll give you an example right here, and I’ll quote from a 
newsletter. And I’m not going to identify it because we’re not 
supposed to. But I’ll quote you what they say because it tells 
exactly what’s going on: 
 

U.S. National Cattlemen’s Association wants Canadian 
Wheat Board restrictions on barley sales into the U.S. 
ended . . . wants U.S. users to be able to buy direct from 
Canadian producers and has requested assistance from the 
Canadian Cattlemen’s Association. 
 
The USNCA says lower Canadian domestic barley prices 
give cattle feeders here a $60-a-head cost advantage. Board 
selling prices to the U.S. feeders are higher than  

producer prices to Canadian feeders. 
 
Relative feed costs could become a cattle trade issue. U.S. 
cattle groups are already eyeing Canadian cattle exports as 
possible source of downward price pressure. 

 
And you know why that is. Because the Canadian Wheat Board 
has deliberately turned down sales of barley into the 
international market which would have triggered an increase in 
price because the supply and demand factor in Canada would 
then have seen that there was a shortage of barley coming here 
and the prices would have gone up. 
 
That’s what happened when the Canadian Wheat Board turned 
down sales early in the last crop year to Japan at prices of four 
bucks a bushel when we were only getting $3 here. That type of 
a comparison. Those are not exact figures. 
 
(1215) 
 
But that is exactly what happened. The Wheat Board turned 
down those contracts because they did not want to short the 
system here. And they knew very well that if they kept the 
system full here that the supply and demand factors would 
work. The supply and demand system does work if you let it 
alone. 
 
You can manipulate it  and the Canadian Wheat Board has 
been doing exactly that. That’s why all of Alberta is on the fight 
to get rid of the Canadian Wheat Board all together. Because 
now they see directly why there are things that are affecting 
them in terms of prices as grain producers, and they want to 
dump the whole thing. 
 
You, as the Minister of Agriculture, can help to stop that 
because we don’t want to lose the Canadian Wheat Board. We 
don’t want to throw the baby out with the bath water. We want 
to save some of it, but you’ve got to let go on those things that 
you have said that you are willing to listen to and understand. 
 
You just conceded that on subsidies you understood things 
differently now that you’re the minister and you see the light. 
Well the truth of the matter is that the barley producers have 
seen the light as well. And they now want you to be challenged 
to see their point of view. So I’ll wait for your opinions on this 
matter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I enjoy this debate too much. And I 
could go on for . . . make a great long speech on this. But it 
boils down to one thing  philosophy, philosophy. 
 
And what you do. . . what you folks do is confuse, confuse 
logic because you say, okay . . . you assume that the price 
you’re getting through the board now is the price you’re going 
to get if the board is gone. Give your head a shake. In the 
open-market system there is one price. In the open-market 
system there is one price. That’s the daily street price  one 
price. 
 
Under the Canadian Wheat Board system there are premium 
prices above the street to the tune of a half a billion dollars a  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2933 

year for western Canada. We know that because we had three 
agriculture economic professors study the sales for the last 14 
years. You can call them liars if you want. I don’t. I believe 
them. 
 
But do you wonder why the Americans want to get rid of the 
board? They want to get rid of the board because then they can 
up and dicker and bid us down to the lowest common 
denominator, the lowest price possible. That’s why. 
 
What you should do is go back and talk to somebody that’s 
lived through it. Go back and talk to somebody who’s lived 
through before the board and ask them why the board was 
created and if the board made a difference. Go and talk to 
somebody who was shipping grain and not making the freight 
on it because the elevator companies weren’t paying, and the 
price the elevator company was really selling for was 10 times. 
 
Canola right now is traded, on an average, 10 times from your 
farm to the consumer. Why do you want to advocate somebody 
being able to make money off of your product possibly 10 
times? Some will lose  it won’t be 10 times, but half a dozen 
times. Why would you advocate that system, ideology? 
 
And I go back to the point that yes, your ideology is you have 
the right to your ideology. But the question is, is the right of the 
individual more important than the right of the collective? 
 
In this case, it is not. Because in this case the dollars are 
proven. In this case, we’ve proven through serious study . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, somebody’s getting hungry. I 
think, through serious study, that the right of the masses, of the 
farmers to collectively get more money is more important than 
what you think that the individual right is  that he can sell his 
grain wherever he wants to, whenever he wants to, and he’ll get 
just as much money. That isn’t true. 
 
Go back and talk to some of your old neighbours who’ve lived 
through this. The person who could wait until the middle of 
winter to haul their grain when the prices were up. 
 
Go look at the price charts before the board. In harvest time the 
prices were rock bottom, and those people who had to put bread 
on the table were taking their wagon loads of grain to town for 
nothing, for basically nothing. But if you had a few bucks in 
your pocket and you could wait until winter, until February, the 
prices always maxed out in the second or third week in 
February, always maxed out. Then they’d start going down for 
the spring. 
 
In this case, the individual right is not more important than the 
collective right. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  But you see, Minister, you miss the whole 
point. You get caught up in your philosophical debate, thinking 
that that’s what it is, when in fact it’s not a philosophical 
debate. 
 
I’m a farmer. You see, here’s my pocket. There’s nothing in 
there. I’ve got no money left to dicker with in the market. 
That’s why we have taken up this debate. Because the truth of  

the matter is, Minister, that the very umpteen dozen people that 
you talk about being in the system taking a profit out of it, other 
than farmers and users, are some of the ones that we can 
eliminate with a dual-marketing system. 
 
You see it just proved to me, this debate, in the last five 
minutes you’ve proven to me that you absolutely have no 
concept of how a duel-marketing system could and would work. 
Because you tie it to philosophy and all these other rhetoric 
things. The truth of the matter is that the more people that you 
have in the market-place buying your product, the higher the 
price will go. 
 
The other proof of the fact that you don’t understand what’s 
going on is the reality that the Americans want to buy barley 
and the Canadian Wheat Board has put restrictions on selling it 
to them. That’s got nothing g to do with philosophy. It’s got 
nothing to do with fair play for the producers here. 
 
If the producers were going to get fair play, the Canadian Wheat 
Board would have sold the barley to Japan last winter and last 
fall. They would have sold it to the Americans now instead of 
putting restrictions on it. They’d sell that barley, clean the 
system out, cause that shortage that would drive the price up. 
Instead of that, we’re sitting on a surplus going into next fall’s 
crop and it’s going to be at dirt cheap prices. 
 
And it is all motivated by an Ottawa government that you 
should be recognizing as the fall guys here with a cheap food 
policy. And they’re using the Canadian Wheat Board to 
manipulate the prices of grain down in Canada and we only 
benefit by the Canadian Wheat Board when it sells 
internationally. All of Canadian grains are being sold dirt 
cheap, cheaper than they should be, because we’ve got a cheap 
food policy in Ottawa, and you can’t even understand that. 
 
It’s no wonder people at the Palliser wheat growers wonder 
how you ever got to be the Minister of Agriculture. I mean they 
are absolutely amazed. And, my friend, as much as I like you, 
there are some days I wonder too. 
 
So let’s think about this. I believe you’re a smart man, and I 
think the fact that it took you. . . How many years have you 
been in politics, 10 or 15? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Ten years. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: Ten years. It took you 10 years to figure out 
that subsidies to the cattle industry were really bad. It took you 
10 years to figure that out. Lord help us, I hope it doesn’t take 
10 years for you to figure out that the Canadian Wheat Board 
has been manipulating the barley markets and that that’s bad. 
 
But we’ve got to try because we haven’t got 10 years to wait. 
We’ve got farmers who are preparing all the time in this 
province to challenge the law. You know about those things as 
well as I do. We do not advocate civil disobedience but we 
understand why it happens. 
 
What causes people to become civilly disobedient? It is because 
they are so absolutely convinced that the price they will pay for  



2934  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

breaking the law is worth paying in order to achieve the goal of 
changing that law. 
 
Those people must have a conviction. How many people do you 
know that really want to go before the courts to defend 
themselves, want to risk going to jail for breaking the law? How 
many people do you know that consciously would go out and 
do that, that are of the kind of people who have families, have 
businesses, have financial investments at stake? How many 
people do you know that would seriously want to jeopardize all 
of that for a principle that wasn’t important? 
 
It just does not make sense, Mr. Minister. It only makes sense 
that these people believe so strongly in what they are doing that 
they are willing to pay the price to get a change. 
 
I believe that there is going to be more of that. I think that the 
Minister of Agriculture, federally, is going to be challenged 
very seriously in the near future by many, many farmers to 
change these rules. If we don’t change a little bit, then we will 
see a reaction throughout the country that will cause a massive 
change and we could in fact lose the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
And we don’t want to lose it. There are many people that do 
need the Wheat Board. They use it, it is good for them, and they 
benefit by it. Because there are, quite frankly, still some 
producers that would never understand the open market well 
enough to be able to survive. I am challenged by it myself. I 
think most farmers are. But some do very well with it. 
 
But for those that don’t know it or don’t understand it, it is a 
reality that they would want the Canadian Wheat Board to still 
be there. That option must be preserved for them. But it also 
must be preserved in such a way that it is open, accountable, 
and honest. And right now the farmers of this country, rightly or 
wrongly, believe that the system is corrupt and that it is working 
against their best interests. We don’t know exactly why but we 
do understand that that is the feeling. 
 
And I guess we can speculate as to why they think that way. 
And the speculation would have to come in this term: that those 
things that are happening to the farmers as a result of the 
actions of a Wheat Board that is not open and accountable, does 
not open its books, then confuses the people into thinking that it 
must be corrupt. On the other hand, maybe it is  how do we 
know? 
 
So, Mr. Minister, think seriously about this. The barley trade is 
going to be challenged seriously. The wheat trade is not so 
significant in this debate right now because we do sell most of 
our wheat internationally at pretty good prices. But it will be 
next because certainly . . . as certainly as people can recognize 
in Alberta that barley is a problem, they will soon recognize that 
our Canadian millers are buying cheap wheat with which to 
make bread for Canadians at a cheaper price than they would be 
paying if the prices were not manipulated by the Canadian 
Wheat Board. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think I should give you a minute to respond 
because I know you have got some things on your mind and it’s 
getting close to the dinner hour probably. 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well yes, thank you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Long question, short answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Short answer, yes, short answer. 
 
The members opposite will continue this debate, and I just want 
to say one thing: try to catch up to me, okay? You just said that 
I changed my mind about subsidies. I have restructured my 
thoughts, let’s put it that way. 
 
It’s time that you made one move now: admit that you’re wrong 
when you say . . . admit that you’re wrong when you say that 
you want farmers to have $500 million less a year. It wouldn’t 
hurt that much. 
 
But I’ve made one change. And if you think I’m going to 
change my mind on the Canadian Wheat Board, then you might 
be fairly long in the tooth before that happens, unless it totally 
goes to pot. 
 
But just join with me. Be a little more flexible. Tell those 
farmers you really do want them to have that half a billion 
dollars a year that the Wheat Board gets them, and that you 
don’t want to take it away from them. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1:30 p.m. 
 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2935 
 June 20, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to the closure 
of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Melville, 
Neudorf, Regina Beach, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 
present petitions of names from throughout southern 
Saskatchewan regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The communities involved are Weyburn, Ormiston, Tugaske, 
Central Butte, Moose Jaw, Rockglen Fife Lake, Caronport, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Kronau, Sedley, Regina, White City, and other points 
throughout the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from people in Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
People that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Big 
Beaver, Coronach, Yorkton, Ogema, and Assiniboia, but the 
majority are from Bengough. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Carievale and 
Carnduff primarily, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise again 
today to present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that signed these petitions are from Moose Jaw, 
Regina, and Wadena. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition has been signed by many 
concerned citizens from a wonderful little community on the 
north end of Last Mountain Lake by the name of Imperial. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Pense, Coderre, Caronport, Moose Jaw, as 
well as some from Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues today and people of Saskatchewan in their efforts to 
save the Plains Health Centre by bringing forward petitions. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have pages and pages of these today, and it looks 
like the most of them are from Regina, but in fact there are 
many from my own area in Frontier, Bracken, Climax. I so 
present. 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased today to present a petition regarding the Family  



2936  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Support Centre. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to urge the Department of Social 
Services of the province of Saskatchewan to reconsider the 
decision to reduce programs and to return the programs of 
the Saskatoon Family Support Centre to their previous 
level of delivery of service. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition. And I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated toward double-laning of Highway No. 1; and 
further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 
monies available from the federal infrastructure program 
toward double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than allocating 
these funds toward capital construction projects in the 
province. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioner will ever pray. 

 
And this comes from the people in Shaunavon, Simmie, 
Frontier, and a lot of other people who risk their lives on that 
particular stretch of highway daily. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today, 
Mr. Speaker, to present petitions on behalf of the people from 
the Dollard, Moose Jaw, and Shaunavon communities. I’ll read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 
dedicated towards the double-laning of Highway No. 1; 
and further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct 
any monies available from the federal infrastructure 
program toward double-laning Highway No. 1 rather than 
allocating these funds towards capital construction projects 
in the province. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I am happy to present these, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order, petitions respecting the 
double-laning of Highway No. 1, and the closure of the Plains 
Health Centre, have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) 
they are hereby read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I’d like to introduce to you and to the rest of my 
colleagues, a fine group of students from the fine city of 
Neudorf, Saskatchewan who are in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
And they’ve come here to see this great building and facility,  

meet the wonderful people that are here. And I look forward to 
meeting them later on after awhile here in the session. 
 
They are accompanied by their teacher Mrs. Gwen Lang, and 
chaperons Mrs. Hoehn and Mrs. Scheirer. 
 
Please help me welcome these fine people to the Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce in the west 
gallery to you and to the other members of the Assembly, two 
very hard-working, dedicated staff that belong to me in 
Redberry Lake, Irene Attrux and Doreen Wintonyk. They are in 
town for the working session this morning and are going to 
watch the session for awhile and then return back to Hafford to 
represent me at a public meeting tonight. And I ask you all to 
welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 
and through you a group from Kamsack. And I would just like 
to reiterate what I have said in the past on the floor of the 
legislature about the sun coming up on the east side of the 
province and that we have a head start. Well if you look at the 
students and the teachers up there it just shows you how bright 
we are. We have that extra hour a day. 
 
And the group I’d like to introduce are 43 grade 4 students from 
Victoria School in Kamsack. Bringing them in today is Gwen 
Reilkoff, teachers Lorrie Neher and Don Brock, and I’d like you 
all to join with me and welcome them to the legislature today. 
I’ll be meeting with them in a about half an hour. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and through you to members of 
the Assembly, a person sitting in your gallery who is visiting us 
today for the second time in this building. The first time I 
believe was in 1934. 
 
Mrs. Arelisle Lloyd, at 81 years of age, from Watrous, spent 
most of her life in Imperial, drove down today to visit with us in 
the Assembly. And her special purpose here is to keep a close 
eye on her grandson, Mark Lloyd, one of our pages. So I would 
. . . I think she’s got a tough job ahead of her. I think that I 
would like all members to help me welcome Mrs. Arelisle 
Lloyd. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to the 
rest of the Assembly, I would too like to welcome Mrs. Lloyd to 
the Assembly, a former resident of Imperial and a wonderful 
supporter of mine through our health discussion in the 
community and in my new adventures. And I’d just like to 
welcome her here today as well. 
 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2937 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Good Student Summer Employment Prospects 
 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As today marks the 
first day of summer, it seems like an appropriate time to relay 
some good news concerning summer employment prospects for 
students. 
 
As I was thinking about the issue today, I was reminded of a 
conversation I had with the former Tory minister of Human 
Resources, Grant Schmidt, back when I was a student leader in 
the late ‘80s. 
 
I’d met with Mr. Schmidt to impress upon him the need for 
government help in creating student employment. He responded 
that he thought students should stop complaining about being 
unemployed and should stop looking to the government for 
help. Instead he said that they should turn to the Bible for help. 
Specifically he told me students should heed the Bible’s 
wisdom by following the passage that says, “Seek and ye shall 
find”. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we did just that. We sought a change in 
government, tossed out the Tories, and do you know what? We 
did find that things got an awful lot better. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to advise you that this year alone the Regina 
student employment centre notes that they are placing more 
students and that placements could rise by as much as 15 per 
cent. 
 
And I am pleased that, unlike the previous Tory administration, 
this government has helped students find work. Through both 
the JobStart-Future Skills program and the Partnerships ’96 
program that will create 2,200 new jobs for students, we are 
helping students find employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the statistics are very encouraging and I’d like to 
offer my best wishes to all Saskatchewan students and 
Saskatchewan employers who will be working together this 
summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Duke of Edinburgh Award 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to give recognition to a constituent of mine, David 
Yeager. David has completed the requirements of the Duke of 
Edinburgh’s Award, Young Canadians Challenge  the silver 
level. This award is the most prestigious achievement award for 
young Canadians. 
 
David is in grade 11, a student at the Humboldt Collegiate. He 
is a member of the Saskatoon youth retreat team and president 
of St. Augustine’s senior youth group. He is also actively 
involved in 4-H and cadets. For the expedition requirement of 
the program, David planned and completed a bicycle trip to 
Melfort, a 250 kilometre round trip that included two nights of  

camping. 
 
At the award presentation in Humboldt tomorrow afternoon, 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan will 
present David with a lapel pin. In addition, I will have the 
pleasure of presenting David with the second part of the Duke 
of Edinburgh Award  a certificate of achievement. 
Congratulations David Yeager; we are all very proud of you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Awards From Seeds Canada Foundation 
 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
congratulate Hillside School and Pleasantdale School, both in 
Estevan, for receiving environmental awards from the Seeds 
Canada Foundation. The Seeds Canada Foundation encourages 
schools and teachers to become involved in environmental 
education projects. Schools that complete 100 projects get a 
Green Award; for 250 projects, they get a Jade Award; for 500 
projects, they get an Emerald Award; and after completing 
1,000 projects, they are named an Earth School. 
 
Hillside School has received a Jade Award for two years of 
recycling, cleaning up the environment, planting trees, and 
other projects. Pleasantdale School has just become an Emerald 
Award winner for over 500 projects. They have been working 
on different community and environmental projects for five 
years now and have conducted many clean-up and 
environmental campaigns around Estevan. 
 
Both schools are on their way to becoming Earth Schools, Mr. 
Speaker, which is the highest award from the Seeds Canada 
Foundation. I’d like to point out that Saskatchewan has six 
Earth Schools out of seventeen across Canada  that’s 35 per 
cent for a province with less than 4 per cent of the population. 
 
I think it’s a wonderful success story and I’d like to thank all 
Earth Schools in the province and other schools that are running 
environmental programs for doing their part to promote 
awareness and encourage the three R’s of reduce, reuse, and 
recycle. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteer Awards 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate some outstanding young people in my constituency 
who were recently honoured for their volunteer efforts. This 
month the Porcupine Plain health care auxiliary held an 
appreciation supper for volunteers from grade 8 to 12. 
 
Tim Buchanan was presented with the volunteer of the year 
award for working over 163 hours in the Red Deer Nursing 
Home. 
 
Tammy Fetis, Alicia Armitage, Karla Bender, Melissa Rodgers, 
Janelle Kowalyk, and Kyla Sabean, and Jeannie Haight will also 
receive volunteer certificates. I think the amount of time and 
effort spent by these young people to make their  



2938  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

community of Porcupine Plain better is simply outstanding. 
 
In total the junior volunteers put in over 2,000 hours of service 
last year. It is the type of community effort that keeps this 
community alive. 
 
I would like to thank them, and the members of the Assembly to 
join with me in congratulating them on their volunteer service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Minds Eye Pictures Film Deal 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we 
heard some encouraging employment news for students from 
the member for Regina South, and I too have some good news 
concerning jobs, that deals with Saskatchewan’s film industry. 
 
The city of Regina is becoming somewhat of a Hollywood 
North. Minds Eye Pictures, represented by Kevin Dewalt, has 
just negotiated a $7.2 million deal with Condor, a Swiss film 
company. 
 
The deal involves production of a film based on the Solar 
Temple tragedy in the form of a four-hour television miniseries 
called The Lost Daughter. It’s a story about an oil man from 
Saskatchewan who is looking for his daughter who has been 
lost to a cult. 
 
Post-production will be done in Saskatchewan and a crew of 
performers from the province will travel to Switzerland for 
shooting of the film. The Saskatchewan shoot will begin in 
Regina. This project, which is 65 per cent Canadian owned with 
assistance from SaskFILM and SOCO (Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation), will locate 250 jobs locally. 
 
So I’d like to congratulate Minds Eye Pictures, all the local cast 
and crew who will be taking part. It’s excellent news for the 
provincial economy and this growing Saskatchewan film 
industry. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Heritage Award for Waskesiu Golf Clubhouse 
 
Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Waskesiu golf 
course clubhouse and Edwards & Edwards Architects limited 
have received a prestigious building award. The golf clubhouse 
was recognized as a heritage building in 1986. Anyone who has 
been to the Prince Albert National Park golf course will 
appreciate the charm of this fine old building. 
 
Built in 1935, its design is well suited to the beautiful park 
situation. The clubhouse has not changed much since it was 
built, but recently it has needed repairs and additions was put 
on. 
 
Edwards & Edwards Architects of Saskatoon was contracted to 
do the work. They did such a fantastic job that the Waskesiu 
clubhouse has won an award. Edwards & Edwards won the  

1996 Vintage Building Award in the category of exterior 
renovations. 
 
I invite anyone travelling into my constituency this summer to 
be sure and stop at Waskesiu to see this historic and beautiful 
golf club. Please join me in congratulating Edwards & Edwards 
for their fine work in preserving our heritage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
 
Mr. Whitmore:  Mr. Speaker, beginning tomorrow the city 
of Saskatoon will become a jazz lovers’ paradise. That’s when 
the 11-day Saskatchewan Jazz Festival begins. People will be 
able to hear 134 musical groups at 100 different events. About 
half of these events are free to the public. 
 
The 1996 Jazz Festival, which is marking its 10 anniversary, 
features talent from across Canada as well as Australia, Italy, 
Britain, and the United States. Whether it’s blues, Dixieland, 
contemporary jazz, or gospel, the Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
has it all. 
 
With 48,000 people expected to attend the festival, the impact 
to the provincial economy is about $4.5 million. 
 
Besides offering excellent music, the Jazz Festival also includes 
seminars and workshops. The seminars provide an opportunity 
to learn more about the music from knowledgeable people in an 
informal setting. 
 
I would like to congratulate the 350 volunteers who help run 
this event, along with the festival manager, Sonia Morgan; 
president of the board, Mona Chappell; and the chairman of the 
festival committee, Bob Eaton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate SaskTel which is 
sponsoring the Jazz Festival for the second year in a row. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Village of Debden to Host La Fete Fransaskoise 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to take this opportunity to invite you and other members of this 
Assembly later this summer to Debden for a major event of the 
Saskatchewan French community, La Fete Fransaskoise. 
 
This year La Fete is being hosted by the village of Debden. The 
village is celebrating the 75th anniversary of the founding of its 
Catholic parish in 1921. 
 
La Fete is a cultural, leisure, and sports activity for all ages, so 
bring the entire family. Every year it provides a unique 
showcase for talent of many Saskatchewan artists. 
 
A minimum of 3,000 volunteer hours will be needed over the 
few days of the festival. So I take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker,  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2939 

to congratulate the volunteers in Debden for the important 
contribution they will be making to the success of this event. 
 
And I look forward to attending this event on August 2nd 
through the 5th. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Business Bankruptcies 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in spite 
of this NDP government’s rhetoric, members’ statements, and 
glossy brochures aimed at convincing Saskatchewan people that 
it is doing a great job on the economic front, the facts speak 
otherwise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  New figures show that business bankruptcies 
increased at the second fastest rate in Canada during the month 
of April. And you can take applause for that. This also 
represents a 60 per cent increase since last year. 
 
Will the minister explain how he can continue to boast about 
his attempts at economic development when businesses are 
closing down in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
member opposite that if she understood the statistics on 
bankruptcy she would know that during the last three years  
and we’ve released this information, the press has it  she 
would know that for the past three years our numbers on 
bankruptcies have gone down, down, down. She knows that. 
And if she would admit that, stand in the House and say that 
Saskatchewan has one of the lowest bankruptcy rates in 
Canada, you might have some credibility. 
 
Now it’s true that after three years of getting to the lowest level 
in Canada on bankruptcies, they’re up a little bit in the first 
quarter of this year. Which you might understand if you knew 
what the Saskatchewan winter was like in 1996. 
 
But if anyone who’s following this will know and watch, as we 
move through this year, that we have the highest number of 
incorporations in history in 1995 and one of the lowest levels of 
bankruptcies. If that isn’t good enough for you, then I just don’t 
understand what it is that would make that individual optimistic 
about the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
All you have to do is look at Saskatoon, look at Regina, look at 
the new companies starting up, and you would know that 
Saskatchewan is a good . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Next question. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It really isn’t me 
needs a reality check. I do know what’s going on out in the  

business world. And if the minister and his government were 
moving in the economy . . . or moving the economy in the 
proper direction, we would not be talking about the high 
number of business bankruptcies. We’d be talking about the 
fact that the economy is moving forward and that businesses are 
thriving. 
 
Will the Minister of Economic Development admit that his 
government’s taxation, over-regulation, and labour policies are 
driving Saskatchewan businesses out of business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I certainly wouldn’t 
because the chart that I’m going to send across to the member 
opposite would clearly indicate that when it comes to her 
comments about bankruptcies, she is absolutely out to lunch. 
 
The fact of the matter is in 1991 there were 583 bankruptcies; 
in 1992 there were 527; in ’93, 400; 1994, 411; in 1995 it 
dropped to its lowest level in 5 years at 366. During that same 
period, incorporations  that is new companies, new, setting 
up  went from 2,100 in ’91 to 3,100 in 1995, an increase of 
1,000. 
 
I’m going to table this, and maybe if the member could read this 
she would look at it and understand that companies are doing 
very well in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liquor Off-Sale Permits 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the minister responsible for the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority or his designate. 
 
Mr. Minister, a few weeks ago the Leader of the Official 
Opposition wrote a letter to you outlining a problem one of my 
constituents is having with a liquor off-sale permit. This man 
has taken over the Canora Hotel which has sold off-sale 
products for 14 years. But despite that, the new owner was told 
that he would not be getting a permit. 
 
After we checked into it, we found out that the government 
limits off-sale licences based on population. Canora’s 
population is now 2,381, just 119 less residents than the limit 
set by this government’s regulations. But, Mr. Minister, this 
limit does not take into account the farmers surrounding 
Canora, visitors to the area, or the people in small towns nearby 
that don’t have this type of establishment. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are severely harming this man’s chances to 
operate a viable business in rural Saskatchewan. Given the 
statistics we have just heard on bankruptcy, this is not 
surprising. Will you intervene on his behalf and make sure that 
he gets an off-sale permit like the previous owner had? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you would  



2940  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

all know, the regulation of liquor sales in the province and 
licensing is a practice that has been developed and built up over 
a long time, and whenever there’s changes to those policies, a 
lengthy period of consideration goes into all the effects, 
because of course, if a person is going to be 119 short, then 
what about somebody who’s 200 short or 300 short. 
 
So when you’re going to change those things, you have to look 
at the whole picture. I will make a commitment to pass on to the 
minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming your enquiry and 
I’m sure that they will get back to you with a response. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to point 
out to Madam Minister, that indeed a permit existed before. The 
policy was there before. There were two permits that were 
granted to the community before and they have been there for 
many years. 
 
There has now been a change of ownership. What we need to 
look at, Madam Minister, is when we determine off-sale 
licences, wouldn’t it be more fair to rural Saskatchewan 
residents if you took into account a greater economic radius. 
This should include farms and villages and hamlets. 
 
Madam Minister, will you look at changing this policy to 
encompass an entire economic area and help provide greater 
business opportunities for rural people and maybe, just maybe, 
set the bankruptcy numbers to go down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Mr. Speaker, one of the things I’d like 
to explain to the member is the principle behind liquor 
regulation is to control, limit, and regulate. And some of the 
people who are most in support of limits in the liquor industry 
is the liquor industry itself, because if there’s too many players 
in the industry, nobody can make a living either. And they are 
some of the strongest advocates. 
 
So I suggest that you keep tuned. I understand that the matter is 
being discussed, and perhaps as future regulations come 
forward we may be able to deal with this issue that you raise. 
But I just want you to understand that any change you make 
ripples through the whole industry, so you can’t make it without 
due consideration. 
 

Condie to Queen Elizabeth Power Line 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister in 
charge of SaskPower was questioned in this House last Friday 
about the status of the Condie-Queen Elizabeth transmission 
line. I pointed out at that time to him and to the House that the 
overwhelming majority of landowners along the proposed 
corridor are opposed to this project, and that 228 landowners 
are refusing to sign construction easements which would allow 
the work to begin. 
 
The minister indicated to us in this House, and I quote: 
 

I would want to say to the member that many of those 
people who have signed these letters have now signed their 
releases. 
 

Question to the minister is, Mr. Speaker, will he tell this House 
how many people have in fact signed these construction 
easements, and will he table that list today in the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, through you to the 
member, let me say that this process is an ongoing process that 
will take some time to complete. 
 
There are a number of people who will be affected with the 
construction of this line that will provide a secure supply of 
electricity for the north-west corner of the province, and I think 
have indicated, through the due diligence process that has taken 
place, that it will make not only environmental sense but 
economic sense. And I guess this process will be ongoing as we 
get approval for this line through the Condie-QE II (Queen 
Elizabeth) area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: I 
guess those are wonderful arguments and he should make those 
to those people that are affected by this and in particular the 
landowners. 
 
I’ll repeat the question once again: that he indicated in the 
House that a great number of those people that have signed the 
petition have already signed construction easements. I’ll ask 
him once more if he’ll tell us how many have actually signed 
that and to table the list today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I’m going to answer 
that by asking the member if he supports it or if he doesn’t 
support the proposal. That’s what I’m going to ask that 
member. And I’m going to ask that member if his colleague, the 
member from Athabasca, supports a secure supply of electricity 
for the Meadow Lake area and the area that he represents. 
Those are some questions that has to be asked. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to that member, that we will follow 
the proper procedures in consulting with the people whose land 
is in that corridor. And if the member isn’t happy with the 
proposal as it’s been put forth, where would he suggest these 
lines be put? Where would he suggest that those lines be put? 
 
I’m saying to the member opposite, we have a responsibility to 
supply a secure supply of electricity to all residents of this 
province. That means that some decisions have to be made with 
respect to transmission and distribution lines. 
 
We have made what I believe to be an appropriate decision and 
we will take the appropriate action to ensure that we supply 
electricity for the residents of the constituency of his colleague 
from Athabasca. 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2941 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Casino Tours 
 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister responsible for Gaming. Madam Minister, more 
details of your secret contract with Mr. Canada’s Touring 
Network have now been uncovered. As part of the untendered 
and secret contact, you are paying a Winnipeg company $40 a 
head for every person they bring to the casino. That’s well 
above the industry standard. It amounts to about $4 million a 
year. 
 
As one Regina tour operator put it, it’s a pretty sweet deal if 
you can get it. Madam Minister, why is such a sweet deal given 
to a Winnipeg company without even allowing Saskatchewan 
tour operators to bid? Will you release the secret contract 
today? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just start 
out by reminding you, as your representative would know on 
the Crown Corporations Review Committee, that the Freedom 
of Information Commissioner has ruled on the request to 
release this information, and I will quote him: 
 

The agreement in question is undoubtedly a commercial 
agreement, defines the rights and obligations of the parties, 
and it’s precisely the sort of document that prudent 
businessmen would be expected to keep confidential. 
 

Now within the context of that I will give you an answer to your 
other question. But let’s discuss the facts of this. With out first 
casino we were entering into a new market that we had never 
participated in before. It was very important to get someone 
with a proven track record, and in fact a business consultant 
reviewed the potential of the various tour companies to provide 
this kind of service. 
 
But if you want to know about the economic benefits, I suggest 
that you ask Gord Staseson, the chair of the board of SGC 
(Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation); Joe Laxdal, the president 
of Tourism Regina; Lowell Monkhouse, the executive director 
of Regina Market Square; Jane Dorsett, centre manager at 
Cornwall Centre; Jim Moats, general manager, Howard Johnson 
Hotels; Brendan O’Bryan, general manager . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had a long and 
impressive list but none of those happened to be operators 
talking about the money that was going to Manitoba because of 
this, and that’s what the question was, and you seemed to miss 
that. 
 
Madam Minister, I understand the Gaming Corporation is now 
considering a proposal from Mr. Canada to provide air charters 
from Alberta and B.C. (British Columbia). Do you plan on 
paying a similar head fee for these air charters? Will other 
companies be given a chance to bid on the contract? Will we 
get the terms of the contract? Why are you dealing only with 
Mr. Canada? And most importantly, Madam Minister, why  

aren’t other companies, particularly Saskatchewan companies, 
given the opportunity to compete for these contracts? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Actually if you read the newspaper 
every day, Mr. Speaker, there are many opportunities now for 
companies to come forward in an open arrangement that’s been 
made available to all operators to participate in a package to 
bring customers to the casino. 
 
Mr. Canada has delivered on his contract. He has met the terms 
and conditions of bringing business from out of province into 
the province. It’s been good for the casino, good for the city, 
and good for the province. 
 
The business people I cited freely gave their names in support 
of the activities that have been taking place. 
 
I will mention that all of our contracts have the opportunity to 
renegotiate over time. And certainly as the market shifts and as 
people gain more experience, there will be opportunities for 
adjustments to contracts and to allow new people in in the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Potential Closure of Pioneers Haven 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my first 
question this afternoon is for the Minister of Health. Mr. 
Minister, last night I attended a public meeting in Kerrobert 
where about 500 residents who are concerned about the 
possible closure of the Pioneers Haven nursing home in that 
community, which is currently home to about 30 elderly people 
. . . 
 
Mr. Minister, over the past few weeks the health board has been 
holding invitational-only stakeholder meetings which involve 
some sort of a health consultant from Edmonton. People who 
attended those meetings tell us that they were given six options 
for closing various facilities within the district. Then they are 
given exactly three minutes to decide on which facility they 
think should close  three minutes, Mr. Minister. In the time it 
takes to boil an egg, these people were asked to decide the 
future of any closures . . . future of any health care facilities in 
their communities and which seniors should be thrown out on 
the street. 
 
Mr. Minister, the people at the meeting last night passed a 
resolution  they passed a resolution calling on you to step in 
and ensure . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. The hon. member has 
been lengthy in his preamble, and I’ll ask him to go directly to 
his question. Order. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, will you 
do what the people of Kerrobert have been asking and will you 
intervene and ensure that the Pioneers Haven in Kerrobert 
remains open? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I will assure the  



2942  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

member and the House of one thing, and that is that not one 
senior in the province of Saskatchewan is going to be thrown 
out onto the street as that member says. 
 
And if the only argument that the member and the Liberal Party 
have is that seniors are going to be thrown on the street, then I 
have to say, Mr. Speaker, they have no argument. But I want to 
say to the member that I’d like to  unlike that member who 
criticizes the health board in Prairie West for consulting with 
the residents  I want to commend the Prairie West District 
Health Board because it’s considering a number of options. It’s 
consulting extensively with staff, with residents, and with 
people in the various communities in that health district. 
 
Now that member thinks that he should get up in this House 
and favour one institution over others, and I don’t think that 
that member should be doing that, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
decisions should be made at the local level and by the district 
health board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My remaining two 
questions are for the minister . . . the Deputy Premier, pardon 
me. Mr. Minister, yesterday in question period you admitted 
that there are problems with your union-preference tendering 
policy. I think you’re the first minister to have the courage to 
admit that so I give you some credit for taking at least a small 
step in the right direction. 
 
My question today is, what is the next step, Mr. Minister. 
Yesterday you said you’re going to try and get the stakeholders 
back to the table, and if that doesn’t work you’re going to come 
up with some sort of a process of review and come to some sort 
of conclusion. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan Construction Association has 
written to the Minister of Labour and made it very clear that 
they are not coming back to the table, so the ball is in your 
court, Mr. Minister. What is the next step? What do you intend 
to do to conclude this process that has started now? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
will know that it is our intent, has been our intent, to try to 
resolve this issue through a conciliatory process, one whereby 
stakeholders sit down and work out the issue. And to that end 
. . . and the Premier alluded to it in his comments of two days 
ago when he said clearly that he was calling on the stakeholders 
to come forward and resume discussions. And we still hope that 
that will be the case. 
 
To that end, staff from my office and other offices of 
government have been talking to Manley McLachlan. I know 
that there are no official discussions going on, but you should 
know that we are doing everything we can to try to bring a 
resolve to this issue. 
 

As I said yesterday, some people have taken issue with the 
policy. No one has ever denied that. Obviously if no one had a 
problem with it we wouldn’t be here discussing it, so that’s not 
a great revelation to anyone. But obviously we would much 
rather have this resolved through conciliation, through 
discussion, rather than something that you would impose or I 
would impose to resolve the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, the construction 
association has advised you that further meetings would be 
pointless unless the CCTA (Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement) is set aside and all parties at the table can be 
involved as full participants. 
 
Will you do at least that, Mr. Minister, on a temporary basis? 
Will you show that you are willing to deal with this problem in 
good faith by suspending the CCTA, for the time being at least, 
while you conduct a thorough review that involves all sides in 
this dispute? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No, I think that that would not be 
productive. It may be productive for one stakeholder or another 
to take that kind of a position. 
 
But what we do want is that member’s support, at least at this 
sensitive time in the next few days, that you would be 
cooperating in trying to bring a resolve by consultation, by 
getting people back to the table. The idea of holding up the 
session, as you’re doing, trying to put influence on one side of 
the debate or the other, is not terribly productive. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, not that it’s a huge amount of 
money, but the fact is, is that you’re playing politics with this 
issue. It’s costing the taxpayers about $35,000 a day, and we 
would urge you to cease this political filibuster that you’re 
doing and try to come onside and get a resolve to this through 
conciliation and consultation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
questions are for the minister responsible for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) or the Minister of 
Labour or their designate. Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association opposes your government’s union 
preference tendering. The Regina Chamber of Commerce 
opposes this policy. Hundreds of small-business owners who 
have employed the same workers for years oppose this policy, 
which has forced them to hire people directly from the union 
halls in Regina and Saskatoon, while blatantly punishing their 
non-unionized, local workers. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had a policy that discriminated against 
workers based on race or gender or religion, it would be illegal. 
But you have a policy that discriminates against workers based 
on their choice not to belong to a union, and you argue that this 
is fair. It is not fair and you know it. And it would most 
definitely say so in any objective review . . . 
 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2943 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. The hon. member has 
been lengthy in her preamble, and I’ll ask her to go directly to 
her question. 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, if 
you have not evaluated the impact of this policy, why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, one thing I do 
appreciate from the former leader of the Liberal Party is her 
consistency in being absolutely opposed to labour legislation 
that might be helpful to working people. She took that position 
loudly and clearly as leader of the Liberal Party, voting against 
every progressive piece of legislation for working men and 
women that came forward in this House. And I’m pleased at 
least to see that she is consistent in that view of being opposed 
to labour legislation and being opposed to the working people 
of this province. 
 
But let me say to you, Madam Member, that last year in 1995 
under this policy, 25 per cent of the tendered projects went to 
union contractors  25 per cent; 75 per cent went to 
non-union. And I would ask you what is wrong and what is 
unfair with the policy that would see union people in this 
province, on the tendered projects, getting 25 per cent of the 
work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, it is absolutely 
astonishing that the Minister of Economic Development 
supports direct interference in how business owners choose to 
run their own businesses and sees this issue as so unimportant 
that you’re simply flippant about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a letter from the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce and it states the following, and I quote: 
 

A Crown tendering policy which requires contractors to 
hire 75 per cent of its employees from a union hall not only 
discriminates against non-union contractors, it also 
discriminates against non-union trades people, who as 
taxpayers should have the right to benefit equally from 
employment opportunities. 
 

Mr. Minister, it’s not simply me saying that this legislation is 
discriminatory. It’s people like the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce who represent hundreds in the business community 
in this city. If there is a review of this policy, why won’t you 
release it? And if there isn’t one, why hasn’t one been done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  As I explained to the member 
yesterday and to other members of the opposition who are very 
much opposed to working people in this province  and it 
surprises me that they would take that position  is that we are 
approaching this in a manner where we’re trying to bring the 
stakeholders to the table to debate, discuss, and bring about a 
resolve in that manner. 
 
The member says that she is surprised that the Minister of  

Economic Development would support policy that would 
influence business in a negative way. And I don’t quite 
understand where she’s coming from because obviously we 
have environmental policy, we have labour law, we have 
minimum wage, all of which in a very complicated way affect 
business. 
 
And in many ways the member shows her naïvety about the 
whole issue of how an economy works by talking about having 
a process in this day and age that’s wide open for business or 
wide open for labour. Obviously this is a complicated situation 
that has to be worked out. And I tell you, if people would allow 
the process to take place, this matter will be resolved without 
legislation and without the heavy hand of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 121  An Act respecting the Accountability of The 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move 
first reading of this Bill. Mr. Speaker, the name on the printed 
Bill is actually slightly different than the way it appears on the 
order paper; therefore I would ask leave to move first reading of 
a Bill under the proper name. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Bill No. 121  An Act to amend The Workers’ 
Compensation Act, 1979 to provide for a broader managing 
Board of Directors for the Workers’ Compensation Board 

for the accountability of the Board 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move 
first reading of a Bill, An Act to amend The Workers’ 
Compensation Act, 1979 to provide for a broader managing 
Board of Directors for the Workers’ Compensation Board for 
the accountability of the Board. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his . . . order. Order! 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the members 
might give me leave to introduce some visitors? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to the members. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to 
you and through you to the members, a group of students who 
are seated in the west gallery. Now these students are in grades 
2 and 3 at Arcola School. They’re accompanied here today by 
their teachers, Cindy Desjardins, K. Nicholls; and by their 
chaperons, G. Colter and J. Hysuik. 



2944  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

They’re here for a visit this afternoon. I’m pleased that they 
could make it today. I look forward to meeting with them 
shortly after 2:30, and I hope they enjoy their stay here. I would 
ask the members to make them feel very welcome here today. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, it’s good to have another opportunity to discuss the 
very important issues that confront our province in the field of 
agriculture. Especially today, I guess, with the Farm Progress 
Show going on, and many of the farmers of the province taking 
time out from their very hectic and busy schedules to come on 
into Regina to see what is new in the innovations of agriculture 
in terms of equipment and everything that has to do with 
farming  almost, I guess you might say in one of the older 
terms, from soup to nuts. 
 
And it’s fantastic how things are progressing in the agricultural 
industry, despite one of the worst recessions in the history of 
our industry which we just managed to start to come out of in 
the last year. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to get back to the Canadian Wheat Board, 
of course, and some more discussion about that issue. And I 
want to talk about things that are involved with agriculture and 
how they relate to what is going on at the Farm Progress Show. 
And there’s just a lot of things that we need to talk about. But, 
Mr. Minister, there are a few local issues that have been 
brought to my attention that I think, if we deal with it, we’ll 
blanket, in some respect, the concerns of people throughout the 
entire province. 
 
But by zeroing in on a rather personal sort of an issue that we 
can talk about, you will know exactly where we’re coming from 
and the people, of course, who have similar circumstances then 
can apply your answers to that. 
 
Now we have situations where you and your department have 
been closing the farm service centres, and announcing that, and 
we have a situation at home that I specifically can talk about so 
as to know where we’re coming from on this issue. 
 
The first concern we had of course was with Leader, 
Saskatchewan, and I think I mentioned this to you at one other 
point. But I want to refresh you on it because we’re going to 
lead down to Frontier where we have another type of situation 
that is somewhat similar but somewhat different. 
 

In Leader of course, the circumstance is such that the people 
there are very isolated from all other service centres. They are 
geographically cut off in terms of getting to the other centres. 
They’re close to the border, which means that it’s hard for them 
to deal with internal structure within Saskatchewan to begin 
with. And then with their geographical circumstances there, 
they are off sort of by themselves, and now without a service 
centre. 
 
Now we asked you earlier for the numbers of case-loads for the 
service centres, and the reality is that we discovered that Leader 
is not a high user of services but not nearly the lowest either. 
But because it is a sparsely populated area, it is natural that with 
less farmers you would have less people able to be able to use 
the services. 
 
Also there’s the reality that these are very conscientious people 
who don’t by nature waste people’s time. And so they don’t go 
in there for frivolous things. When they have a call into the 
office, it’s a genuine concern of a genuine need. You can find I 
think, circumstances in some of the bigger centres where folks 
maybe just sort of drop in to have a kind of a visit, and they all 
get counted. Well I think it’s a little unfair then to stick strictly 
to those figures when making an analysis of who should be 
there or who shouldn’t. 
 
The reality being though that in this circumstance at Leader 
we’ve had a different twist put to it and that is that the people 
there have been so inclined to want to keep their service that 
they’re willing to talk to you about just about any other kind of 
compromise that might come along. They would even go along 
with helping to pay for some of the costs of keeping that 
individual there. 
 
The people in the community have said that this individual has 
been such a good community member that they would like to 
keep that person, not only just because the job is an economic 
generator for the community, but this individual is such a bright 
and good person that the services of public involvement are 
worthwhile in terms of volunteer work that is done by this 
individual and participation in the community. 
 
And so with all of those things weighed into the factor, they 
believe that it is more than worthwhile to spend some money to 
keep that service in the community. 
 
Now that was one example we used of why that service should 
be kept. And we wonder if there’s any consideration for your 
department to rethink the closure of some of these offices, 
where the communities can genuinely sit down with you and 
prove their case that you may have erred when you assessed the 
criteria that you used when determining which offices should 
close. 
 
Now I want to lead you down to Frontier, Saskatchewan, 
because there is a different circumstance and here we have an 
awful lot of similarity but some differences, but it may apply in 
general I think, to a lot of other communities. Again, the 
similarity to Leader is that Frontier is a rather isolated 
community from the rest of the world geographically, in terms 
of Saskatchewan contact. Being on the U.S. (United States)  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2945 

border of course, there would be easy contact with Havre or 
Chinook or those communities to the south. 
 
But unfortunately contact with those communities has no reality 
to the ability to get services from our provincial government to 
which these people pay their taxes. And there is no agricultural 
service there in the States that they can access realistically that 
would help them. 
 
So in that community we have the crop insurance people being 
taken out of the community and now we find that these folks 
have to travel north to Shaunavon which means crossing the 
Whitemud river. It geographically cuts off the community. It’s a 
long ways to go and those people feel that it is just simply a lot 
cheaper, to have one person paid to be in the community rather 
than to have the whole community travelling individually three 
or four or five times all the way up to Shaunavon or some . . . 
perhaps to Swift Current or somewhere else. 
 
And it makes eminent sense. I mean when you think about it, 
what did we do in the old days when people wanted to get their 
communities established, Mr. Minister? They built a little 
schoolhouse because they had children in the families around. 
And they didn’t take all the children and put them on the ox cart 
and take them down the road for 10 miles to the next school. 
They hired a teacher and brought them into the community 
because it was easier to bring one people to the community than 
it was to drag the whole community off to some individual. 
 
(1430) 
 
Same thing happened with our churches. Communities built a 
little church in their community and they hired a pastor or a 
priest, depending on what the religious involvement would have 
been in that community. And it was cheaper and it was easier to 
bring one individual in. And oftentimes that individual in those 
rural communities would just be brought in on Sunday. They 
would live in another community and serve three or four 
parishes. And it worked out quite nicely and that person would 
come in and because it was a lot easier and a lot cheaper for one 
person to come to the group than it was to take the whole group 
over to wherever the services were available. 
 
Well the same thing holds true of crop insurance today, Mr. 
Minister. It’s a lot cheaper and a lot easier for that community 
to have some of their tax money paid to have an individual 
come into their community and give them the services that they 
need rather than to have the whole community trucking off 
down the highways, under threat of being killed or maimed or 
injured in the condition our roads are in, not to mention a lot of 
other factors. But the simple fact that you’ve got tons of people 
out on the road travelling, it’s a lot more costly than bringing 
one person to the community. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to take the liberty, and I’m holding here 
hands full of letters and I’m going to be presenting to you, and I 
want to quote one of them though for the record for you, to just 
give you an idea of the kind of support that is out there in this 
community for the things that they want. 
 

And they address this letter as a letter to the editor because they 
were going to make it just a very public letter so that everybody 
could know about it. And I’m sure that you may have gotten 
copies, but I’m not, you know . . . I haven’t asked you about 
this, but I’m sure you probably have. If not, you’re going to get 
all of these. As soon as we get the names off of them, I’m going 
to have them sent over to your office, so you’ll be able to 
answer each of these individuals independently, as I plan to do. 
And I plan to do that, of course, with some basis with regards to 
the answers we get, obviously. 
 
And it goes like this: 
 

As a producer, I was very upset to hear the announcement 
on Monday, February 19, 1996, that the marketing agent 
office will be closed as of August 1, 1996. I conversed 
with my marketing agent to keep me up to date and 
informed on program changes and activities that happen 
throughout the year. I do not have the time or understand 
the paperwork I receive from the SCIC (that’s the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation). 
 
The 1-800 number might be fine for some things if one can 
get through and doesn’t get transferred to a number of 
personnel for an answer to my questions. It was never a 
problem to visit or phone my marketing agent at his or her 
office or home. I knew the doors were open for me to set 
up an appointment at a time that was more convenient for 
me, whether it be an evening or weekend. I cannot imagine 
the customer service offices remaining open extended 
hours. I like the fact that I can sit down with my agent to 
have the different price options, guarantees, spot-loss hail, 
and total cost explained to me before leaving the office. 
 
Your decision to give marketing agents the axe has left me 
with a loss of services and an increase in costs. I now have 
much further to travel to my customer service office than I 
had to visit my marketing agent. My marketing agent is a 
management tool that is as important to me as my 
accountant, my fertilizer and chemical agent, or my banker. 
I am asking that you not remove the marketing agent 
system from the SCIC. 
 
If you are agreeable with this letter, please clip it out, sign 
it, and send a copy to your MLA. 

 
Now I’ve got, like I say, tons of these letters signed by 
individuals who agree with the statement and want us to take 
action. People like Lawrence Larson, from Box 388 at 
Shaunavon, Saskatchewan. He also is in support of Bruce 
Lewis, of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance at Eastend. So this 
doesn’t just stay with Frontier. Now it has overlapped also to 
Eastend and we are running into some of the same problems. 
 
We also have Peter Larson, probably of the same family, from 
Shaunavon, but an independent farmer, wanting also your 
attention. We’ve got John Gilbert. He’s wanting you to take a 
look at this letter and to consider his needs as a crop insurance 
agent. We’ve got Donald Briggs and we’ve got Ronald Selvig, I 
believe it is, and David McLeod from Frontier. 
 



2946  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Well, Mr. Minister, these are real people. These are people with 
homes and families. There’s Dave Durrant from Eastend . . . 
Well, Mr. Minister, I could read them all to you. As you can 
see, there’s an awful pile of them here. 
 
The thing is that these folks want you to reconsider the decision 
that you’ve made. They have expressed their wish to have you 
reconsider this, through phone calls and through this massive 
letter campaign. And I would ask you on their behalf, is there 
any way that you will reconsider the actions that you’ve taken 
and give them an opportunity to keep their marketing agents in 
some communities and their rural service offices in other areas. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think we’ve gone through the 
process over a period of time. And I know it’s not easy for 
people to lose the agrologist in their area. But the reality is that 
we had to do some restructuring. We had to make some 
decisions. 
 
But what I want to tell you about, is that we are encouraging 
people to stop thinking about having to drive to a place, 
whether it be the Crop Insurance office, the ACS (Agricultural 
Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) office, or the agrologist’s 
office, because you don’t have to drive. There may be occasions 
when you want to physically go and see the agrologist. But with 
the information processing systems that we have today, whether 
it be through computers  I know everybody doesn’t have a 
computer, but many do and they can work with the office that 
way  or the telephone. 
 
Crop Insurance is a perfect example. When we reduced the 
number of Crop Insurance offices a number of people were 
upset that the office was closed. But the reality is we’re trying 
to get to a program where you don’t need as many offices. We 
want to keep it simple for farmers. 
 
The old system . . . And I repeat this, when I started into 
farming in 1974, I never darkened the door of a Crop Insurance 
office. And it didn't matter if that office was right next door to 
me or if it was in Timbuctoo, because everything was done 
through the mail. They mailed me the forms, I filled them out, 
mailed them back in  a cheap way to operate. 
 
Then came along the political decision to put the agents in. A 
duplication of service. Many, many good agents out there  I 
mean don’t get me wrong. But you don’t need them. Because 
we want to get back to a system where you use the mail, the 
cheapest form, not having to drive to see your agent or to the 
office. 
 
So this is the direction that government is going. We’ve got an 
InfoNet service now through the department on the world wide 
web. That’s the way the information technology is moving. 
There will come a time when most farmers, I would predict, 
will have access through a computer — maybe not their own, 
but maybe in a machinery dealership or city, town hall or 
wherever. They will have access through the computer to all the 
information they need. 
 
So while it’s difficult to make the decisions to close an office 
down, those decisions have to be made. They have to be made  

for one reason. Because we have within the Department of 
Agriculture a budget that we have to meet, and we’re going to 
meet that budget one way or the other. 
 
So then you start making decisions on what you do to meet your 
budgetary requirements. And I ask you this question. Here’s 
some of the things that we’ve kept money for: $261,000 for the 
4-H grants  that would have kept a couple of offices open 
every year, two or three maybe; $330,000 for the rat program. I 
mean these are all things that could have been cut. The rat 
program would have kept another three offices open, but you 
have to make these decisions. 
 
And we felt because the technology . . . and we wanted to get 
people back from thinking they have to drive to see their agent 
or to drive to their office. And as I said, sometimes you have to 
go, but there’s lots that can be done by the mail. We want to 
move in that direction because that’s the direction . . . we’re 
following the direction, we’re not leading it. But that’s the way 
the information services are going. 
 
And as far as your specific question about Leader is concerned, 
if they want to hire an agrologist, the residents of that area in 
the town or whoever, they certainly will be supplied with all the 
information that our agrologists get  all the literature and that 
stuff. But the problem is, if you start making deals with one 
group, saying okay, first of all we made the decision to close it 
based on a number of factors, if you do one, every place is 
going to come back and say, well you made some changes for 
them; you got to make them for us. 
 
So we’ve made the decision based on what we think are sound 
management reasons, but we are willing to work with those 
folks if they, you know, supply information, even put them 
on-line with the computer if they wish to hire an agrologist. So 
that way we can work with them, but as far as government 
involvement, I think the decision’s been made. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, we’ll pass that 
information on to the people from Leader and Frontier and 
Eastend. There are . . . I think I counted up 87 letters here. It’s 
not a whole bunch in terms of a million people in a province, 
but when you consider communities where populations are very 
sparse, that’s a whole lot of support. And I think it can’t go 
without some recognition and some notice. 
 
Now it’s easy for you to stand in your place and make the 
argument, would you cut the 4-H program. Obviously nobody 
wants to see the 4-H program cut, but the point being that there 
are a whole lot of other millions of dollars that you are 
spending in your department, and no one area may be more 
important than the others but it is a question of balancing 
things. 
 
In this case the savings that you are going to make are lost in 
other areas. And so I think you can fairly make the argument 
that if you are spending more money to truck all of these people 
back and forth to a central office . . . now you say they’re not 
going to have to go. I beg to differ with you, from the 
arguments made by the very letter that these people have 
signed. And the very argument that they make is, they say here,  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2947 

and I’ll quote again for you: 
 

It was never a problem to visit or phone a marketing agent 
at his home office. I knew the doors were open for me to 
set up an appointment at any time that was more 
convenient for me, whether it be in the evening or on the 
weekends. I cannot imagine the customer service office 
remaining open extended hours. 

 
Now I note that my colleague has some people that he would 
like to introduce, and so I can get into this later, Mr. Chairman, 
if you’d care to recognize my colleague. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With leave, 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of 
my colleague, the member from Moosomin, I would like to 
introduce to you in the Speaker’s gallery, 41 grades 1 to 4 
students from the Glenavon School. Along with the students we 
have their teachers, Beverly Dammann, Donna Stajniak, Jim 
Grela, and Shelly McCall. And I assume somebody up there 
must have driven the bus for all these children but I don’t see 
any names down here for bus drivers. 
 
So I would like to ask the members of the Assembly to 
welcome them all here today. I hope you enjoy the proceedings, 
and I gather from the introduction that the member from 
Moosomin will not be meeting with you because of your time 
constraints. But I hope you enjoy the proceedings here today, 
and I would ask members to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
want to go back quickly and refresh your mind here by quoting 
from this letter  the letter that these people have signed in 
sincerity and have sent to you. And it goes like this, and I quote: 
 

I converse with my marketing agent to keep me up to date 
and informed on program changes and activities that 
happen throughout the year. I do not have the time or 
understand the paperwork I received from the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 

 
Very clearly these individuals have humbly put their hat in hand 
and come to you and said what most people wouldn’t  

have the courage to admit in our society these days, that they 
don’t understand everything, that they don’t know what’s going 
on with all of these programs. But they’re willing to say to you 
that I do not have the time or understand the paperwork that I 
received from the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. 
 
Now you stand in your place and say that these people who 
have admitted that they already can’t understand the paperwork 
should all of a sudden become computer experts and understand 
the program when you send it out on a computer network. 
 
Well I’m sorry but, Mr. Minister, not everybody has a 
computer, and even a lot of the people that do, don’t work with 
them. There’s just a whole lot of people in our society that do 
excellent work at providing a useful service to society without 
ever learning how to run a computer and who will never learn 
to run a computer. That doesn’t mean that they’re any less 
capable of running their farms. They know what chemicals to 
use on their crops, they know what insects to spray and when, 
they know when to harvest, they know when to wait, they know 
when to seed, and they know how to pray. Because certainly in 
farming you need to do a lot of that. 
 
(1445) 
 
These are good, honest, hard-working people that do a very 
necessary service in our society. But they’ve come to you and 
they’ve said, we don’t understand the system. And we’ve been 
provided with a person in our community that not only 
understood the system, but was capable of understanding us so 
that he could in turn know how to communicate to us. 
 
And you will know, Mr. Minister, that in the school system we 
often talk about teachers who are very, very brilliant, but never, 
ever have the knack of being able to teach what they know to 
children because they haven’t bridged the gap of knowing how 
to put the intelligence from their minds into the language that 
children would understand so that they could gain that 
knowledge little by little and grow to that level of the teacher. 
 
The same thing is true of crop insurance because of the changes 
that have come rapidly and, in many cases, many different kinds 
of programs over the years. If it were a program that had 
steadily stayed the same, most folks probably, as you started out 
with it in its simplicity, would have known how to handle it. I 
want to tell you that when it first came out I did my own 
paperwork too. Very simple program. Do you want it or not, yes 
or no? Check it off. The rate is set, so many dollars per bushel, 
this is what the premium is going to be, so many acres times the 
rate, that’s the price. Not too hard to figure out. 
 
Well now I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, the last time I went 
into my crop insurance agent, and I don’t think I’m any 
different than any other farmer in this way, I expect we had 
probably seven or eight pages of potential things that could 
happen if we took different options and different variations of 
the program, including hail or not hail, including prices or not 
prices, high prices, low prices, different classes of land, 
different variations, different crops, umpteen crops  I think in 
that section alone there was probably 15 or 20 crop options we 
could consider. The systems have changed. 



2948  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Then we threw in GRIP (gross revenue insurance program), the 
almighty GRIP program that went into the middle of the mix 
and complicated it even some more. And we’ve got all kinds of 
things like that. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, what I’m saying very simply, is that by 
taking away this agent, you’ve taken away a tool for farmers to 
use to know and understand the programs. So what is going to 
happen is that they’re probably going to say, to heck with it. 
They’re going to opt out of the program. 
 
You said yourself you don’t like subsidy programs and you 
don’t like having to step in and help people except in extreme 
disasters. Well we know there will be a disaster in farming. It’s 
just a matter of time, because it has happened in history and it 
will happen again. 
 
And you know very well that if these people all decide, because 
they can’t figure out what’s going on, to heck with it, we’re just 
not going to go in the program any more, and they all opt out, 
then you as the Minister of Agriculture are going to find every 
one of those farmers on your doorstep the very first year that we 
have a major drought, a major flock of grasshoppers that fly in, 
a major hailstorm with a bunch of wind that wipes out a 
community  anything that you could imagine that is a 
disaster. An August 2nd frost, 5 degrees of frost on August 2, 
you know very well everyone of them farmers will be on your 
doorstep. It’s going to happen. 
 
So if you drive them out of the program by not providing them 
with the tool that they need to be able to understand it so they 
can stay in it, then you’re going to have a bigger problem down 
the road. So considering those factors, is there any way that you 
would reconsider your position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I assume you mean my position on crop 
insurance agents . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. Okay. 
 
No. We have considered the position. You know what you’re 
talking about, first of all, I understand that all farmers aren’t 
going to have computers. But what I said, if you listened 
carefully, is that you won’t . . . I believe, and this is my opinion, 
in the days ahead you won’t have to have your own. There will 
be places in your service district, whether it be in a store or in a 
machinery dealer  that’s something that I perceive  where 
there, as a service, somebody will provide you with a computer 
that you can go and get any information you want. And all you 
have to do is ask in the course of doing your normal business. 
Maybe that won’t happen, but I believe that’s coming down the 
road. 
 
With regard to the crop insurance agents, the logic of your 
argument defies me a little bit . . . or evades me a little bit 
because you’re saying that we should have the agents because 
the farmers can’t figure out the programs, so we need to keep 
the agents around. Well by eliminating the agents, we save $5 
million. And there’s one factor, there’s only one factor that I 
believe determines the number of farmers, the number of acres 
that are in Crop Insurance  that’s the price. 
 
And that’s what we’re trying to do. You didn’t need that  

duplication. Now we can hold the line on price. If we can get 
rid of the Crop Insurance debt, we can hold the line on price 
even more. That’s why this five-year review is so important. 
Instead of keeping all the bells and whistles that were on the old 
program  and there were many bells and whistles that were 
useless for the most part  we’re trying to streamline the 
package so we can get back to that simple application form. 
 
This doesn’t have to be complicated, and so we’re trying to 
streamline it. You don’t need that extra service. We’re saving 
money to keep the premium down in order to make it affordable 
for farmers. 
 
I want to see a program some day where all farmers are in Crop 
Insurance. Because you and I know, it’s the only game in town. 
Like I say, unless there was a major, major disaster across the 
Saskatchewan province, or Saskatchewan and western Canada 
where the federal government and the provincial governments 
would have to kick in, Crop Insurance is going to be the 
program. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well I guess there’s no use belabouring that 
part of it any longer, Minister. You’ve made your position fairly 
clear. 
 
But you do allude to the fact that Crop Insurance will be the 
only game in town as far as protection for producers. Then as 
you spoke though, I sense that you . . . well first you said you’re 
going to simplify the program and you want to get premiums 
down, and that’s good stuff. How about the other programs that 
work in the world around us? 
 
Now I understand that the Americans have a program that is 
sort of in place that every farmer automatically is given by the 
government. Have you looked at that program and are you 
looking at any possibilities of going into that type of a program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes. If you’re talking about the same 
program that I’m thinking about, we sent . . . what was it, two 
years ago, the Farm Safety Net Review Committee, a 
subcommittee of the Farm Safety Net Review Committee, I 
think it was two years ago, went down to the U.S. to study their 
crop insurance program. They came back and thought it was a 
pretty good idea. 
 
While Manitoba will take credit for the two-tier system that 
they have there now, where 50 per cent coverage is for 
administration fee and then the farmer buys up from there, the 
idea really did originate from the U.S. through our Farm Safety 
Net Review Committee subcommittee and of course through 
the federal government levels. 
 
Now that is the type of program. That was one of the options, 
when we had our review. The farm, the rural meetings, one of 
the options was a two-tier system, where 50 per cent coverage 
would be the very low cost, then you would buy up from there. 
 
I like that program and I think my . . . the indication I get from 
the people who did an analysis of all the meetings say that for 
the most part farmers think that’s the right direction to go. 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2949 

Mr. Goohsen:  I sense there, Minister, that you’re saying yes, 
we’re looking at this program and that we’re going to head that 
way. How fast are we heading that way, and how would it be 
implemented, and what kind of costs would be involved then 
for the farmers? And can you keep these forms simple enough 
under that kind of a program so farmers will be able to fill them 
out themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That’s what our ambition is, and I think 
that it’s quite achievable. 
 
There are a number of things that are in Crop Insurance right 
now that we don’t need because nobody’s using them. The 
options are there, which just complicates the program. So we’re 
going to probably remove some of those. 
 
The time lines, this is for 1997 crop year, so we want the 
program in place . . . Let me back up. We had the farm 
meetings. We’ve had the review of those meetings. We’ve got 
the basic outline, you know, put down. Now we’re meeting 
with farm organizations  Sask Pool, then a few wheat 
growers and others  to have them have some input in it. And 
we’re going to also meet with some of the adjusters, the people 
who work on the fields. They have good ideas that sometimes 
don’t get through the corporation to the policy making. So we 
want to make sure they get some input into it. 
 
Have it all done by the end of this year. I would like to see it 
done by December. I’d like to see it done sooner, but I’m 
hedging a bit. But anyway by the end of the year so the farmers 
have . . . because you start making your seeding plans, as you 
know  you farm  you start making your seeding plans or 
thinking about them through the winter. So we want to make 
sure that January and February are available for everyone to get 
to understand the program. 
 
I can remember many  not many times, but at times when I 
was sitting on the tractor in the spring and not knowing what 
the program exactly was going to be, in years gone by. And I 
don’t like that. That’s why I’m pushing to make sure we get the 
program in place by the end of the year so people can 
understand it. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well certainly that timing is an appropriate 
way of approaching it, Minister. And the thought comes to 
mind then, is this program going to be actuarially correct, as the 
terms goes? How much government money will be put into it? 
Or, you know, where’s the funding going to come from? Are 
they totally going to be from the farmers’ involvement? Does it 
become strictly an insurance program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  There will still be three-party funding  
federal government, provincial government, and producer. That 
won’t change. It will be actuarially sound over a period of time, 
as the old program was. 
 
The basis of the . . . this is just, what we’ve done is taken the 
opportunity every five years, under the agreement, to review the 
corporation. We take this opportunity to make some major 
changes. And I think, for the most part, they’ll be quite 
successful. We’re trying to do the process right, trying to keep  

the cost of the premium down. 
 
Now I don’t want you to misunderstand me. I don’t know if we 
can actually reduce the premium, but at least we can hold the 
line. If we can reduce it, I’ll be very, very happy. And that’s a 
possibility, depending exactly what the cost of the program is. 
But one of the keys is to get the debt, the re-insurance debt 
down. 
 
And if you wanted to help out in that manner, I would suggest 
that you talk to the federal government and say hey, guys, let’s 
get this debt down somehow. Because if you get the debt down, 
you’re starting with a new program, with new people in it, and 
this is going to be one of the arguments. Does the debt that was 
being built there by three-quarters of the land being in the 
program, transfer it to somebody else now if they want in the 
new program, should they carry that debt. 
 
Those are all things you have to talk about, but I think so far it’s 
looking pretty good. 
 
Mr. Goohsen: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’d be happy to talk to 
the federal government about these things any time, any place, 
and say exactly those kind of things, because obviously we do 
need the federal government to cooperate with agriculture. It is 
a national industry of national importance, and no question in 
my mind that the taxpayers of the entire country owe their 
existence to the people that grow their food. And so that’s not a 
problem for us at all. 
 
But of course you know as well as I do that they probably aren’t 
going to listen all that much to me if they don’t listen to you. 
But we’ll try collectively to help out and work that way. So any 
time you want to go to Ottawa, I’ll go along with you. 
 
I want to go into the hail part just a little bit, because that’s of 
concern to a lot of people this time of year. The rates for the 
hail seemed to be driving people away from insuring with the 
hail portion of the crop insurance. What is your analysis of that? 
Is my observation there concurrent with what has actually 
happened in the corporation over the past year and into this 
year, or is it just something that I saw in my local area that is 
not universal throughout the province? And what are you doing 
to correct that problem, if there is a problem developing in that 
area? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I don’t know that it’s a problem. There’s 
a concern because the rates rose quite dramatically simply 
because we had two bad years of hail. It’s like any other 
insurance company. When you get hail, you’re in a hail area, 
you understand that your rates will continually rise. When I 
started farming I think my rate was 2 per cent, two and a half 
per cent, and I think last year some of them was as high as 7. 
And then you start chopping off crops  you’ve got double 
barley and canola. I mean it’s getting expensive because there’s 
been more hail. 
 
But the fact of the matter remains, and this is what boggles my 
mind a little bit when somebody says, well I don’t like that  



2950  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

spot-loss hail crop insurance because the premium’s going up. 
The fact of the matter is if you’re in a private company you pay 
100 per cent of the premium. In Crop Insurance you’re paying 
50 per cent of the premium. So while it has increased because 
of the conditions, I think it’s still a pretty fair deal. And if 
somebody pays half of your premium I don’t know why you’d 
want to complain  and get the same coverage basically as a 
private  I don’t know why you’d want to change that. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well there are a couple of problems, 
Minister, in the area of course and that is, to start with, you 
can’t get the same coverage. The coverage is very limited, very 
small, in terms of replacement costs and that sort of thing. I 
know in my own operation the amount of coverage I could get 
with Crop Insurance would not cover my investment. And so 
we found that we had to go to line companies on top of the 
Crop Insurance in order to protect ourselves if we wanted that 
full coverage, enough to make sure that we could carry on for 
the next year if we were hailed out. 
 
And I think that’s the aim of most people with insurances of 
this kind is to probably cover yourself enough so that you can 
get enough inputs back so you can carry on for another year. In 
light of that, then most people when they find themselves with a 
program that is not giving them enough, they simply opt out of 
that program and go 100 per cent into some other line company 
program. 
 
So is there any consideration to overhauling the hail insurance 
part of the program to first of all allow higher coverages for 
those people that are more intensive farming  people who are 
using more fertilizer and chemicals in chem-fallow programs, in 
heavier stubble cropping programs, continuous cropping where 
more fertilizers are used and that sort of thing. They need to 
have the ability to recover more for their inputs. So have you 
overhauled the program or will you be overhauling the program 
in order to address those problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We won’t be . . . I don’t think be 
adjusting. We haven’t talked about adjusting it for high or low 
use input costs to producers. That in itself works out in your 
individual yield. So whether, you know . . . I don’t think we 
want to start designing a program. If you start designing a 
program to fit the costs that people put into their operation, 
you’re going to start really complicating it. And as I say, that 
works over your individual yield. That’s reflected there. 
 
But no, I don’t know what your area is. I’m just going from 
recollection. I think my coverage is about $67 an acre through 
Crop Insurance, if I recall right. And while you may be right, 
that doesn’t cover all your input costs. It’s certainly for the 
price you pay for that premium you pay for that insurance, it’s 
very, very reasonable. If we wanted, as you say, to start 
pumping up the coverage, that’s when it gets really expensive. 
That’s why we picked 70 per cent  70 per cent with spot loss 
or 80 per cent without spot loss. 
 
Once you go, like if you wanted to go to 80 per cent with spot 
loss, the premiums rise dramatically. And as I said before, 
farmers buy crop insurance based on the cost of the premium. 
I’m not 100 per cent but I believe that. I mean I farmed many  

years and my neighbours and I talk to people; that’s what it is. 
If the premiums go up, the participation goes down. 
 
So we can’t have it all, and that’s why the rates are set where 
they are. That’s why you’re 70 with spot loss and 80 without, 
simply because once you start moving it up higher, that last 20 
per cent of coverage is deadly expensive. So we’re at the middle 
of the road I think right now. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Another area of concern, Mr. Minister, of 
course is always the adjustment area. And we find a lot of 
people complain about Crop Insurance adjustments and the fact 
that they feel that one of the reasons that Crop Insurance was 
able to keep their premiums low last year for example, was 
because the adjusters were trained to adjust far lower than line 
company adjusters did. 
 
And so I wonder if you could tell me how the appeal process 
works, and whether or not people have the option to appeal to 
someone else. And in the final analysis, if you don’t agree with 
the way people are adjusting your crop, how do you then 
continue to sell them that product after they’ve had a bad 
experience? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the appeal process has a number of 
hoops it goes through. First of all, if there’s a dispute, it’ll go to 
the regional director. And if it can’t be settled there  there’s 
four of those people in the province  if it can’t be settled 
there, then it goes to the Crop Insurance Appeal Board, which is 
a board of farmers that hear the case. 
 
They don’t make an adjustment . . . or they don’t alter the 
adjustment so to speak, because the crop . . . by the time it hits 
appeal, the ground’s been worked, the crop is off, whatever it 
was, and it’s, you know . . . So the board can’t say, okay, yes 
there was 10 bushels there or there was 11 bushels there. What 
they do is they go through the process of determining whether 
or not the circumstances within which the farmer made his 
appeal is such that sometimes they can’t alter payments, and 
that’s what they’re for. Any number of things can happen. 
 
As far as the adjusters in Crop Insurance, I think it was your 
accusation that they adjusted less, at a lesser rate than the line 
companies. That is not my experience. I don’t know what it’s 
like in your area but whenever I do have hail and whenever the 
adjusters come along it’s usually the first guy there . . . if you 
can talk the first guy up, then you’re okay for the most part. 
Because the other companies, through competition, and Crop 
Insurance is no different, my experience is they will adjust the 
same basically as the line adjusters. 
 
So I don’t . . . If you have specific cases that you’re concerned 
about, I’d certainly be willing to talk it over with you because I 
think it’s not real hard to do these adjustments. Sometimes on 
some of the new crops it’s difficult. And sometimes when you 
get an early hailstorm and there’s a delayed settlement and, you 
know, there’s some disputes there. That might be the area that 
you’re talking about. 
 
I know with the delayed settlement, if you get early hail, and 
they say, well we got to leave it, let it go because if you don’t  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2951 

get a frost till the end of October you might have 50 bushels of 
wheat here. But if you happen to get a frost at the end of 
August, you would have a lot less, a lot fewer bushels. 
 
So maybe you can tell me if that’s what you’re talking about, 
but I’m not aware of any lesser adjusting as opposed to line 
companies. 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. The Chair, with the indulgence of 
the committee, would like to have leave to introduce guests if 
that is the committee’s wish. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Flavel:  I take this opportunity to thank the committee 
for allowing me this opportunity to introduce to the Legislative 
Assembly this afternoon, 36 grade 4, 5, 6 students from the 
Wishart School. Their teachers, Virginia Latoski and Cindy 
Ramler, are with them. The chaperons, Connie Bashutski, Paula 
Stefankiw  I hope I got that right  Mr. and Mrs. Kitzul, and 
Carol Kluz is also with them, I see, back behind the clock. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them later on and enjoying some 
refreshments and answering any questions that I can answer and 
just having a good visit with them. So I would ask the members 
to join with the Chair in welcoming the Wishart grade 4, 5, and 
6 here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Mr. 
Minister, to get back to our debate about the agricultural 
problems of our province, and specifically at the moment, crop 
insurance and how it works. 
 
I won’t obviously mention names of individuals in the 
Assembly with regards to their personal crop insurance 
problems. But I will tell you about an instance that we did run 
into, and I think you’ve hit on part of the problem, and it is the 
new crops type of area, the diversified, new crops. And the fact 
that when you start a new crop in an area where the adjusters of 
the area have never seen those crops very much before, they can 
find themselves in some difficulty knowing and understanding. 
 
And of course canola is a very good example of that. And I can 
give you a case in point of how that has happened. There was a 
situation that I’m aware of where a canola crop was hailed, two 
different policyholders on land very close together. One was 
assessed 17 per cent damage and the other was assessed at 65 
per cent damage. In the end, the argument took place of course 
 by the owners, who were good friends  the discussion  

took place that they thought their crops looked equally 
damaged. And when all was said and done, the proof had to be 
in the harvest. 
 
And of course the harvest was done. Both crops had come in at 
about 15 bushels to the acre gross. They had high dockage 
because when you get hail in canola, as you know, lots of the 
kernels then become small ones and become dockage, and lots 
of weeds grow in the interim, and that sort of thing happens. 
So, about 11 bushels net. 
 
(1515) 
 
Now one farmer got in the end about 60 or 65 per cent return 
from the hail claims  two of them in fact. The other farmer, 
disgusted with the process, didn’t bother making a claim at all 
after that, not even for the loss of yield, and simply opted out of 
the program because he’d only gotten paid for 17 per cent loss 
and had exactly the same yield as the farmer that had gotten the 
65. 
 
Now you tell me how you’re going to win that farmer back and 
get that farmer back into the program after that type of an 
experience. How can that possibly happen? It just won’t. And I 
don’t think I even need to bother letting you answer that, unless 
you want to, and I’ll go on into another question. Because it 
can’t be answered. I mean the people just didn’t know what 
they were doing. And pride gets in the way, egos get in the way. 
But anyway, so much for that. 
 
I wanted to ask you, Minister, many years ago we had a 
program called land bank. Is the land bank land still under your 
jurisdiction? I have constituents who farm land bank land and 
they still pay rent to the government. They complain about the 
share of money that they got for the Crow payment and those 
kind of things. 
 
But I do wonder, is this still under your jurisdiction in the 
Department of Agriculture? Where would we find that located 
in the Department of Agriculture? Could you briefly tell us 
about how much land is still involved in that program; whether 
or not you have sold it or if you are selling it? What’s 
happening with those properties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, it’s still under my jurisdiction, 
under the administration of Agriculture and Food. We’re just 
getting the acres, the number of acres. It’s under lands branch;. 
it’s all called lands branch now. They rolled all the land bank 
land and Crown land into lands branch. Lands branch 
administers the leases and the like. 
 
There was . . . I can ballpark the numbers. There would be 
about a million acres of . . . I think there’s about a million acres 
of land bank land that went in originally a few years back, if I 
recall that right. Today about 900,000 acres right now of . . . 
that’s just the cultivated land  900,000 acres. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, is that land for sale, or has 
any of it been sold? Or can those people expect ever to be able 
to buy that land if they want to? 
 



2952  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes, there’s land sales that go on 
regularly. If somebody wants to buy Crown land, all they have 
to do is come and ask the Crown, you know, put a bid in on it 
when it comes up. Or if they’re renting it now and they want to 
buy it, they can . . . you know, we have to go through the 
process of posting it. 
 
But the only time that you wouldn’t be able to buy it is if it was 
designated as critical wildlife habitat. That’s about the only . . . 
There is one other category too to do with environment, and I 
just forget it now. But basically, critical wildlife habitat would 
be the only reason you couldn’t buy it. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Minister, I’ll roll two questions into one here. 
How would you establish the value of that land if you were 
going to sell it, or if a person approached you and wanted to 
buy it? I guess I’d better let you deal with that first because the 
other question is on another subject. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  It’s sold on the basis of appraised value. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Okay. Of course appraising can mean an 
awful lot of things. I might appraise it a lot different than you. 
This would have to be some kind of professional appraiser, I 
presume. Could you elaborate a little bit on who would qualify 
to be those appraisers and tell me also, Minister, why you’re 
doing that now. 
 
The lease fee that you get for the land  what percentage of the 
value of the land would that come to? Or to get specific about 
what I’m getting at, does the lease fee amount to as much as the 
interest that you would have to pay to borrow the principal of 
value of that land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  While the staff are looking for the 
details on the percentages I’ll just answer the first question. The 
way the system works is that we will have it appraised. The 
government will have it appraised, the quarter land appraised. 
Then if you as a farmer who want to purchase it disagree with 
that, you have every right to go out and hire your own appraiser 
to have it appraised. And the farmer has to bear that cost of the 
appraiser. And I believe the way it works is that if you plan to 
purchase it’s taken off of the back end of the purchase price. 
 
If there’s . . . for the most part. I mean there may be incidences, 
I guess there always are, where appraisers don’t agree, but for 
the most part if you got a few thousand dollars difference, they 
just take and split the difference. They’re fairly flexible. 
Because we certainly don’t want to stand in the way of people 
buying land. It’s government land, it’s for sale, and they’re 
welcome to it if they can get the money. 
 
I will just sit down for a second and get the answer to your 
second question about what percentage of the lease fee is of the 
. . . if it would be equal to the interest rate. 
 
Just to keep things going here, we can get that answer. We 
actually . . . I think we have a per acre cost so we can figure it 
out. And if you’re up $40,000 a quarter, you know, simple math 
is, 10 per cent interest is $4,000. We’ll get the exact cost, but 
that would be depending, you know, that would be probably a  

little bit more than what the lease fee would be . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well you know the answer, double. The leases 
are very reasonable. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Okay, Minister, I guess you made my point, 
but I will want to see the figures when you get them and I’ll 
appreciate having them. Because the point I am making is that 
the lease fees, for the farmers who have to pay them, always 
seem to be high because the costs of inputs and all that were 
high, you know, and the returns on grain have been low. But 
now that they have gone up somewhat maybe that’s going to 
change. 
 
The reality being that it was tough for a farmer to make a living 
off the land even paying a low rate. However on the other hand, 
on the other side of the equation, the lease fees being paid to 
government were not high enough to pay the interest that had to 
be paid on the principal value of the land. And the government, 
having bought that land, then had to get that money from some 
place to pay for it. 
 
So they borrowed the money, probably, and are paying interest 
on it  interest that is higher than what the land is returning to 
the government from those leases. So then it would make 
eminent sense to sell it as fast as you could, wouldn’t it? And 
you are doing that, you say. 
 
So then tell me, if one farmer has some Crown land  and I 
will for the record say that I don’t have any  but if one farmer 
happens to have it and the next farmer wants to buy it, can he 
bid on it? And would the farmer that is presently farming it 
have the first right of refusal, or how would that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Just on your first question, your earlier 
question, it’s about $10 an acre. So you’re right. It’s less than 
half of what the interest would be in the early stages of a loan, 
if you had a view as a person . . . 
 
But in the lands branch program, we are a net generator of 
dollars, so we’re not losing money. And you have to remember 
the role of the Crown — the reason the land bank was put in 
place was that we wanted to try to keep younger people out on 
the land and make it affordable for them to farm. 
 
So that principle has not changed, and it’s reflected even 
though we’ve rolled land bank into lands branch  or was 
rolled back a number of years ago  the principle of age, 
distance from the land, and the assessed value of your assets is 
the three things that count. That’s trying to get smaller . . . 
basically the smaller or the younger farmers involved, so that 
while we make money on it, the rates are reasonable enough. In 
fact I’ve had some people complain that they’re not high 
enough. But they’re set on a formula with the price of grain, 
inputs, and it’s working fairly well. 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, the point I’m making 
though, I think you make as well. The reason that you have a 
net profit in Crown land is because you had a holding of a lot of 
Crown land that you never did buy because nobody ever has  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2953 

owned it but the Crown. Those lands are being leased out and 
you’re taking money back. 
 
But the land that came in from the land bank program is losing 
you money. So the quicker you could sell it, the better off 
financially you would be because we do have a debt in this 
province. You keep reminding us of that. A large part of that 
debt could be eliminated if we sold all of this Crown land. 
 
Now I would make another point to you. It might be of benefit 
to sell that land at a reduced price even, just to get rid of it, so 
that you don’t have this debt, and get some cash and pay it off. 
So you might be able to give some people actually a bargain on 
this land, and benefit the government by getting out from under 
this debt load. 
 
Now if the debt is as serious as you claim it is, then we 
obviously have to work at every area where we find debt. This 
is an area where we can identify that some of the debt has been 
caused. So simply put, let’s sell it. 
 
And then my other questions then would lead into, can one 
farmer put in a bid on land that another farmer holds and 
leases? And if they can or can’t, that’s what we would like to 
know because then you could facilitate getting some of this land 
sold and bought up. 
 
The other argument that I’m going to put down on you is the 
one where you make that you were going to try to keep younger 
farmers on the land. That may have worked for a while in the 
1970s initially, to some extent. Unfortunately though, the dirty 
eighties did happen. They were the worst, toughest years since 
the Dirty Thirties and my dad says the dirty eighties were a lot 
worse than the Dirty Thirties because people had expectations 
that were a lot higher in terms of the way they lived. And so it 
was tougher to live through the ‘80s, he said, for many farmers 
than it ever was in the ‘30s because they had so much more to 
lose. 
 
That having been said, an awful lot of those young farmers that 
were dependent on land bank land were already the farmers 
who were finding themselves in some financial difficulty during 
the glorious ‘70s when the grain prices were relatively strong 
and farming was relatively good. They sold their land for the 
most part because those farmers wanted either to retire or were 
finding themselves in financial trouble. They were able to keep 
that land in the family but it was now leased land and it became 
a cost every year. And if you had debts that you paid off with 
the principal, you didn’t have any buying power left; those were 
in fact for the most part farms that in fact folded during the late 
‘80s and into the early ‘90s. 
 
The candidate for the NDP (New Democratic Party) Party from 
the Maple Creek constituency in 1991 was one of those people 
who held some of those land bank lands and now lives in 
Alberta. 
 
So you know, I just throw that at you as an example of how the 
principle upon which you started this program really has been 
lost, because an awful lot of that land now has transferred to 
other people who are still in the farming business. And lots of  

them are by no means young, and lots of them are by no means 
small operators. Because they’re the only ones around, they’ve 
naturally picked it up. 
 
It had to be farmed by somebody and certainly the Crown 
people were not going to let that land lie idle and not get any 
lease money from it. So in some cases, they simply had to lease 
it to whoever was able. So the principles have been lost. 
 
And yet we have the debt part of it, and we need, I think, to 
address that and take a serious look at how we can sell that land 
as quickly as possible to the people that want to buy it. 
 
I know that there are also people who have Crown grazing land 
that they have never, ever owned  the Crown has always 
owned it. They would like to buy that land and they say that 
there are deliberate stumbling blocks put in their way of not 
being able to buy that land. 
 
So there’s seems to be a contradiction, and I’m glad to hear you 
say today that these people can buy this Crown land because we 
will be delivering to them your words in Hansard so that they 
can approach the department and try to buy this land now 
because they will know that it is available and that it is for sale. 
 
But I want to let you comment on my thoughts with regards to 
the Crown lands and those things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well with regard to your specific 
question about leases and buying leases. You can’t buy a lease 
. . . a chunk of property out from underneath the lessee. If 
you’re leasing land and I want to buy it, I can’t just go to lands 
bank and say okay, I want to buy that, and so we turf you off 
the lease and then sell it. Because it’s not fair, for one thing. So 
that land could be sold if that person who’s leasing ever gave 
that land up, as far as leasing is concerned. 
 
But what concerns me a little bit is your argument, and where 
it’s going. Because what I hear you saying is that . . . and we 
sell land . . . I mean there’s . . . I, first of all, want to ask you 
when you stand up just to give me some idea what the 
stumbling blocks are because I’m not familiar with them. 
Because I mean there’s no advantage . . . the critical wildlife 
habitat is one of the only reasons that they can’t purchase. 
 
But if there are stumbling blocks, I’d certainly like to know 
about them specifically so that I can take them to the 
department and say okay, I say that we can sell land. We sell 
land all the time and I think we should continue to do that. But 
if there’s stumbling blocks, I’ll have to know about it. 
 
But your argument that . . . I think what I hear you’re saying is 
that we should be increasing the lease rates because the reason 
people are farming . . . are not buying land is because . . . I 
don’t know if you were . . . yes, you were probably in 
government in the ‘80s when you had that special program that 
lasted for a couple of years, an incentive to buy leased land, 
lands branch land . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. And it 
didn’t work; very few people took it up because the lease is 
reasonable. 
 



2954  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Now if you’re arguing that we should increase the lease rates to 
give the farmer incentive to buy the land, I’m not sure that I 
would accept that argument. I mean things are working fairly 
well. The land was transferred to the lands branch at no cost. 
It’s Crown land. We’re making revenue off that land even at 
those reasonable lease rates, and so there’s . . . I just want you 
to do those two things. Tell me if that’s what you think we 
should do: increase the lease rates so that we give the farmer 
some incentive, more incentive, to buy it rather than leasing it at 
a cheap rate. And secondly, what the stumbling blocks are 
specifically that you’ve heard about. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well very directly, Minister, no, I’m not 
saying that you should increase the lease rates, because I think I 
made my argument at the start that farmers have to be able to 
make a living off this land. The lease rates do have to be tied to 
production or productivity and saleability of the products that 
they produce. And that is a given. Otherwise if the lease rates 
go up any more, a lot of these farmers simply wouldn’t be able 
to make a living and they will lose their farms and their land 
and it will be sold to somebody else because then they’d be 
vacating. 
 
So that part . . . and it is a bit of a catch-22 because on the other 
hand if you did sell it, it would bring in enough cash so that you 
could pay off the debt then, not owe the interest on that debt. 
And of course you would alleviate the government’s problem of 
a debt problem. So getting the land back into the hands of the 
individuals is the goal. 
 
Increasing the fees I don’t think would be the way to provide 
that incentive because you would break the farmer and he 
wouldn’t end up with it. And like you said, you want to try to 
protect the farmer that’s got it. You don’t want to provide an 
option for some neighbour to maybe get it. 
 
But I see nothing wrong with this land periodically being put up 
for sale. And especially now that grain prices have gone up a 
little bit and Farm Credit Corporation has eased up on its 
lending criteria, I understand. I haven’t gone there myself, but 
I’ve been told that they are getting easier to deal with because 
they can see the potential for farming to make some money to 
pay off land debt and that sort of thing. So they are in fact 
encouraging people to build land bases through the Farm Credit 
Corporation process again. 
 
So you might be able to use that process then to encourage 
people to buy the land, owe the money to Farm Credit, put the 
debt into the private hands of the people that own and operate 
the land, which would give them then an incentive to know that 
they have long-term ownership again. And they would then try 
to make that land more productive and do those things that 
individuals with pride in ownership will do to enhance the 
properties and to make it produce even more. 
 
So that’s what I’m saying is I think the proper way that you 
could handle this to get both sides satisfied. You would be out 
of debt, and the individuals then would have some property, 
and everybody I think would be happy. 
 
Now I’ve missed your other question somehow, but anyway I  

guess I’m supposed to ask the questions. And so what we want 
you to do is to tell us if there is any plan in the future to put 
these properties up for sale. Just a sort of blanket day, July 15, 
everybody can bid on it or it will be up for sale. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I’m not sure where you’re going 
with this, because . . . I’m not sure that you know where you’re 
going with it either. Because if you’re advocating that the 
government set a date, let’s say February 1 that there’s going to 
be a block of land put on the market for sale across the 
province, well that land is being leased by someone at the 
present time. It’s always for sale. 
 
If you had leased the land, you can come to the government any 
time you want to and say, I want to purchase this land and go 
through the process. It’s really simple. So it’s always for sale, 
except for the critical wildlife protected lands. 
 
So it’s not always for sale for everybody. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s the problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That’s the problem. Well then you’re 
advocating that we should cut off leases and sell the land. If you 
were leasing two quarters of lands branch land and you’ve got, 
you know, eight or ten quarters of farm, you’re saying the 
government should say, okay, you’ve leased that for 25 years 
now but we’re going to sell it. So you’ve got to make your 
decision, Mr. Farmer. You’ve got to buy that land or you’re 
going to sell it. Either you’re going to buy it or you’re going to 
lose it. 
 
I don’t know that that’s a very smart thing to do. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well you say yes. Well maybe you can 
explain to me a little bit about how that would work. I mean . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, you can do that. 
 
And secondly, I want to go back to the principles. Principles 
haven’t changed. Age, distance from the land, and the assessed 
value of your existing property are still the three fundamental 
principles that lands branch start out with. 
 
Now there’s some problems and that’s why we got to . . . we 
talked about this just the other day. We’re going to be 
reviewing, because there’s certain situations where, because of 
the larger farming operations where a father and two sons might 
have 50 quarters of land and the farmer . . . the son will apply 
for the lands branch now and get it, and somebody with . . . 
That’s what you got there? Okay. Well I’ll sit down then; you 
understand. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, to begin with, when you sell a 
lease to an oil company, they are leasing the minerals under the 
ground. But you have a limit on that lease  so many years  
three years or five years. When that lease expires, if that oil 
company hasn’t done certain things, then that lease is for sale to 
somebody else. If they do produce oil and gas on it, they’ve got 
a 21-year lease. You know, it’s different. 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2955 

But everything has an end; it’s so many years, much as Crown 
land was leased on 33-year leases. Those people that had those 
leases expired had to renew them and match the criteria. If they 
were in arrears and hadn’t paid their fees, that land was taken 
away from them. Right now if a rancher hasn’t got his lease 
fees paid and his long-term lease comes up, you throw that up 
for grabs to anybody. What’s the difference if you do that with 
cultivated land or the other land? 
 
And the real thing here is that if you don’t provide some 
incentive for these people to buy the land, who are getting 
cheap lease fees, they will never buy it because they can use 
that, as you said in your own argument, as leverage to buy other 
property and be able to compete at higher prices with their 
neighbours for other property, thus making bigger and bigger 
farms on the strength of owning lease . . . or having leased land 
at cheap rates. 
 
So that defeats your argument of trying to keep smaller family 
farms. Because it doesn’t work. You’re actually putting into 
their hands the powers and the leverage to become the bigger 
farms that you are obviously against. 
 
Now I’m not against the bigger operations. So I say at certain 
times, yes, you should put all this land up for sale. Every five 
years that land should all be for sale. If it’s not sold, it can be 
re-leased. But if nobody buys it, you lease it again if you want 
to. But if somebody buys it, it’s theirs  just the same as you 
do with the royalties for the oil companies. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you’d want to comment to that. And then I 
want to get into some other areas or let one of my comrades in 
on something else. But I’d like to talk to you about 4-H . . . 
colleagues, right word. They’re comrades; we’re colleagues, 
okay. 
 
(1545) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I don’t think you ever heard me say 
I was against large farms but I like your flexibility with 
interpretations . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well no, we 
won’t be doing that. We won’t be doing that so we can . . . I 
won’t say much. 
 
But just, I hope . . . you haven’t considered the chaos it would 
create. Just think on grazing land if we said, okay, this block of 
grazing land goes up every five years or, I mean, is up on a 
certain date. Can you imagine what the ranchers would do? 
They’d be going crazy. What would they do with their cattle? 
They’ve got so many acres, you know, cow units figured out for 
their operation. It just doesn’t make a whole lot of sense. 
 
And besides, I don’t see that your argument holds any water 
about the advantage you get from a low-lease rate on land bank 
puts you at a greater advantage to buy other land. Yes, there is a 
couple thousand dollars on a quarter. With today’s inputs and 
costs and prices, that is a very, very small percentage. So if 
there is . . . I would agree with you that your argument is valid, 
but the gain is so minimal that your argument then becomes 
invalid. 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Mr. Minister, let’s get this straightened 
out a little bit here. When I rent property from another person, 
another individual, I get a one-year lease, a three-year lease, a 
five-year lease. When that lease is up that land is up for grabs 
for anybody again. They don’t have to lease it back to me. 
 
I can’t see where the government is any different. After three 
years or five years, if you choose to put it for sale  you’re the 
owner  that’s the risk everybody takes, and on cultivated land 
you don’t have any cattle that are depending on it for the most 
part anyway. 
 
So that argument about the cattle thing though does change 
things because there you do, in very poor quality land, you do 
build an operation on the basis of large acres that you are 
dependent on for a livestock herd. That’s why it was accepted 
in the past that longer term leases were the normal thing on 
Crown land that was grazing land. And that’s why you had the 
33-year leases because that gave a person the option to build an 
operation for basically one lifetime  33 years, you should 
retire. Next 33 years will be the next generation. 
 
So those things didn’t happen by accident. Those kinds of 
numbers that were used in the past have been used for a reason. 
Those people back in those days weren’t all stupid. They didn’t 
just pick these numbers out of the air. They were figured out on 
the basis of how people could survive and exist the best 
possible way, and oftentimes it’s better to go back to those old 
ideas to find out how to do things better even in today’s society. 
 
So what I’m saying to you though, on cultivated land, I’ve got 
no guarantee that when I lease property from my neighbour that 
I’ll have it when the lease expires. The oil company has no 
guarantee that they’re going to be the ones to be able to buy the 
royalty lease back if they don’t live up to their obligations after 
the three-year period. Then it goes back on the auction block 
and they have to buy it back. They have to bid against 
everybody else. They may be successful, they may not. 
 
The same thing in my case. If I’m renting land from my 
neighbour, I bid him so much for the land and if somebody else 
comes over and bids him more, he can rent it to that person. It’s 
a free country. 
 
So what’s different about Crown land? Why should it be any 
different? Why not lease it to the people who would bid you the 
most after every five years? Why not put it up for tender or up 
for sale? What’s the difference? 
 
And don’t tell me that this is a little bit of money because 
you’re the one that keeps telling me that the debt is dragging 
this province down. Every little bit of debt we can pay off is 
important here because we are trying to challenge this system of 
getting rid of this huge debt. And here we can start with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’ll guarantee you that the havoc that 
you’d create out in the community would, at the end of the day, 
be a net loss rather than a net gain as far as the debt is 
concerned. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Assistant Deputy  



2956  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Chairman. Mr. Minister, you mentioned an item in your 
comments that directly relates to the letter I had in my hand of a 
circumstance where some leased land became available, a son 
tendered on it, placed a tender, a second son placed another 
tender, and the father owned a sizeable chunk of land that they 
were farming as a unit. 
 
How does this qualify . . . how does this meet the qualifications 
that you have in place for leasing land? According to the letter I 
have here, the present policy states that only one application per 
farm unit will be considered. All land owned and operated by 
the farm unit must be included in the application, including the 
lands individually owned, owned as joint tenants, or owned as 
tenants in common. 
 
The second paragraph says, a farm unit means any and all 
individuals who farm out of the same headquarters and have 
joint ownership or control of land. 
 
When a father and two sons operating out of the same yard 
tender on land, obviously the father has too much land base to 
put in a tender on the lease. So number one son puts in a tender 
on the lease. If anybody complains about it, number one son 
will in all likelihood be rejected. 
 
But you can only appeal the winner in the case of a lease; you 
can’t appeal anyone else in the system. So number one son gets 
appealed, loses the lease, but number two son picks it up. 
 
How is this fair, Mr. Minister, and how is this policy supposed 
to be working? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I don’t think it is fair. I agree with 
you. And that’s one of the things identified. We are continually 
reviewing the policy. And that is an area that keeps coming up 
to me; obviously coming up to you too. 
 
An Hon. Member:  April 11, ’96. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Yes. No, I’ve had a few of them, but it’s 
very . . . That’s why we have to review the policy to see if it’s 
still working. Because it’s very, very difficult to . . . If there’s a 
yard and machinery on the half mile and one son’s got his 
house across the . . . it could be the same yard, but the quarter is 
split, or the half is split, the yard is split by the quarter line. 
 
Machinery. I mean everybody knows this is happening. I 
shouldn’t say everybody, but more people know. They’re using 
all the same machinery. They live in two or three houses around 
the yard. They can make an argument that they are independent 
farmers. I mean, they would say well look it, I buy my fuel, 
here’s my fuel bill. You know, here’s my crop insurance bill. If 
we were one unit, then we’d have all one fuel bill. 
 
So this is why  and I agree with you 100 per cent  that’s 
why that’s one of the areas that we’re looking at now, to figure 
out how we can make it more fair, or fairer. I don’t know what 
the answer is. 
 
If you have any suggestions, I’d certainly welcome them. 
Because we want to make sure the intent stays the same. And  

the intent is to try to keep the mid- to small-sized younger 
operator on the land. 
 
I think those are pretty noble objectives that we have. I don’t 
think it’s working 100 per cent right now and that’s why we’re 
looking at it. And welcome back. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, what happens in the 
case of a situation like this where you agree that there is a 
problem here, a concern that should be addressed. If this is a 
valid case of there being a problem here, are you prepared to go 
back and revisit the circumstances such as this to determine 
whether or not there’s actually a problem there, whether or not 
an appeal should be launched, whether or not an appeal should 
be approved? 
 
Mr. Minister, perhaps when you’re reviewing these situations 
what you need to do is make some inquiries in the 
neighbourhood as to what is the actual fact, what is the actual 
circumstance under which people are operating. I think it 
should trigger flags within the department when people from 
the same neighbourhood with the same name come forward and 
make applications, to determine whether or not they are in this 
kind of a situation  brothers living in the same yard  or 
whether they happen to be 14th cousins who happen to live in 
the same community. 
 
In one of the communities that . . . right next to where I live, 
half the people have the same name. But their 
great-great-grandfathers were related but that’s as close as it 
gets. So sometimes they are not related and sometimes they are. 
But perhaps when the similar names come up in the 
applications forms, it should trigger a red flag that a little more 
investigation should be carried out in it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, in these particular kind of cases, what kind of 
appeal mechanisms are available to the farmer who is aggrieved 
by the situation; and what kind of appeal is in place if the land 
has been awarded after a certain period of time such as now, if 
you believe that this kind of a situation is wrong? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I don’t know the details of your specific 
case that you have on hand over there, but certainly if . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s a compelling one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m sure it will be compelling. 
 
There’s a process. I don’t know if it’s been to appeal or what 
the situation is, but certainly send it over and we’ll have a look 
at it to see if there’s anything that’s been done wrong, see the 
process, make sure the process has been followed. 
 
Now as far as retroactivity  very, very difficult. Very difficult. 
Difficult because if you change something retroactively, what 
you’re saying is that the process that you went through and the 
appeals process that you had was no good, you know. 
 
So I think that we are reviewing this aspect. I want to tighten it 
up because I think that this is happening too much. And where  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2957 

it will actually land, I don’t know. But if that specific case is 
sent over, we can certainly have a look at it. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Retroactivity is no problem  you’ve 
done it lots of times. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  That’s right. As my colleague says, 
you’ve done it lots of times already. You could just simply 
deem it not to have happened, Mr. Minister, as one of your 
previous counterparts did when he was the . . . 
Rosetown-Elrose. The current Minister of CIC has some past 
experience with retroactivity, deeming things not to happen, 
and perhaps he would be willing to do the same thing with the 
CCTA that he’s responsible for now because he certainly has 
experience at doing it to farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, the letter that I received here is concerned about 
the appeal process and how he can appeal the first person to 
have been awarded the tender but can’t appeal the second-place 
person. Is there a process in place for someone to appeal more 
than one person in a tendering process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Now I don’t quite understand what 
you’re getting at. Any unsuccessful applicant can appeal. 
 
An Hon. Member:  He wants to appeal the second-place 
applicant though, not the . . . He wants to appeal both first and 
second place. They were the brothers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I don’t know. I’ll consult with my 
experts. You don’t appeal the person who got the land; you 
appeal the allocation. And what I don’t quite understand is, why 
would you want to make an appeal to somebody else who 
didn’t get the land? I understand that in this case there are two 
brothers. They both applied for the lease. One . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  According to the scoring system, one 
was first and one was second. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  One was first and one was second. So 
why would you want to appeal the second place? If you wanted 
the land, why wouldn’t you appeal the person who got it? I 
might be missing something here. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Mr. Minister, as I understand the system 
works, you put in a tender on a lease and you’re scored on 
various items: how much your land base is; what your capital 
base is; what your age is; how far away you live; all of those 
things. And you end up with a total score. 
 
In this particular case, brother number one ended up with the 
highest score. Brother number two ended up with the second 
highest score. So one of the other unsuccessful farmers could 
appeal brother number one, because you’re allowed to appeal 
the winner. So if he appealed and won, then the next highest 
person would be awarded the tender, which would be brother 
number two. 
 
And so that’s what his concern is: he would like to appeal both 
of the brothers because they both have the same circumstances. 
Obviously one is younger or older than the other and perhaps  

that influenced why brother one was higher in the scoring than 
brother two. So he would like to appeal both brothers, because 
they’re in the same circumstances. 
 
(1600) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  It’s my understanding that you would be 
able . . . let’s say you appealed successfully and knocked 
number one off. Then it’s a new allocation so then you could 
appeal again on the second allocation. We are of the belief that 
that’s possible, so I think you can accomplish what your 
objective would be. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Do you know of any circumstances, Mr. 
Minister, where this has occurred, where there has been more 
than one appeal on an allocation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I can’t give you a definitive answer. We 
believe that yes it has happened, but I would have to go back 
into the case file to see if and when it exactly did happen. But 
my officials believe that it has happened. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not 
particularly interested in the individual cases but rather that the 
fact that there is a track record there that it has happened. And 
perhaps you could indicate though, if your officials would 
know, whether anyone has appealed two successfully . . . two 
appeals successfully. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We’re sending out for a specialist to 
answer your questions more specifically. Instead of supplying 
you with wrong answers, I’m going to get the person to come 
over from the department who deals with appeals, and that way 
we can do it now and you won’t have to wait for the answer in 
the mail or . . . 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, we could always 
keep you here until you supply us with the answer too. Mr. 
Minister, since your officials are looking for the answers on this 
particular issue and I realize . . . I didn’t expect them to have the 
answers with them. I just thought perhaps one of them might 
happen to recall it. 
 
I’d like to move on to another issue which I have talked to you 
about and which you are working on, but I’d just like some 
general information and that is again with lands branch land 
and oil leases. I wonder if you can give me some indication as 
to how many oil locations would be located on lands branch 
lands? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We’re trying to get that answer. We 
don’t know exactly what the . . . how many wells there are on 
Crown land. 
 
But just reverting back to your other question about double 
appeal. It’s at the discretion of the board and it has happened. In 
recent memory, from the department person that’s talked to 
you, we don’t know of anybody who’s successfully done it 
twice. But the process has been . . . they’ve gone through the 
process. 
 



2958  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m 
disappointed to hear that nobody in corporate memory of the 
people sitting here  and I would have to assume some of them 
have been there for a significant period of time  that no one 
has appealed it successfully. 
 
I would think that if in a case like this where two brothers are 
involved, that the cases would be similar enough that in all 
likelihood, if appeal one was to be successful, appeal two in all 
likelihood would be. But again, I’m just going by the facts 
presented to me by the individual. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, leaving that aside, perhaps you could give us 
some indication as to the amount of income that Ag and Food 
receives for its oil leases. Does that money pass through Ag and 
Food? Does it pass directly to the Minister of Finance with 
which Ag and Food has no connection to gain any knowledge? 
How does that work? 
 
And what kind of average prices would you be receiving on an 
initial surface lease? Not the ongoing lease but the initial 
drilling lease. I wonder if you can give me that information, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  The dollars come into our department 
and then we just transfer them over to Finance. And ‘96-97, 
petroleum and gas, $4.7 million. And as far as the number of 
dollars for the initial lease, we haven’t got that specifically, but 
I believe it’s around $5,000. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, for giving me 
back the numbers I gave you the other day. 
 
Mr. Minister, I missed the first part of your response there, if 
you could give that to me again. I got the number for the ‘96-97 
of 4.7 million, but you had a number in front of that. I wonder 
if you can give me that again, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, that’s the only number that I gave 
you. I said before that, what I said was that the money comes 
into our department, and then flows through . . . and we just 
send it over to Finance. We don’t get to keep any of it, 
unfortunately. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How is this 
4.7 million compared with other years? Is this a growing 
revenue or a shrinking revenue or basically holding steady? I 
wonder if you can give some indication as to what’s happening 
in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We’re just in process . . . but just to keep 
things going, we’re looking for that number of whether that 4.7 
is . . . We’re trying to find the last few years to give you an 
indication of what’s happening with it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. While your 
officials are looking, perhaps they’ll come across some other 
numbers that I’m interested in. How many new locations have 
been drilled on Ag and Food land in the past year? Perhaps you 
might find that number. 
 

And perhaps you have a policy directive on what are the 
reasons that the oil companies pay Ag and Food these surface 
leases, particularly the drilling leases. I know that when they 
deal with a private individual they have it broke down  we 
give you so much for land damage, so much for inconvenience 
and nuisance factor, so much because we’re utilizing 3.4 acres. 
I wonder if Ag and Food has some sort of directive, policy, that 
. . . for the reasons why you go after the oil companies for X 
number of dollars. 
 
(1615) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well the fee is basically for the oil 
company giving them the right to use Crown land, use the 
people’s land. And that covers . . . that’s what the fee is for. 
 
Now if the problem . . . the problem is if we were to transfer the 
fees, the initial fee, or especially the ongoing lease fees to the 
renter, we would be putting ourselves in a negative position, the 
taxpayer in a negative position. Because what he would pay, if 
we flow all those dollars through, it would be more than what 
he would be paying on his lease. So I mean the taxpayer, we 
wouldn’t be getting any value for our money. So we have to . . . 
we keep that money and it goes into the formula for rent. 
 
So I understand there is a factor involved for the people who 
live there, as a nuisance or whatever. But right now, like the 
way it was explained, is that that is a fee for using that land. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Now thank you, Mr. Minister. You’re 
anticipating my questions, based on a conversation we had the 
other day about a particular case. But, Mr. Minister, I think 
when you look at particularly the drilling leases, not so much 
the long-term lease, but the drilling lease, the initial surface 
lease, that fee that you receive is for right of usage, right of 
access, for inconvenience, and for nuisance. 
 
Now certainly the Crown is entitled to the right for usage and 
the right for access. I don’t disagree at all. And I think most 
leaseholders who are being reasonable would not disagree that 
the land belongs to the Crown and therefore the Crown should 
receive any money for usage and for access. 
 
But when it comes down to the inconvenience and the nuisance 
factor, I think there is some room there for some dispute. That 
area I believe the leaseholder should have some claim on. 
 
Now obviously if the oil company comes in and drills, puts in a 
location where they’re producing oil, or perhaps even water 
disposal, that is going to be a long-term impact on that land for 
the Crown. It’s going to have either a negative or a positive 
impact; therefore some of that inconvenience should remain 
with the Crown. 
 
But some of that inconvenience is also going to be suffered by 
the leaseholder as they have to work around that particular 
piece of property. They are going to lose access to that many 
acres, which was part of their agreement with the Crown at the 
time when they acquired that agreement. 
 
So they are going to lose . . . It’s like having an extra slough  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2959 

stuck on your land that you have to dodge around. I have a lot 
of sloughs and unfortunately I haven’t got any oil wells to 
dodge around, and sloughs don’t pay near as good as oil wells 
do. But for a leaseholder who has to dodge around it, that is an 
inconvenience and a cost to them. 
 
In light of the case that we were talking about  and this 
doesn’t happen in all cases  but this particular case that we 
have already discussed, and you’re looking into; I believe in 
that particular case  and it has come up before where the 
nuisance factor is very dramatic on the leaseholders  because 
in this particular case, and in one other case that was brought to 
my attention, the drilling was going to happen right next to the 
farmer’s yard. 
 
And this was going to create a great deal of nuisance for them. 
They were going to have to watch their animals a lot more 
closely, their dog would be endangered because of the heavier 
traffic on the road, their children would be endangered because 
of the additional traffic; and if you’ve ever spent any time 
around a drilling rig they make an awful lot of noise in the 
middle of the night. And that is a great inconvenience and a 
great nuisance factor. 
 
So I believe that the leaseholders on a drilling site should 
receive some form of compensation from the department. Now 
it’s my understanding that at the present time the department 
offers a very limited amount of compensation; $100 I believe is 
the fees that is allowed for the leaseholder for their 
inconvenience. 
 
It’s not just the inconvenience though, Mr. Minister. The 
leaseholder acquires the land, acquires the lease with the 
understanding that at some point in time they may desire, may 
wish to purchase that land. And that land, let’s say, has an 
average of 10 times the assessed value at the present time. That 
these numbers are increasing but let’s say 10 times. 
 
If you put an oil lease on there, you have dramatically changed 
the value of that property. Now they’ve been leasing the land 
and farming it for a considerable period of time. It may be 1 
year, it may be 20 years. And they may be close to the time 
when they can now afford to buy that land. But an oil well is 
put on it. They’ve gained no value out of that, when the oil well 
went on there, because your department got the entire 
settlement for the drilling lease. The leaseholder got $100. 
 
But when they come to buy the land, you will now include the 
value of that service lease as part of the purchase price. And I 
don’t know just how much additional you would add on, but 
obviously it has some value. 
 
So you need to provide, Mr. Minister, at least at the drilling 
time, some compensation to the leaseholder for their 
inconvenience and their nuisance. So perhaps, Mr. Minister, 
you could comment on that. And could you also comment on 
the impact that having an oil lease on your leased property 
would have at the time when the leaseholder might wish to 
purchase the land. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  First of all, I’ll give you the numbers  

from the oil and gas . . . we have approximately 3,000 wells, 
and first-year rent varies between 2 and $3,000, and after that 
we get $1,000 a year. So those numbers are there for you. 
 
And in this particular case that you’re talking about, it is . . . the 
department’s been working with them and it’s a unique case. 
And I think it has enough merit that we should be reviewing our 
policy on that because 100 bucks a well, if it’s out in the middle 
of the north forty that’s enough, who cares, you know, and the 
people won’t. But in this particular case where the drilling rig is 
right at their house . . . that’s why the department is looking into 
it, and we’ll see if we can block that crack or putty that crack, 
not just for this case, but down the road, because there will be 
others. There probably will have been others. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that we do have some insurances 
like their water supply, okay. We put the onus on the company, 
the drilling company. If they contaminate the water supply, they 
have to compensate for that. So there are some . . . you know, 
the nuisance is the issue here. We can take care of all the 
technical stuff, but it’s what is the value . . . what is the cost of 
the nuisance of having that well clunking in your ear all night or 
bothering your cattle or, you know, driving through the yard. I 
know they have another approach, but if you got small children, 
it’s a nuisance. And probably should be compensated for. 
 
That’s why the department is looking at it now. What that level 
will be, I don’t know. But we’ll continue to work on this to try 
to find the solution that’s not only right for this case, but 
probably would be precedent setting for the future. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. This is the 
second such case that I have had come forward to me. And the 
other case, the farmers were able to negotiate a settlement for 
themselves with the oil company in particular. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, what rights does the leaseholder have in 
regards to an oil company coming forward and wanting to drill 
on their lease? Do they have the right to refuse to allow the 
drilling to proceed? What rights do the leaseholders have? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  No, the leaseholder can’t stop the 
drilling, but what we endeavour, is that we try to cover off all 
their concerns. Now you will never get it 100 per cent because 
you know, everybody’s . . . your concern might be a little 
different level than my concern. 
 
But we work with them to try to make sure, you know like I say, 
their water supply is not going to be contaminated; cleaning up 
the site; anything off site that is damaged should be 
compensated for. So while they can’t stop it, it is of concern to 
the government enough that we have to . . . we want to work 
with them and try to make sure that all their concerns are 
alleviated. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Okay, let’s . . . 
you say they can’t stop it. Can they hold it up for a considerable 
period of time? 
 
Because the oil company wants the leaseholders to sign a  



2960  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

release for them. I’m not sure who this release applies to, 
whether it applies just to the oil company, whether it’s a release 
from Ag and Food on a portion of their acreage that they’re 
leasing. Somebody wants them to sign off for some purpose. 
Obviously if they have to . . . somebody needs a signature to 
sign off, signing that releases somebody from something. So 
what is the signature then for in the case of an oil drilling lease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well what he’s signing off is simply 
saying that he’s satisfied that all his concerns have been met. 
We don’t require that it be signed off but we like to have it 
signed off all the time because that means that there’s been 
cooperation and people are satisfied. 
 
It’s no advantage to the government to have somebody 
unsatisfied and knocking on your door, you know, every year 
for the next 10 years, saying, you know, you didn’t do this right. 
So we try to get those concerns alleviated and that’s why the 
signature is needed, just to say yes, we agree that things are 
okay here. We’ve met all requirements of water, traffic, and the 
like. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it would seem to me 
that there must be something more to it than that. I recall 
another case where the leaseholders negotiated very strongly 
with the oil company and received more than the $100. There 
was also a second lease that was inquired about on their 
leaseholdings. And in that particular case, a different oil 
company I believe it was, wouldn’t offer anything more and 
they simply refused to sign off then. What happened in that 
particular case was the oil company moved across the road and 
drilled on somebody else’s location. 
 
Horizontal wells, you can do that. You don’t have to be where 
you want to do the actual drilling, you can move off . . . actually 
you can probably move off a mile or more if you really wanted 
to. Costs are obviously going to be higher if you do that, but so 
the oil company moved off. The well was not drilled on the Ag 
and Food land. Actually in this particular case it turned out to 
the benefit of the leaseholder because they were able then, at a 
later date, a couple of years later, to turn around and buy that 
particular quarter of land where the well would have been but 
was not drilled, and they didn’t have to pay anything extra. 
They paid the going rate at the time for the land and it was of 
advantage to them to have rejected the proposal to put the well 
on their land. 
 
In some manner they had the ability to say no and the drilling 
lease was moved. Now you say that they can’t refuse to allow 
that lease on the land. Perhaps the drilling company didn’t want 
to wait to go through arbitration. I don’t know if that would 
have been involved. So I have to inquire as to what, how, or 
then . . . that that particular leaseholder have that some other 
leaseholder may not have had then in refusing to allow the 
drilling to take place on their particular piece of land? 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I would have to know the details of 
the other case you talked about because, you know, I don’t want 
to speculate on why. 

But if the money, if there was extra money, are you saying the 
extra money they got came from . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
came from the oil company, yes. I was going to say, it didn’t 
come from us. And if they . . . you know, oil companies will do 
that from time to time simply to keep the leaseholder happy. 
Happy leaseholders are no headache for the oil companies. 
 
What I’m saying here is that we are looking at this. I know it’s a 
problem and I think we have to look at some type of a solution 
if we can. I don’t know what the solution is and I’m willing to 
work with you. And the department is working with the people 
out your way. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, I’d like to move on to another issue, and I would like 
to thank you for looking into the issue of the oil leases and 
hopefully finding some type of a solution so that in cases of real 
nuisance, that the landowners do receive more compensation 
than simply the $100. 
 
The issue I’d like to move on to now is the grain car situation. 
With the proposals that the grain car fleet of Canada’s railroads 
be sold to someone, or rather the fleet owned by the 
government be sold to someone, the ownership transferred to 
someone, the proposal has been made by SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), along with a large number 
of the other stakeholders  the NFU (National Farmers Union), 
the barley growers, the canola growers, and other stakeholders 
 that these be sold to the producers. Now this proposal runs 
against the grain for the railroads, who obviously want to 
acquire these particular vehicles for themselves so that they can 
utilize them. 
 
What position has Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture 
taken on this? If the producers gain access to them, then the 
costs to operate . . . the cost to purchase, to operate and to 
maintain will be on the producers. If the railroads get them, 
obviously the costs to purchase, to operate, and to maintain will 
be on the producers. No matter who owns them, the producer is 
going to pay for them. What position has Ag and Food taken on 
this particular issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  We’ve taken the same position that the 
Department of Highways and Transportation has taken. We’ve 
worked with the Department of Highways and Transportation. I 
don’t know if you asked these questions in Highways last night, 
and we won’t have any detail on this because it is Highways 
section. If you ask detailed questions, I think we’d have to get 
them to you some time later. 
 
But no, our position is the same as . . . we worked it out . . . the 
minister and I have been working together on this. He takes the 
lead because it’s a Highways issue, Transportation issue, but it 
worked well. 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s an Ag issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  It’s an Ag issue as well. That’s why we 
worked together on it. Exactly. But the way the departments are 
set up, it has to . . . he takes the lead on it. And we are in 
support of the producers owning the cars. 



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2961 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, there seems to be 
some producers who don’t agree with that any longer. At one 
point in time I believe that most of the producer organizations 
were supportive of the idea of producers owning the grain cars. 
 
And I have a news release, as you say, from Highways and 
Transportation that the Saskatchewan government recommends 
the federal government sell the grain cars to the producers. Well 
that has changed in the last couple of days actually, the last 
week. Two outfits now have pulled out. 
 
I have a news release here from the wheat growers. Wheat 
growers withdraw from the SARM rail car coalition, Mr. 
Minister, because they believe that the federal government was 
placing too many restrictions on how those cars could be used, 
how they were going to be operated. 
 
And I’d like to read to you one paragraph, or a part of one 
paragraph. And I quote, “The federal government is forcing any 
potential car owner into a very narrow line of business, he 
said.” And that would be Larry McQuire. 
 
He pointed out that the government is restricting the purchaser 
of the cars to dealing with Canadian railroads and using the cars 
for western grain. The car owner will have a very limited 
bargaining power with the railroads over the use of these cars in 
this particular situation. 
 
Do you see a problem, Mr. Minister, in the idea that these grain 
cars are strictly limited to usage by Canadian railroads, and 
strictly limited for usage in western Canada? Obviously at 
different times of the year, grain is not available in western 
Canada particularly when you look at the summer months. Most 
of the grain has been moved out on most years. Perhaps these 
cars are not needed because a number of the hopper cars at 
various times of the year are used to haul potash and fertilizer. 
If these cars are not available for such usage, that means that 
it’s limiting the access to revenues to help pay for those cars, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Again, not all grain is hauled by Canadian railroads. I believe 
that Saskatchewan producers and Canadian producers are 
looking for other access points to the international system for 
the movement of grain. 
 
I know that we talked in one evening here about the 
possibilities of shipping down the Mississippi on rail down to 
New Orleans to the Gulf coast, which is probably the cheapest 
route to export right now. Also there has been times when grain 
has been shipped south of the border on the BN line  
Burlington Northern  out to Seattle, particularly at times 
when the Vancouver port has been on strike. 
 
So under those kind of restrictions, a good chunk of the 
Canadian transportation system for grain would not be available 
to move the grain under a shipment south or at a point in time 
where a non-Canadian locomotive was connected to that train. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, that would, I think, greatly restrict the 
movement of Canadian grain if those kind of restrictions were 
placed on the rail cars whether they were owned by the  

producers or owned by the railroad. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I’m a little disappointed with the 
federal government. Needless to say it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, have we said anything about it, the 
member from Kindersley asks. Absolutely. I don’t know the 
detail because . . . before I answer unilaterally, or categorically, 
I want to tell you that I haven’t seen the restrictions. But from 
what you describe to me  and that’s why I say these are really 
Highways estimates because Andy . . . or I mean the minister 
takes the lead on highways. But no, I would be one to agree that 
there should not be restrictions to limit the usage. Because I 
know that the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation is used 
primarily for board grains and are used very successfully, and 
they move all the grain that we want to move. 
 
But I also know that the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
made three quarters of a million dollars last year by leasing 
those thousand cars out in times when they weren’t being used. 
 
And so I think probably this is an attempt by the federal 
government to discourage people, the farmers, from owning this 
thing. Really it’s pretty petty. I mean if they’re being 
responsive, they know that the farmers of this province should 
have those. They can make a few bucks on leasing those cars. 
Why would any government want to restrict  and it would be 
their property if they buy them  why would any government 
want to restrict that ability to make money on those cars? 
 
So I think the important part of this whole thing is the 
allocation though. It’s the allocation of the cars that are going to 
be as important as the ownership. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If we keep you 
here this evening we will have you agreeing to go to dual 
marketing, I know. We have got you agreeing on free trade. 
We’ve got you agreeing now on no restriction on grain cars. By 
this evening, by 10:30, we’ll have you agreeing with dual 
marketing. So I’m looking forward to discussing the issue with 
you after 7 o’clock, Mr. Minister. 
 
But I’m very glad to see that you’re in favour of removing the 
restrictions on the sale of the grain cars, Mr. Minister, or the 
usage of the grain cars after they have been sold. And hopefully 
the producers will be able to purchase those. But I do have 
some concerns as to what process will take place for the 
purchase, what kind of avenues will be available to producers to 
buy those cars. Will it be a direct investment where producers 
will be asked to pony up X number of dollars to make the 
purchase? If that is the case, I really don’t see producers being 
able to do that. 
 
Hopefully some sort of a scenario can be developed with the 
federal government for purchases over time, for credit with the 
federal government to make the purchases. I believe that would 
be an appropriate means by which to do it. I think when you 
look though at the purchase of the grain cars by Saskatchewan 
producers, because obviously Manitoba and Alberta producers 
will be a part of this, anybody within the Wheat Board area 
hopefully would be a group of that. 
 



2962  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

My colleague here, the member from Kindersley, has pointed 
out to me which group it is. The other group that dropped out 
since the Western Wheat Growers have pulled out of the 
coalition, and I’ll just read you this first sentence: 
 

Another member of the Western Farmer Rail Car Coalition 
seeking to buy government hopper car fleet has dropped 
out. Western Producer Car Group which lobbies for 
unrestricted access to producer cars also advocates 
commercialized market-driven handling and transport 
system. Farmer ownership of cars has insufficient potential 
to enhance competition or increase efficiency. 

 
So they have pulled out. And I gather this group is from 
Manitoba. I don’t know actually who they represent at all, but 
they have pulled out of the agreement at least. 
 
The Western Producer Car Group, WPCG, I haven’t heard of 
them either, Mr. Minister, but they’re out of Manitoba, I gather. 
So they have some concerns obviously with the restrictions that 
are being placed in that it won’t make the purchase a viable 
option for western producers. 
 
What kind of scenario do you envision coming forward from 
the federal government to purchase the cars, and what kind of 
formula will be in place to determine the price? Is it simply 
going to be an open tender where he with the most money has 
the right to purchase? Or is it going to be fixed in some other 
manner? 
 
(1645) 
 
An Hon. Member:  The person with the deepest pockets. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I would hope it’s not the person 
with the deepest pockets, as the member from Kindersley said. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That’s what it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I think that’s where the Liberals are 
heading, the federal Liberals are heading. And I don’t agree 
with that at all. 
 
An Hon. Member:  We paid for them already. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  That’s just what was on the tip of my 
tongue. The taxpayers, and producers being taxpayers, have 
paid for the cars once. The alarming part was that when the 
railroads were getting the cars, they were only about $100 
million. Well now it’s up to $400 million. As soon as we talk 
about producers owning them the federal government seems 
like they start to up the dollar amounts, which is really 
unfortunate because it does show a lack of priority for this area. 
 
The one thing I would say about the two groups that . . . and I 
don’t know the last group; I’m not familiar with them, but they 
pulled out. And I don’t think you gain anything by pulling out. 
I’m disappointed that they did pull out. I don’t think it will 
affect the coalition or the value of the coalition because I think 
there’s still enough major groups in there that the federal 
government should listen. 

As far as the formula and that’s concerned, you will remember 
this is not Agriculture estimates . . . this is Agriculture 
estimates, not Transportation estimates. And as far as the 
formula goes, you would have to ask Transportation officials 
last night. In fact I wasn’t here all night last night, but I don’t 
recall you even asking any questions on grain cars till the 
minister . . . So I’m not sure what the logic is here because the 
Highways minister is the guy that’s supposed to be asked these 
questions and not Agriculture. 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s easier to get stuff out of you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m much more cooperative, yes. 
 
So anyway, as far as the regulations go, I don’t know the detail; 
I’d have to see them. But I think that they should not be putting 
restrictions on. I think that the federal government is trying to 
find ways to chip away at this coalition because I think they 
want the cars to go to the railroad. 
 
I disagree with that. We are going to be working with the 
coalition and contacting the federal government to try to 
encourage them not to, by use of the back door, force producers 
into a position where they figure the cars . . . if they get the cars, 
it won’t be of any benefit to them. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I think 
perhaps the Saskatchewan government should pursue that on 
behalf of producers to ensure that if producers acquire the cars, 
that they have the maximum opportunity for a return on it, and 
that it not be restricted in any manner. 
 
And I’m recalling an open-line show that I was on dealing with 
the Canadian Wheat Board and an individual phoned in and 
believed that the only cars in Canada were owned by the 
railroads. And I pointed out to him at the time that the Canadian 
Wheat Board owned grain cars. 
 
I wonder if you could indicate whether or not the Canadian 
Wheat Board cars are part of this agreement. Because obviously 
farmers have already paid for those cars out of their pooled 
accounts with the Canadian Wheat Board. So we shouldn’t 
have to pay again for those cars. 
 
When it comes to the other cars owned by the Government of 
Canada, I believe a good place to start to look for the money for 
Saskatchewan producers in particular would be the monies that 
were returned out of the GRIP program. That’s $256 million 
that Saskatchewan farmers have already paid back to the federal 
government that should be used in this particular case to pay for 
those grain cars and we should not have to pony-up any 
additional monies, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I do not believe that the Canadian Wheat 
Board cars are included in this deal. That is not my belief. Now 
with the way things have been changing with the federal 
government  not to say that they couldn’t be. But I agree with 
you; they should not be part of the deal. This deal is the 10,000 
Government of Canada cars. We’ve got a thousand cars, 
Government of Saskatchewan; Alberta’s got a thousand cars; 
the Wheat Board’s got 2,000 cars. The Wheat Board’s 2,000  



June 20, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2963 

cars, I believe, are not involved. That’s my understanding. It 
was that way unless it’s changed. 
 
And as you say, since the farmers’ coalition got together, a 
number of things are changing. So if you would’ve asked this 
question of the Minister of Transportation last night, he 
probably could’ve told you exactly . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, you voted him off, so you can’t. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe we 
could ask leave of the government at some point in time to 
bring the estimates back for the Minister of Highways and we’ll 
ask him those questions again. 
 
I’m sure that the Minister of Agriculture would rather have the 
Minister of Highways answer these questions than himself. But 
perhaps over supper, if you and the Minister of Highways were 
to go out for supper, you could query him, and then when you 
come back after supper you could have the answers for us. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, perhaps one of the problems with the federal 
government in dealing with the grain cars and how they’re 
going to be disposed of deals with the fact that, I believe it was 
Pierre Trudeau or John Turner, while they were prime ministers, 
appointed the head of CP (Canadian Pacific) Rail to the Senate. 
And perhaps that gentleman is now having an influence as to 
how these particular railcars will be disposed of. I would 
certainly hope that is not the case, that the senator from the 
CPR, (Canadian Pacific Railway) and I can’t remember what 
his name is right offhand  it may be Sinclair, but I’m not sure 
exactly  whether or not he may be having some influence on 
this particular area. 
 
But I believe it’s certainly wrong for the federal government to 
start out . . . put out the proposal to producers, to the railroads, 
that 100 million or $130 million is the number which they were 
looking at to achieve on these particular sales. As soon as the 
. . . and I agree with you when you say that as soon as the 
producers expressed an interest, the price of these railcars 
started to accelerate at a fairly fast rate. The fact is, much faster 
than any locomotive could accelerate. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe that your government, that you 
personally, along with the Minister of Highways and your 
Premier, need to bring forward the concerns of the producers in 
this particular area — that they must have the opportunities to 
purchase these cars. Because it is, you might say, a golden 
opportunity for the grain producers of western Canada to have a 
major impact on the transportation of their own commodity. 
 
Well perhaps I shouldn’t say their own commodity. If they’re 
hauling canola or flax or oats, it is their own commodity. For 
the rest, their cereals, the wheat and barley, for hauling the 
Canadian Wheat Board’s grain that the farmers have grown for 
them. 
 
So perhaps, Mr. Minister, you should be making strong 
representations along with your colleagues from Manitoba and 
Alberta to the federal government to ensure that producers have 
access to these cars at a reasonable price. 
 

I’d like to ask you whether or not you’ve been in contact with 
the Ag ministers, or the Transport ministers in our two 
neighbouring provinces, and I’d also like a comment from you 
on the use of the GRIP monies that were returned to Ottawa to 
pay for this purchase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Before I answer that question, you’d 
asked a question on the number of new drillings this year. The 
new drillings for 1995-96 was 344. 
 
Well, I think that . . . And again not having transport officials 
here to give me detail, I think that we have to do one thing. We 
have to ask . . . and I would ask if one of the Liberal members 
 I know where I sit in this thing, supporting the farm coalition 
group. It sounds like you’re in the same park as that, which is 
kind of scary when you start agreeing here too much. But I 
think what I might ask of one of the Liberal members if they 
want to get up and give us their position on this during these 
estimates. 
 
Because we’ve seen the federal government back off or make it 
more difficult, it appears, for farmers to own these cars. I 
disagree with that. We have made representation  letters from 
our Minister of Highways and Transportation to the federal 
minister. 
 
I will be talking in July, early July, first to the fourth of July, ag 
ministers conference in Victoria. I’ll be talking to Mr. Goodale 
at that conference and I’m not sure that there isn’t a little bit of 
a split in the federal ministers. Because the Minister of 
Transportation and the Minister of Agriculture there . . . in the 
past I’ve seen some little power struggles. And yes, somebody 
wants a few more bucks, but I’ll be talking to other ministers, 
western ministers, about this and the federal minister about this. 
 
So rest assured that we’re on this and I’m a very strong believer 
in these things coming to the farmers, but only if . shouldn’t 
say only if  come to the farmers, making sure that they have 
the advantage of the flexibility to lease them to whoever they 
want  you know, as we run our Grain Car Corporation here. 
Because if they own them and they’re restricted so they can’t 
make any money off them in down times, you know, that really 
does put into question whether it’s worth your while. 
 
Now it would be worth your while probably anyway because 
otherwise you’d be paying premiums on cars, like the U.S. do, 
in the bid system. I mean, the cars are there and they’re up 3 or 
4 or $500 on top of the bid that you have to ante up the cash to 
get the car. So that’s just . . . And it doesn’t work. And that’s 
what we would have had had they gone the railroads. 
 
So just rest assure that I do agree with you in that farmers 
should own them and they shouldn’t be restricted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister, you even 
have one of your own colleagues getting a little nervous about 
those statements, but I certainly agree with you. 
 
But I wonder if you could comment on the idea of the GRIP 
monies that were returned to the federal government being used 
or being allocated to the purchase price of those grain cars on  



2964  Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 1996 

behalf of Saskatchewan producers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well if that’s the route that could be 
used, I’d like to see that money come to Saskatchewan any way 
we can get it. Because I think, I mean, we are heavily reliant on 
agriculture in this province and if that money would be 
earmarked for part of that, that would be fine by me. I mean I 
certainly wouldn’t be opposed to it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Certainly 
those monies were originally allocated to agriculture in 
Saskatchewan. I’m sure that we will never see the light of day 
again as far as that $256 million in actual cash coming from the 
Liberal government again. But perhaps with a strong negotiator 
such as yourself, Mr. Minister, and your colleague, the Minister 
of Highways, you could make an arrangement with them to 
credit us with that. That could be used to pay a portion of that 
grain car cost. 
 
If the costs are going to be, let’s say, $130 million spread 
between the farmers of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta, 
surely no more than half to 60 per cent of that would be 
allocated to Saskatchewan’s share since we do indeed produce 
the majority of the grain. We should pay the portion related to 
the movement of grain that we produce. 
 
But surely some of that money could be allocated to the use to 
pay for those grain cars, and I believe that would be a very 
worthwhile project. It would certainly make farmers a little 
more comfortable with some of the decisions made by your 
government in sending that money back. I know that you didn’t 
voluntarily send it back; it was part of the agreement. But 
nevertheless the agreement when you made the changes forced 
that return back to the federal government. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, perhaps you and your colleague should 
sit down with Mr. Goodale the next time you catch up with him 
in town here and have a very close discussion with him on that 
particular avenue and persuade him in the manner that I know 
you are very persuasive, Mr. Minister, to get the federal 
government to credit Saskatchewan with those monies for the 
use to purchase those producer cars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well, as I say, I’d welcome the money in 
any form that we can get it in. That’s the route. 
 
Now when you talk about the changes to the program causing 
the surplus, we might have a little disagreement there. And if it 
was, if it did . . . I think what it did is tighten up the moral 
hazards enough that there could have been a surplus. And I 
think it depends where you go in the province whether you 
think the changes were good or bad anyway. 
 
So no, in the whole transportation field, we have to ensure . . . 
And that’s why I’ve asked the Liberal members to get up and 
join us, join with . . . Obviously you and I are agreeing on the 
ownership of the cars and how it should be regulated. But I’ve 
asked the Liberal members, anyone, to get up and say, do you 
agree with us. Can we go united to Ottawa? 
 
I mean, we’re working one on one with the federal government  

now. You’re throwing your support behind us now, that’s great. 
And I just asked one of the Liberal members if they could just 
get up and indicate, do we got . . . Well it’s near five now, but 
we’ve got lots of time. 
 
But just, please, just give us an indication. Do you agree that 
the farmers should own the cars? Stand in your place and join 
with us and then we can write a letter  three parties agree  
to Ottawa saying look, here’s what should happen. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I gather 
our Liberal colleagues don’t have an opinion yet on this. Not 
surprising. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to move on to another issue. I know that 
there was a court case that settled the issue of the farm fuel 
rebate program. And that deals with agricultural fuels, fuels that 
are . . . gasoline that is used for farm purposes on which the 
Saskatchewan road tax has been paid. 
 
I wonder if you’d have any idea, Mr. Minister, just how many 
farmers apply for those rebates and what size those rebates are. 
And how many of those farmers . . . or how many farm wives, 
in particular, have expressed concern that they were not being 
allowed to apply for the rebates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Well I feel like the Premier tonight. First 
we started with Agriculture, then we went over to . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order. Order. It now being 5 o’clock, this 
committee stands recessed until 7 o’clock later this same day. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER  

Ruling on Privilege  
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................2913 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................2924 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2926 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2936 
Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................2936 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2936 
Upshall.......................................................................................................................................................................................2936 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2936 
Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................2943 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2947 
Flavel .........................................................................................................................................................................................2951 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................2935 
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2936 
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2936 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2936 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Good Student Summer Employment Prospects  

Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................2937 
Duke of Edinburgh Award  

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2937 
School Awards From Seeds Canada Foundation  

Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2937 
Volunteer Awards  

Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................2937 
Minds Eye Pictures Film Deal  

Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................2938 
Heritage Award for Waskesiu Golf Clubhouse  

Langford ...................................................................................................................................................................................2938 
Saskatchewan Jazz Festival  

Whitmore ..................................................................................................................................................................................2938 
Village of Debden to Host La Fete Fransaskoise  

Johnson .....................................................................................................................................................................................2938 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Business Bankruptcies  
Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................2939 
Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................2939 

Liquor Off-Sale Permits  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2939 
Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................2939 

Condie to Queen Elizabeth Power Line  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2940 
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................2940 

Casino Tours  
Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................2941 
Crofford ....................................................................................................................................................................................2941 



 

Potential Closure of Pioneers Haven  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2941 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................2941 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2942 
Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................2942 
Haverstock ................................................................................................................................................................................2942 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS  
Bill No. 121  An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979 to provide for a broader managing Board of 
Directors for the Workers’ Compensation Board for the accountability of the Board  

Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2943 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  

General Revenue Fund  
Agriculture and Food  Vote 1  

Upshall.............................................................................................................................................................................2913, 2946 
D’Autremont ...................................................................................................................................................................2913, 2955 
Goohsen ...........................................................................................................................................................................2931, 2944 
 

 


