
















































March 28, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 565 

 March 28, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf 

of gravely concerned citizens of Saskatchewan with respect to 

the closure of the Plains Health Centre in Regina. The prayer 

reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Estevan, from Caronport, and many other small rural 

Saskatchewan towns. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

numerous southern Saskatchewan communities and the city of 

Regina. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

petition reading as follows: 

 

To the Hon. the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

the legislature assembled. 

 

Petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth that the government has 

failed to address the serious concerns of the landlords who 

provide rental accommodation to Saskatchewan renters. 

 

The prayer reads as follow, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

action to allow an increase in the security deposits on 

rental properties to the equivalent of one month’s rent, and 

that your Hon. Assembly review the remedies available to 

landlords who are not given sufficient notice by social 

assistance tenants who vacate properties and whose rent in 

their new accommodation is paid by social assistance 

without regard for outstanding obligations in previous 

rental agreements. 

 

I so present. The petitions are from people from throughout 

Regina and Calgary. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise  

today as well to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Regina, but Balcarres as well. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of the Plains Health Centre. The petition that I would 

like to present reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Signatures come from Regina, Moose Jaw, and all through the 

southern part of the province. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions of 

names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the closure of 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, from 

Craven, from Grenfell, and all over southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 

present petitions of names from people throughout southern 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the Vibank 

area and the community. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people who have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Redvers, Weyburn, Northgate, Montmartre, Kelliher, 

Belle Plaine, Regina, and Moose Jaw, just to name a few. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to  



566  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

all throughout Saskatchewan. We have them from Regina, from 

Rouleau, from Yorkton, Pilot Butte. They’re from Osage, 

Fillmore,. . . (inaudible) . . . .McLean, Kindersley, Broadview, 

Weyburn. They’re from all throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and I so present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to 

present petitions on behalf of people throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding saving the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are of 

course all throughout Saskatchewan, but a lot of them from 

Regina, of course, from the constituency of Regina Elphinstone, 

Regina Albert South, and many communities throughout 

Saskatchewan that have also suffered closure of hospitals. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Now the hon. member knows that in 

presenting petitions that debate is not permitted, and I know 

that he realizes that. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to, on 

behalf of the official opposition, welcome all the friends of the 

Assembly who have gathered here today to be with us and I ask 

all my colleagues to please welcome all these very special 

people to the Assembly here today to be with us. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Komis Gold Mine 

 

Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, as a northern MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) I have some exciting  

news that impacts the people of northern Saskatchewan. I’m 

referring to the Komis gold mine project located near Brabant 

Lake in my constituency. 

 

The project recently received approval to proceed with 

development. Golden Rule Resources and Waddy Lake 

Resources were granted the surface lease to begin mining 

operations after the environmental impact statement was 

reviewed and approved by Saskatchewan Environment and 

Resource Management. The mine and processing mill are 

expected to employ about 100 people, and many of them will be 

northern residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition, Northerners will have every 

possibility for employment in this project, including training. 

There is excellent growth potential of the Komis mine and these 

companies are encouraged about the future production potential 

of other gold deposits in the Waddy Lake area. 

 

This project, and the mining industry in general, are areas 

which have been identified under the province’s Partnership 

for Growth strategy, and as having a significant impact on our 

economy. 

 

I would like to congratulate Golden Rule and Waddy Lake 

Resources for their hard work in seeing this project become a 

reality. This is good economic news and a golden opportunity 

for the people of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Farm Women 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, because this week is designated as 

Agriculture Week, I would like to recognize some of the 

outstanding accomplishments made by farm women in 

Saskatchewan every day. 

 

Thousands of Saskatchewan women make their living farming. 

Many are landowners, crop producers, livestock producers, 

researchers, and marketing agents. This is particularly 

admirable because many of them accomplish all of this while 

raising their families and working at part-time or full-time 

off-farm jobs. 

 

It is estimated that by the year 2010 well over half the 

agriculture land in the world will be owned by women. A great 

number of Saskatchewan’s women in agriculture are right in 

step with the global information systems, ensuring that this 

province is ahead of the game in research opportunities in 

identifying markets. 

 

Saskatchewan women have played a vital role in the agriculture 

industry for the past 100 years. Their contributions are valued 

and need to be recognized. Today I would like to pay tribute to 

all women in Saskatchewan contributing to the health of the 

agriculture sector in our province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

Saskatoon YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, last night in the city of 

Saskatoon a group of seven outstanding Saskatoon women 

received awards at the 15th annual YWCA women of 

distinction awards banquet. 

 

I would like to congratulate these women, and all the others 

who were nominated for awards. All of these women have 

made tremendous contributions to the life of the city of 

Saskatoon and to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to mention each of the seven, though time will not 

permit me to list their achievements. 

 

The business and professions award, to Shan Landry for her 

outstanding leadership in health care. 

 

Loreen Wilsdon received the community enhancement award 

for her work with the Save the Children Canada, the 

Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation and other 

organizations. 

 

Margo Bedo, a third year engineering, physics and computer 

science student at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan), 

received the youth award. 

 

And track and field athlete Judy Warick was named woman of 

distinction in the fitness and lifestyles category. 

 

The arts and culture award went to two nominees: painter and 

writer Elyse St. George, and Ann Stewart, who has been active 

in theatre and several social and cultural organizations. 

 

Irma Grandon, executive director of Maggie’s Day Care Centre 

for teen moms, received the leadership in the workplace award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government of Saskatchewan, I 

would like to commend these women and thank them for their 

contributions to the life of the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Computerized Axial Tomography Rebuttal 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today, not happily, to take 

umbrage with comments that were made in this Chamber 

yesterday. Yesterday the member from Humboldt asked the 

Minister of Health a couple of straightforward questions 

regarding health care in our province, namely the availability of 

CAT (computerized axial tomography) scans in Regina. These 

questions deserved honest, straightforward answers. However, 

the minister, letting his role as a political animal get the best of 

him, decided instead to cross the line of honest debate in this 

House and suggest the member, and I quote: “get her head 

examined,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

We on this side of the House can take our lumps with the best 

of them, but it is my personal belief that the minister crossed 

the line with his insulting and unwarranted remark. He not only 

should publicly apologize to the member from Humboldt; more  

importantly, he should apologize to all those in our province 

who, through no fault of their own, have a real need for CAT 

scans. Head injuries or other ailments involving the brain are no 

laughing matter and the Minister of Health should show a little 

more class and a little more sensitivity to the people of this 

province when he’s dealing with such an important . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I understand that there is a fair 

degree of latitude that is permitted for members’ statements; 

and there are avenues that the members can bring when they 

feel that debate has not exercised the respect that is becoming 

of the Chamber. I would caution all members, when making 

members’ statements, to use the appropriate course of remedy 

when doing that. 

 

Kelran Microbiologicals 

 

Mr. Kowalsky:  Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a new business 

venture in Prince Albert that’s setting an excellent example of 

creating new jobs and expanding into new markets. This family 

business is called Kelran Microbiologicals. It is a supplier of 

microbiological growth and identification products to labs in 

Saskatchewan hospitals. 

 

Kelran currently has five employees and is looking to increase 

that number. As of this week, Kelran is expanding into Alberta 

and Manitoba and anticipates sales will triple as a result. This 

company states that the people of Saskatchewan have access to 

the highest level of health care available and believes in the 

integrity of our health care system. 

 

Kelran is the single largest Saskatchewan-based supplier of 

microbiology, Mr. Speaker, growth and identification products 

for western Canada and has some excellent ideas about how to 

reduce expenditures in this field. People who use their products 

could end up saving money as a result. 

 

I would like to congratulate Randell Toporowski and his family 

for believing in Saskatchewan and for demonstrating the 

entrepreneurial spirit that is so prominent across Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Tourism Attraction 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a relatively 

unknown attraction in the Thunder Creek constituency. It’s 

located on the eastern edge of the rural municipality of Coulee 

No. 136. 

 

It’s a most unusual anomaly of the landscape. I’ve taken the 

opportunity to have a firsthand look at this natural wonder and I 

would encourage the rest of you to do so as well. It’s a rather 

large hill which is sinking slowly but surely out of sight. Over 

the course of the past 50 years this hill has sunk back into its 

surroundings by over 60 feet. 

 

I bring this unheralded attraction to the attention of the 

Assembly at what should be considered a most opportune time. 

Recently a new economic development strategy was announced 

in this province. A rejuvenated effort to attract tourism to the  



568  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

province should be everyone’s goal. I believe that it is these 

relatively unknown and unpromoted attractions which could be 

crafted into a tourism strategy to generate increasing revenues 

to our province’s economy — revenues generated by ourselves 

on our own two feet. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would emphasize not only the 

importance of tourism in this province from now into the 21st 

century, but also just how important it is to be careful what hills 

we choose to invest in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Written in Stone 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For most people in 

Saskatchewan, stones are things to be removed by back-

breaking work from a farmer’s field. We all know that one 

spring crop that never fails is the new pile of stones thrown up 

by the thaw, and the whole process begins anew, part of the 

cycle of life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, however, in the town of Lang just down the highway 

from my home, a remarkable entrepreneurial couple has started 

a business which will take Saskatchewan’s most reliable crop 

and turn it into a new building product, and most importantly, 

35-50 new jobs in the next three years. 

 

Dean Smith and his wife, Kimberly Besler, have chosen Lang 

for their two businesses: Written In Stone and Geo-Ark 

Petrographic. Written in Stone takes blocks of stone from 

Saskatchewan, from Brazil, from France, from wherever, and 

processes them into stone veneer panels called stonelite panels 

that are 80 per cent lighter than traditional stone slabs and 

therefore easier to work with and less expensive to install. As 

well, they have durability and great variety of stone. 

 

Even though the product is just now commercially available, 

the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce has recognized 

Written In Stone with an Abex nomination in the new 

Saskatchewan product category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Dean Smith said, small Saskatchewan centres 

are viable. This exciting new business  only the second of its 

kind in North America  proves just that, and I am excited to 

live just a stone’s throw away. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

BDM Information Systems 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the University 

of Saskatchewan and Innovation Place in my constituency, 

today I want to mention one of the many companies that is 

making Innovation Place the hub of Saskatchewan’s high-tech 

industry and one of the keystones of our provincial economy. 

 

BDM Information Systems is experiencing record sales because 

of strong Canadian and US (United States) interest in their 

health care software. With rapid changes taking place in health 

care across the world, health care professionals are seeking new  

ways of delivering services. BDM’s new “Pharmacy for the 

21st Century” is an industry-leading software that is proving to 

be an invaluable tool in the hands of health professionals. This 

software product, along with others, was designed and 

developed in BDM’s North American support centre located at 

Innovation Place. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, as we listen to a budget that prepares 

us for the 21st century, it’s good to know that businesses in our 

province are working toward the same goal of making 

Saskatchewan a place where common sense and innovation 

provide security and prosperity. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Reception Costs 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, the 

Minister of Finance will be bringing down her budget in a very 

short period of time. For the last few months, we’ve been told 

of the dire straits our province has been put in. Understandably, 

stakeholders throughout Saskatchewan are watching this budget 

nervously, since they simply cannot bear any more cuts to 

essential services from this government which has downloaded 

hundreds of millions onto municipalities, schools, and 

taxpayers. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, my mind has been set at ease because I 

find out that tonight the Minister of Finance is hosting a party 

for a couple of hundred of her closest friends, celebrating the 

budget at the Regina Rugby Club. So it must be filled with 

good news. Or is it? 

 

Will the minister not agree that such a shindig would be totally 

inappropriate if Saskatchewan residents are made to suffer 

through her actions today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I think the Liberal leader 

is just angry that he hasn’t been invited to the so-called shindig. 

It is . . . after all the government does have some standards, and 

he’ll understand if he doesn’t get an invitation as a 

consequence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to be serious about this, this has been a very, very 

long-standing tradition of all governments, Liberal and 

Conservative, that on budget day when there are people from all 

over the . . . well if not the world, certainly North America, 

present with us today to listen to the budget of Saskatchewan, 

to host a small reception for them. 

 

The categorization of a shindig indicates how the trivialization 

of an important issue like a budget ought not to take place in 

this Legislative Chamber. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a government 

which certainly likes to spend taxpayers’ dollars on its little 

celebrations. 

 

Through a request through the freedom of information Act filed 

a couple of months ago, we’ve discovered the opening night 

party for Casino Regina held January 25 cost the taxpayers of 

this province over $55,000. That’s about the same  the 

Minister of Finance  at about the same time the Minister of 

Finance was on her $100,000 PR (public relations) campaign 

and just before the Premier’s $30,000 infomercial. 

 

Will the Minister of Finance not agree that spending $55,000 of 

taxpayer money for her friends to get a preview of the $37 

million casino was inappropriate, given the whining and 

snivelling she’s been doing about the state of Saskatchewan’s 

finances? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  I want to caution members to bring to the 

debate in the House, language in reference to one another that’s 

appropriate of the dignity of the House. And I’ll ask all 

members . . . I know all members respect that and I’ll ask them 

to cooperate. 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll thank the 

member opposite for his question. 

 

The opening night of the casino was organized in such a way 

that the revenues from the proceeds of that evening would cover 

the costs of the opening night. No taxpayers’ money has gone 

or will go towards this. It is a self-sustaining operation that pays 

for its costs through its own revenues. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One year ago this 

government balanced the books of this province on the backs of 

Saskatchewan farmers by taking $188 million from the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) surplus. 

 

Farmers are now calling on this government to live up to their 

promise to not collect the GRIP wind-up bills. It may interest 

this House to know that the total amount of these bills is less 

than the interest would be on the GRIP surplus funds this 

government took from farmers. 

 

To quote from a letter from one farmer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

You may deduct this amount from my share of the $188 

million you stole from the GRIP fund to balance the 

budget. 

 

And yet another farmer writes, and I quote: 

 

The government said there would be no bills, plus they 

took back money belonging to the farmers in the first 

place, which should be called robbery. If we stole money  

belonging to someone else, we’d be put in jail. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you ensure that these bills will be reviewed 

on a case-by-case scenario and that the farmers will indeed be 

treated fairly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Member, 

we’ve been around this horn several times. I will repeat one 

more time. Mr. Speaker, the member knows the bills have to be 

paid; they know the process that has to be gone through. I think 

that, with all due respect, the fact that this member is carrying 

on this issue shows a bit of a lack of respect for a process and 

the intelligence of farmers who  all that I know  want to 

pay their bills and do pay their bills. 

 

I’ll just tell the hon. member one more thing. He knows a 

case-by-case would take probably a century to go through on a 

case-by-case basis. It’s unreasonable, almost as unreasonable as 

some of the questions that he’s been asking about this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister should 

remember it’ll take a century for the farmers to crawl out of the 

debt that you’ve put them in. Mr. Speaker, this government 

made a clear commitment to farmers that GRIP wind-up bills 

would not be sent out but bills were. Farmers cannot make 

sense of this government’s policies, the bills, or the ministers of 

Agriculture’s policies. The bills are ridiculous. 

 

To quote from another letter, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to 

quote: 

 

Mr. Romanow and his colleagues destroyed the initial 

GRIP program with the stroke of a pen. Our contract meant 

exactly nothing to them. Now we’re expected to abide by 

the terms of this agreement even though it is not the same 

contract we originally signed. 

 

And yet another farmer writes, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

Here is the so-called GRIP wind-up statement. It should be 

called NDP’s broken promise report. I hope this will help 

nail these crooks to the wall. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order, order. I want to remind 

members that the rules of the House do not permit members to 

do indirectly what they’re not permitted to do directly. And I 

will ask the member to simply withdraw that final . . . that 

unparliamentary comment and proceed directly to his question 

or I’ll go to another question. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I would withdraw the comment 

from the quote from the distressed farmer. 

 

All Saskatchewan farmers want is to be treated fairly. Mr. 

Minister, will you ensure that these bills are reviewed and  



570  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

cancelled as you have done previous with a number of farmers? 

And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to send over a number of 

bills to the Minister, if I might. And I will ask the minister if he 

will ensure us that all these bills will be treated in the same, fair 

way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

too have letters from farmers that I could read out, too. And the 

theme of those is  stick to your guns; the process you’re 

going through is the right one. 

 

Had we not gone through the process of collecting the 

overpayments, you would be in a situation where one farmer 

who had a large overpayment would be subsidizing another 

farmer who had a smaller overpayment. How would the 

government justify that? It’s the same way. 

 

Now I ask the member to clarify his position, to clarify his 

government’s position along with the federal government, who 

have asked for the overpayment from the WGSA (Western 

Grain Stabilization Account) from as far back as 1987, to now 

be paid. The federal Liberal government is billing farmers for 

that overpayment. I ask the member if he’d clarify his position 

on this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would remind the 

minister again, Mr. Speaker, that there was more than enough 

money in the program to pay off those debts from those 

farmers, as well, put more money in the other farmers that were 

entitled to a pay-out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers are moving into seeding this spring and 

many, many bills are coming upon them. I’d like to quote from 

another farmer: 

 

After 10 years of hard times, one year of a price turnaround 

has not created a well-to-do agriculture industry in this 

province. 

 

And to quote from a letter from another farmer who received 

the GRIP wind-up bill, and I quote: 

 

We left good jobs in Manitoba to farm here  big mistake. 

 

Yet another farmer quotes, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I don’t know who else to turn to for to help as my resident 

MLA, the present Minister of Agriculture, is part of the 

reason I’m in this mess in the first place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been sending GRIP wind-up bills over to 

the minister since this session began, calling on him to treat the 

farmers in Saskatchewan fairly. I will now send over the 

remainder of the GRIP bills, Mr. Speaker, and ask that he 

handle those in a fair and equitable way too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I’m not sure what the question was, Mr. 

Speaker. But the fact of the matter is this member is 

encouraging civil disobedience. I don’t think that’s a proper 

manner for an elected member of this Assembly to act. We 

know the process is paid . . . Does he want taxpayers to not 

collect overpayments for unemployment insurance, or the 

federal government not to collect overpayments of UI 

(unemployment insurance)? Should the federal government 

change its position now, is that what he’s saying, on the 

overpayment bills that they’ve sent out for the WGSA 

overpayments? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government and the provincial Liberal 

Party should get together on their policy. But I’ll say one more 

time, this position I’m taking is not changing. Farmers, well 

over half, have paid their bills. Other bills are coming in on a 

daily basis. They understand the process; we understand the 

process. I ask the member to try to raise his credibility a bit and 

get off this business of asking farmers to disobey the laws. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sales Tax Harmonization 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this afternoon are for the Premier. Mr. Premier, a 

report in today’s Globe and Mail says that a number of 

premiers, including yourself, have already recently held private 

meetings with the Prime Minister to discuss harmonization of 

the GST (goods and services tax). Your office obviously didn’t 

let anyone know about this meeting so it really makes a person 

wonder what you’re trying to hide. 

 

Mr. Premier, were you in fact discussing tax harmonization 

with the Prime Minister, or were you simply giving him tips on 

how to break his promise to eliminate the GST, just like you 

broke your promise to eliminate the PST (provincial sales tax)? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 

answer the question. Yes, it was a pleasure of mine to meet 

with the Prime Minister of Canada a couple of weeks ago. The 

topic under discussion was not the GST or harmonization of the 

PST. 

 

The topic involved a number of matters related to national 

unity. We also discussed the question with respect to the 

Saskatchewan fiscal position generally, which since we’re in 

the business of quoting The Globe and Mail, I note in today’s 

Globe and Mail the headline in the lead editorial says: “Again, 

common sense in Saskatchewan”. 

 

And if I had to capsulize my message to the Prime Minister, it 

would be as the Globe and Mail said today: 

 

The New Democrats have governed imaginatively since 

they took office in 1991. Facing a deficit of $845 million, 

the worst per capita in Canada, they feared the collapse of 

the social system they had built. They didn’t create the 

mess  the NDP had left the Conservatives a balanced 

budget when they were defeated in 1982  but they knew  



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

it would (have to) take drastic measures to clean it up. To 

save social programs, they would have to recast them. 

 

And so they did . . . 

 

And in conclusion, the editorial says: 

 

As Mr. Romanow enters his second term . . . he is showing 

anew that public confidence in his administration has not 

been misplaced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

McDowell Report 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Premier, 

since we’re into quoting from the newspapers I’d like to supply 

you with a quote. The other day the Finance minister answered 

one of my questions by quoting from the Star-Phoenix editorial. 

 

The NDP (New Democratic Party) obviously puts a lot of stock, 

as the Premier does, in editorials, just as The Globe and Mail or 

the Star-Phoenix in this case. And I’d like to quote from a 

recent Star-Phoenix editorial. It’s called: “Quit stalling”. 

 

The posturing of (the) Premier . . . and his fellow NDP 

MLAs on the issue of taking a pay hike for this year is an 

insult to the intelligence of (Saskatchewan) taxpayers. 

 

Not only does the Premier refuse to acknowledge that there 

is some $4,000 in after-tax income at stake here for each 

MLA . . . but he belittles the integrity of opposition 

politicians who . . . (cannot accept the money or) will not 

accept the . . . money. 

 

My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, will you follow the 

advice of the Star-Phoenix editors, will you be rolling back the 

pay increase for you and your MLAs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the 

Leader of the Conservative Party that I’m into the business of 

quoting from The Globe and Mail. I’m not into the business 

from quoting of the Black newspapers which control the 

province of Saskatchewan, mainly because I believe that they 

are mainly erroneous and are so extremely biased as to have lost 

all proper perspective of how reporting should take place in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But none the less, having heard your quotation from the 

Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post, the Black newspapers, and 

the issue of stalling  and the member asked me about whether 

we’re stalling  I ask him the reverse question. Are you 

stalling, and have you made the payment of the cheque of 4,400 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no, the member says he’s made 

the commitment. Tories make commitments and they never 

fulfil them. Have you written the cheque, yes or no? That’s 

what we want to know. 

 

And I want to say to you, Mr. Conservative Leader, if you write  

that cheque of $4,400 it would be a very small fraction of what 

you and the Conservatives owe the people of Saskatchewan as a 

result of nine years in government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

editorial comment also goes on to point out the Gaming 

minister’s feeble argument that the poor NDP MLAs would be 

left in the lurch if they had to give up their pay hike. 

 

What about the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Premier, who are going to be left in the lurch as the result of 

today’s budget? Workers are going to be left in the lurch by 

losing their jobs. Communities are going to be left in the lurch 

by seeing their highway depots close. 

 

Mr. Premier, how can you possibly accept a pay increase, a pay 

hike, under these conditions? Or do you think that you and your 

MLAs are exempt from the same kind of sacrifices that you’re 

asking everyone else in this province to make. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again I find it somewhat 

amusing that the leader of all parties, the Conservative Party in 

the province of Saskatchewan, after their scandalous nine years 

of bringing the province to the verge of bankruptcy, has the 

audacity to say in the legislature about this particular question 

 and this, I might add, Mr. Speaker, from the same 

Conservative leader who has introduced several Bills in this 

legislature, all of which say that the civil service, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, should not only be downsized, 

should virtually be decimated; that Saskatchewan should be 

some sort of an Alabama of the North  and he has the 

audacity to say that we’re leaving people in the lurch. 

 

No, we don’t leave people in the lurch in Saskatchewan. We 

deal with people in Saskatchewan with compassion. And if you 

doubt my words, then just consider what happens after the 

budget today. And I ask you to remember what your 

Conservative friends are doing in Ontario and the lack of 

compassion that Conservatives demonstrate in Canada, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Well, Mr. Premier, regardless of what the editors 

of any newspaper say, the people of this province, the taxpayers 

of this province, know full well that it is unacceptable for you 

and your MLAs to take a pay increase. That’s the bottom line. 

Every taxpayer in this province knows that. 

 

Mr. Premier, the PC (Progressive Conservative) caucus 

recognizes that cuts have to be made in today’s budget because 

of federal offloading. We wish, Mr. Premier, that you had the 

courage to tell the voters of this province the truth about the 

cuts during the last election. 

 

Mr. Premier, why didn’t you tell the voters the real story during 

the election campaign? Why did you promise a 2 per cent 

increase in health and education? Why did you promise $10  



572  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

million in VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues to 

communities? Why did you promise no job losses in this 

province? Why did you make all of those promises during the 

election campaign when you knew full well you couldn’t keep 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative 

leader has the unfortunate habit of trying to re-fight the 

provincial election campaigns that he loses so gloriously. 

 

These were all the issues which he raised during the June 1995 

campaign. And with the greatest of respect to the Conservative 

Party, you are reduced to third-party rump — five. The people 

of Saskatchewan spoke, and they spoke in favour of the 

promises which we made, which were not your promises. 

 

Now the issue of a pay hike is of course absolutely and 

completely, totally false. The member knows that there is no 

pay hike. The member knows that the Legislative Assembly 

Office has tabled to you, in writing, documentation which 

indicates that it’s a minus 2 per cent reduction coupled with a 

minus 5 per cent reduction for cabinet ministers prior to this 

time. And you know that. 

 

You say that that is not the case. Then I say, you tell the people 

today. Show me the cancelled blank cheque of the $4,300 that 

you have written to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. Because 

you have not written it and you won’t write it, because you will 

not keep your commitment because you know what you say is 

inaccurate. I say to you that the proof of the pudding will be 

when you write that cheque, and you won’t do it. 

 

And I repeat again, it’s a small fraction of what you owe the 

taxpayers of . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I’ll ask all hon. members 

to come to order and abide by the rules of the House. There is 

opportunity for debate and it’s laid out in the rules, and I’ll ask 

that we do it. Order. Next question. 

 

Post-secondary Education 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Post-Secondary Education announced that he has 

hired a Regina lawyer to conduct a review of Saskatchewan’s 

two universities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Justice department came under some criticism 

when this . . . when the tenure of the now Minister of 

Post-Secondary Education. This has resulted in two Calgary 

lawyers being hired at a cost of $100,000 to review what went 

wrong. Now because the Premier has so little faith in his 

minister, a friend has been hired to help the minister do his job 

at a cost of $11,000 a month. 

 

Will the Premier explain why he created the new department 

responsible for post-secondary education when he obviously 

has no faith that the minister can carry out his duties? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, where in the world do 

these provincial Liberals live? From what planet do they come? 

The hon. Liberal member says, why is it that the Premier has 

created a new Department of Post-Secondary Education and 

Skills Training and the like? He asks, why? 

 

Has he not paid attention to Paul Martin, the federal Liberal 

minister’s budget? Has he not paid attention to Jean Chrétien, 

the federal Liberal Prime Minister’s statements? 

 

Because the federal government has offloaded, constitutionally 

and financially, skills training and manpower training to the 

provinces of Canada. Because your Liberal Party has offloaded 

on post-secondary education to the extent of $80 million. 

Because your Liberal Party has cut back on the SIASTs 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

and have left the provinces of Canada  all of them, by the 

way, unanimously, of this position  have left the provinces in 

the lurch because of a failed manpower program and a failed 

post-secondary education program and reduced funds. 

 

And the member gets up and he asks why in the world we set 

up a department. We set up a department because we’ve got to 

grab a hold of this Liberal mess and get Saskatchewan leading 

again in the 21st century, as we have in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

obvious that the Premier created a department for a friend who 

in turn created a job for a friend. How long does the Premier 

intend to pay others to do the job that taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan are paying the Minister of Post-Secondary 

Education to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, again I don’t mean to 

demean the member but I am absolutely befuddled by where he 

is and how long he’s been a member of the Liberal Party. He 

says Harold MacKay is a friend. Harold MacKay has been  

and I think Harold would not object to me saying this or 

otherwise  he’s been a card-carrying member of the Liberal 

Party for ever. He’s never been a member of the New 

Democratic Party  for ever. 

 

Now if the member says that he’s a friend of mine, the answer 

is yes, he’s a friend of mine. Believe it or not, I’ve even got 

some other intelligent Liberal friends around. Unfortunately, 

none of them exist in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  And I’m even looking for a Tory 

friend, if I can find one anywhere in Canada. And I still haven’t 

been able to find one. 

 

Mr. MacKay is a citizen of Saskatchewan and Canada with 

impeccable credentials, academic ability that has the confidence  



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

of the universities and the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan; and shame on that member for attacking a 

person who has committed his life to public service and who 

believes in the very cause that he ostensibly believes. You 

shouldn’t be following that kind of political activity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Highways Funding 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the Minister of Highways. Poor highways are affecting 

everyone. In fact I recently received a letter from one of my 

very young constituents. I’d like to read this letter to the House: 

 

Dear MLA: I am writing this letter because my community 

road is rough. I had tipped over before I was 10 years old. I 

tipped and I hurt my leg, and I went to Ile-a-la-Crosse and I 

wished the road was paved. 

 

Yours sincerely, Erica Billette from Dillon 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Highways tell this little 

girl and the other people in the communities of Dillon, La 

Loche, Turnor, Garson Lake, Patuanak, why he will not provide 

funding for the paving of this road, especially knowing that this 

government makes great profits from forestry and mining in the 

North? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I want to thank the hon. member for his 

question. I want to tell the hon. member that this government 

has a commitment to northern Saskatchewan. Most recently of 

course, you will know that we have announced and have begun 

and will complete the Cumberland bridge. Highway 965, Mr. 

Speaker, to Canoe Lake will be done this year. 

 

We’ve worked very hard with northern Saskatchewan, the 

federal government, on the Athabasca Road which will be from 

Points North to Black Lake — access to those people, Mr. 

Speaker, to the rest of Saskatchewan and the rest of 

Saskatchewan access to Lake Athabasca. Grandmother’s Bay, 

Mr. Speaker, has never had access before by road  now they 

will enjoy that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Highways 102, 905 from La Ronge to Wollaston, 

we have a partnership with the mining industry to in fact 

improve that road. So yes, we have a commitment to the North. 

We will continue to work on those roads as money is available. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Minister, for the past 15 years people 

from my constituency have been asking to have an important 30 

kilometre stretch of highway built to an isolated community of 

Garson Lake. Yesterday officials in the North travelled eleven 

and a half hours to ask him to commit $250,000 per year for 

three years. This money would not only go to construction of a 

road, but to training construction workers as well and creating 

jobs. As well, these monies are being matched by training  

institutions and programs. 

 

Mr. Minister, I applaud your efforts in building a $2 million 

bridge for Cumberland House. We’re not complaining that the 

bridge was built, but we’d like the minister to explain why do 

problems in the Athabasca constituency not warrant the same 

attention and money as those next door? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for his 

question, and again I say to the member that we do have a 

commitment in northern Saskatchewan and will continue to do 

that. But their unconditional support, Mr. Speaker, has blinded 

the members opposite. They’re more interested in supporting 

the federal government than the Saskatchewan people. 

 

Where were they when the federal government cut $106 million 

from health care and education to this province? Where were 

they, Mr. Speaker, when they pulled $320 million out of 

farmers’ pockets with the change to the Crow? Where are they 

now, Mr. Speaker, with rail line abandonment going to cost the 

province and municipalities 30 to $50 million a year on added 

road costs? Where are they? Not a word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yes, we have a commitment to northern Saskatchewan, but we 

would like them to join with us and support us and not keep 

their heads in the sand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Table a response to question no. 25. 

 

The Speaker:  Question 26 is converted to motions for 

return (debatable). 

 

Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McPherson:  I rise on a point of order pursuant to rule 

32 of the Rules and Procedures, in sections 485, 486 of 

Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, regarding the use of 

unparliamentary language in the House yesterday. 

 

The Speaker:  I’ll ask the member to proceed and make his 

case. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Health used unparliamentary language in answering 

a question to the member from Humboldt in the reference to the 

word, cat. He knows full well that the member is a female 

member of this House and we would ask that he immediately 

apologize to the member today in this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I’d just like to make a very brief 

comment in view of the proceedings that are to follow which, I  



574  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

think, transcend in importance this matter. Let me just say with 

respect to this matter, if any apology is to be forthcoming, 

surely there ought to be some consideration given to the 

statements made by members, such as the member from Arm 

River yesterday. 

 

The Speaker:  I have listened to . . . Order, order. Order. I’ve 

listened to the point of order put by the Opposition House 

Leader and comments by the Government House Leader. I treat 

them seriously and I thank the hon. member for raising them. 

 

I will want to consider his points, the points made here, and 

also to review the record and I will bring a ruling back to the 

House at the earliest possible convenience. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 

ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I have a message from 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker:  I ask all members to rise. 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 

sums required for the service of the province for the 12 

months ending March 31, 1997, and supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for 12 months ending March 31, 1996, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The members may be seated. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 

seconded by the Premier: 

 

That His Honour’s message, the estimates, and 

supplementary estimates be referred to the Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, there are many special guests here today and I 

would like to welcome them all. But I want to especially 

welcome five special guests. First and foremost, my husband, 

Peter. Would you stand please. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  My son Alan and his friend, Tricia 

Mutlow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  My son William. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  And my very good friend and 

veteran of the Second World War, Mr. Bill Kinloch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, this budget is about 

preparing Saskatchewan for the 21st century, about planning 

today for prosperity and security tomorrow. With this 1996-97 

budget, we step boldly toward the new century. The winds of 

change are sweeping around us  globalization, new 

technologies, the new fiscal reality. But we are confident of 

success because Saskatchewan people do not fear change. They 

welcome it. 

 

Throughout our history we have met change head on and 

shaped it to meet our values and beliefs. Such is our tradition. 

Such will be our future. 

 

Saskatchewan takes on the future from a position of strength. 

We are blessed to live in the best province in the best country in 

the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Our quality of life is second to 

none. Our economy is strong and getting stronger. 

 

Last year our farmers harvested one of the best crops on record. 

Our mining, forestry, and manufacturing receipts are all up. 

People are shopping at home and buying locally, pushing up 

retail sales nearly 5 per cent last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That increase is higher than the 

national average, and even higher than Alberta which has no 

sales tax. Most important, last year 10,000 more Saskatchewan 

people were working than in 1992. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  There were more full-time jobs, 

more jobs for women, more jobs for youth. Personal incomes 

are rising and so is our population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 1980s, we lost a generation of young people 

who had to seek opportunity and hope elsewhere. Today we are 

keeping our young people here at home where they can live and 

raise their families with a renewed sense of hope and optimism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget we were the first Canadian 

province in the 1990s to balance its budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s a source of strength. 

However, those accomplishments are only part of the story why  



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

we approach the new century with confidence and 

determination. 

 

We can also rely on the guidance of our enduring values: 

cooperation  working together to build a better future; 

compassion  making sure that everyone, rich or poor, has 

access to essential services; community  seeing beyond 

ourselves to embrace the greater good. That spirit of community 

remains strong. 

 

Our government reached out to Saskatchewan people and 

sought their input for this budget, and they responded  in 

town hall meetings, on phone lines, by the Internet, and in 

letters. The people of Saskatchewan told us what they expect 

from their government and what they hope for their 

communities. People told us they want jobs and opportunities, 

more jobs in a global economy. And that’s what this budget 

delivers  more jobs for more people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We start by building on our 

strengths. Our businesses have already proven that they can 

compete with the best in the world. More than half of what we 

produce is sold beyond our borders; a third of our jobs are tied 

to exports. 

 

Our new economic development strategy, Partnership For 

Growth, builds on this strength. This budget provides funding 

for STEP, the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, 

industry and government working together with one objective: 

to find and develop new trade and export opportunities for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Similarly, our farmers have shown they can develop new 

agricultural products for the world market. That’s another 

strength, Mr. Speaker, and our goal is to expand value added 

processing. Therefore I am pleased to announce that we will 

invest up to $238 million over the next four years to diversify 

and further strengthen agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  But farmers have to get their 

products to market. With the Crow benefit gone, they have to 

know that there is a reliable, sustainable transportation system 

for future crops and farm products. 

 

This budget prepares us for that future. It provides $125 million 

to upgrade and maintain our highways in 1996-97. This 

represents an investment of more than half a billion dollars in 

Saskatchewan’s highway system over the next four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Minister, farming is an 

occupation with many risks. We will work with farmers to 

redesign our crop insurance program so that it provides the 

security farm families want and need  today, and into the 

century. 

Mr. Minister, a related field, agricultural biotechnology, offers 

tremendous potential. Saskatoon is rapidly emerging as one of 

the world’s foremost agricultural research centres. By the turn 

of the century, agricultural biotechnology is expected to 

generate $200 million a year in sales and create hundreds of 

new, highly skilled jobs. 

 

This budget supports this new high-growth sector with $7 

million, to expand research facilities at Innovation Place at the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  It also helps create 125 high-tech 

jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, small businesses create the vast majority of new 

jobs in our province. We want to support them, but we want to 

do it right. 

 

Saskatchewan people told us that outright grants to business are 

not the way to promote growth. We agree. Rather than direct 

grants, we are using targeted tax incentives, proven to stimulate 

new investment and create jobs. But we must use our scarce 

resources wisely. We have to identify the most effective tax 

incentives to stimulate investment and growth and create jobs. 

That’s why we reduced taxes on manufacturing and processing, 

resulting in more than 3,000 new jobs in this area in 1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  And that’s why I’m pleased to 

announce that this reduction will be continued indefinitely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Last year we reduced the aviation 

fuel tax on a trial basis. The result was more jobs for 

Saskatchewan people and improved air service in the province. 

Those are the results we were looking for, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s why I’m pleased to announce that this tax reduction will 

also be continued indefinitely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Today, I’m pleased to announce 

another targeted tax measure. Effective January 1, 1997, we will 

change the tax rules to level the playing-field for truckers 

working out of Saskatchewan and to stimulate more repairs and 

equipment sales within the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, these are the kind of 

responsible, targeted tax cuts that create jobs. 

 

We’re also creating jobs by investing in Saskatchewan’s 

infrastructure. Government departments and Crown 

corporations will invest over $630 million this year to build  



576  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

better educational facilities for students; to upgrade health 

facilities; to improve our world-class telecommunications 

network. 

 

Investments, Mr. Speaker. Investments creating jobs today and 

building for tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We are keeping our promise to 

reforest land depleted by poor forest management practices of 

the past. This investment will create more jobs for students. In 

total, we will provide funding for 2,500 summer jobs to help 

young people in furthering their education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  At the grass roots level, we’ll 

provide funding for new and existing regional economic 

development authorities. This highly successful approach  

communities coming together to identify their strengths and 

coordinate their efforts  will be expanded to the North. 

 

And we will carry through on the message to cut red tape for 

business and create one-stop centres for people who want to 

start a new business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, the private sector is 

showing its confidence in Saskatchewan’s future. Statistics 

Canada recently released a report that Saskatchewan is one of 

only three provinces where business intends to significantly 

increase its investment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Both business and consumer 

confidence can be enhanced by easing the tax burden. 

Saskatchewan people told us loud and clear to hold the line on 

taxes. We listened; we are responding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that this budget contains 

no tax increases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s a promise made and a 

promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This government is also keeping its 

commitment to cut taxes as times improve. Last year we began 

to reduce the debt-reduction surtax. The second phase of this 

reduction will be implemented in 1996. This income tax cut 

enhances the fairness of the Saskatchewan tax system. 

 

The greatest benefits go to middle and low income taxpayers  

over 6,000 low income earners will no longer pay income tax. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  As well as lowering taxes for 

individuals and families, the tax cut will inject $55 million a 

year into the Saskatchewan economy to strengthen local 

business and create jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, we are working on 

every front to implement our plans for jobs and prosperity  

building on our strength in key growth areas like 

manufacturing, processing, and small business; investing 

millions in our infrastructure; targeting tax incentives and 

cutting red tape for business, and reducing taxes for families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a plan for jobs. That’s a plan for today and 

for a better tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Preparing our province for 

tomorrow also means preserving and enhancing the quality of 

life that makes Saskatchewan the best place in the country in 

which to live. 

 

Saskatchewan people told us they want the security of knowing 

that essential public services will be there for them. They want 

to know that if they are sick they can receive medical services 

without needing a credit card. They want to know that their 

children can have access to advanced education, whether they 

come from a rich family or a poor one. They want to know that 

if they fall on troubled times a social safety net will be there to 

catch them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  But, Mr. Speaker, these vital 

cornerstones of our quality of life are being undermined by the 

federal government. We understand that the federal government 

has to reduce its deficit. But we do not, Mr. Speaker — we 

cannot — agree with the way they are going about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  In the 1996 federal budget, 

three-quarters of the total spending cuts were to the key areas of 

our quality of life here in Saskatchewan: health, post-secondary 

education, social programs — the very areas most important to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

This year we face a $114 million cut in federal funding for 

these essential services. Saskatchewan people warned the 

federal government what these cuts would mean. The Saskatoon 

District Health Board, for example, wrote to Ottawa and called 

the federal cuts potentially devastating. The North Valley 

Health District cautioned the federal government that further 

cuts to health care would have a detrimental effect on services, 

people, and our medicare system as we know it. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan asked us to do our very best to  



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

shield them from the impact of these federal cuts on our core 

social programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have listened. We are responding. This budget 

provides $110 million of new provincial funding to replace the 

1996-97 federal cuts to our social programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  It back-fills 100 per cent of the 

federal cuts to social services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  It back-fills 100 per cent of the 

federal cuts to the operating funding of our universities and 

federated colleges. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  And it back-fills 100 per cent of the 

federal cuts to our health care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, these programs are the 

priorities of Saskatchewan people; and make no mistake about 

it, they are the priorities of this budget and of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  But, Mr. Speaker, that only takes 

care of 1996-97. Regrettably, the cuts in federal cash transfers 

increase each and every year for the next four years. By 

1999-2000 these federal cuts will be more than a quarter of a 

billion dollars a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province introduced medicare to North 

America. We will not stand by and allow Saskatchewan to enter 

the 21st century with its health, education, and social system 

undermined by these federal cuts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That is why I am pleased to present 

a four-year financial plan today that will provide $242 million 

of new provincial funding for our social programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  For every dollar that the federal 

government cuts from our vital social programs, this plan puts 

back 96 cents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  As I’ve said, there are risks; our 

economic circumstances may change, or the federal government 

may offload even more of its financial problems onto the 

provinces. If that happens we may have to adjust our long-term 

plan. But this government is absolutely committed to shielding  

our health and education partners from the full impact of these 

federal cuts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  But, Mr. Speaker, this does not 

mean shielding them from the need for change. While providing 

time for our partners to prepare for new fiscal realities, we must 

work with them to redesign our essential services for the 21st 

century. To change our health, education, and social services to 

meet the new demands of the new century. 

 

We’re already seeing the benefits of our work to renew 

Saskatchewan’s health system over the past four years. More 

illness-prevention and support services are available at home 

and in the community. In response to the appeal by health 

boards for stable funding, we will maintain total funding for 

district health boards at current levels for 1996-97 and 1997-98. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  And we will work with our health 

partners to find ways to maintain that funding level right 

through to the year 1999-2000. But, Mr. Speaker, we must 

continue finding new and better ways to deliver primary health 

services so that they can be sustained into the new century. We 

must continue to enhance home- and community-based services 

and build a client-centred health system to improve the health 

and well-being of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Health reform provides the vision. This budget provides the 

stability of funding to keep Saskatchewan a health care leader 

right into the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, compassion is a 

defining feature of this province. Working together, we can 

redesign our social safety nets to make them effective and 

sustainable. Working together, we can ensure that the most 

vulnerable members of our society are protected while we help 

able-bodied men and women seek the independence and the 

security that comes from a job. We want to help people move 

from welfare to work. We want to encourage young people to 

get the education and the training they need to prepare them for 

the future. 

 

This budget maintains funding for social assistance at current 

levels for 1996-97 and provides increased funding for children 

in need. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  It also provides $500,000, as 

promised, to help ensure that child-care workers are paid a fair 

and decent wage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  As long as we’re fashioning our  



578  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

social safety net, we are committed to changing our 

post-secondary education and training system. In the words of 

the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union: the path is 

clear. We must reinvent our universities. The time has come for 

real change. 

 

People want a flexible and accessible post-secondary system, 

one where there is more integration among programs or sharing 

of resources. They want duplication reduced, administration 

cut, and more resources directed to programs. 

 

While this government can maintain operating funding for 

universities and federated colleges this year, the increasing 

federal cuts will make it necessary to reduce funding by $5 

million in 1997-98, and a further $5 million in 1998-99. This 

still means that this government is providing $75 million of 

new provincial funding over the next four years. 

 

(1445) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, that’s a commitment to 

post-secondary education. 

 

The federal government is also withdrawing its support for 

skills training in Saskatchewan. This province cannot ignore the 

emerging 21st century demands for highly skilled workers. We 

will build a made-in-Saskatchewan skills training network to 

prepare people for the new technological workplace. The 

Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training will 

lead and coordinate the new training strategy. 

 

In total this budget provides $91 million to train Saskatchewan 

people for new and better jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This funding includes $5 million to 

continue upgrading and employment opportunities through the 

very successful JobStart program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the best foundation for higher education and skills 

training is a relevant, high quality education system from 

kindergarten to grade 12. Therefore I am pleased to announce 

that foundation operating grants for school divisions will 

increase by $2 million in 1996-97, and a further $900,000 in 

1997-98. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

told us to find administrative savings while ensuring that our 

children continue to receive quality education. We will work 

with our partners in education to achieve savings of $7 million 

annually in 1998-99. The Minister of Education will consult 

with school divisions, educators, and parents, on how best to 

achieve these savings. 

 

Once again we are giving our partners as much time as possible 

to plan and prepare for change. But we must continue to renew  

and revitalize each of these essential areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the provincial government has also started to 

restructure itself. To free up money to protect the cornerstones 

of our quality of life, we will continue to streamline our 

operations. 

 

Our ongoing strategy includes: cutting administrative costs; 

eliminating duplication and overlap; and delivering services 

better. We took a fine-tooth comb to the administrative 

structure of government. We knew we could reduce layers of 

management and consolidate operations while still maintaining 

important services. For example, we are streamlining operations 

in the Department of Highways and Transportation to save $6 

million a year. That’s 6 million more dollars to be used to build 

and preserve roads. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We found another $7 million in 

administrative savings in the Department of Health. That’s 7 

million more dollars to be used each and every year to help 

maintain funding for health districts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We also looked to reduce 

duplication of services. For example, while the government has 

to set the rules and guidelines for student loans, financial 

institutions can write and manage these loans. Therefore, a 

chartered bank will provide loans directly to students beginning 

August 1 to save taxpayers $6 million a year. That’s 6 million 

more dollars to replace federal funding cuts to post-secondary 

education. 

 

Farmers, like students, can also take advantage of other 

borrowing options. As one farmer from McLean asked: why 

duplicate the Farm Credit Corporation, a federal agency which 

lends money to farmers? Mr. Speaker, we agree and we are 

winding down the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan to save taxpayers more than $3 million a year. 

 

Ending duplication is one way to save money. Delivering 

services better is another. For example, consolidating all small 

vehicle safety and registration in SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance) will save $1.4 million a year. 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance is consolidating its delivery and 

marketing systems to save $5 million a year. These and other 

changes throughout government will result in savings of more 

than $50 million in 1996-97. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  And that’s not just for this year. 

That’s savings of $50 million every year thereafter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Overall, the largest single reduction 

in this budget is to government operations. And these savings 

will go to protecting our health, our post-secondary, and our  



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

social programs, from federal cut-backs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Restructuring and streamlining the 

provincial government will eliminate 582 positions, although 

the actual job loss will be significantly less. We will manage the 

associated job losses with sensitivity and compassion through 

the use of early retirement, job-sharing, and other measures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people told us to reduce the cost of government at 

all levels and we have responded. We have worked hard to cut 

administration, eliminate duplication and overlap, and find 

ways to deliver services better. We believe all levels of 

government have to consider these kinds of common-sense 

changes to make tax dollars go further. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is pleased that the federal 

government is responding to the request of western provinces to 

study the creation of a national tax collection agency to 

coordinate the collection of federal and provincial taxes. Such 

an agency would reduce the cost of collecting taxes and further 

cut red tape for business. 

 

As we prepare to enter the next century, municipal governments 

are also taking a good, hard look at their administrative 

structures. Saskatchewan’s municipal governments were 

established in the early 1900s as part of a new and developing 

province. Times have changed, and yet there has been no 

fundamental change to the structure and responsibilities of 

municipal government. 

 

In the meantime, taxpayers are demanding more relevant 

services, fairer taxation, and more efficient government. Mr. 

Speaker, we can maintain revenue-sharing grants at their 

1995-96 level for l996-97, as promised; however, because the 

province must pay a larger share of the costs for health, 

post-secondary education, and social services due to federal 

cuts, revenue-sharing grants will be reduced by $20 million for 

1997-98. 

 

Beyond this, the province and municipalities must deal with a 

number of fundamental issues. The Minister of Municipal 

Government is looking forward to working with municipalities 

on future fiscal arrangements, provincial levies, and funding for 

key roads and infrastructure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  While we realize our partners face 

some difficult choices, it is important to remember that sound 

fiscal management is a key to protecting core programs and 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sound financial management is already helping 

this province meet the fiscal realities of the 21st century. 

Through the cooperative efforts of Saskatchewan people this 

government balanced the budget in 1994-95. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That was the first balanced budget 

in more than a decade. 

 

Meanwhile, 1995-96 brought its own special challenges  

forest fires, floods, and dramatic reductions in federal 

equalization payments. Despite these financial difficulties, I’m 

pleased to announce that we will again balance the budget in 

1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  And our new four-year financial 

plan presents four more balanced budgets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Sustainable balanced budgets  

little more than a dream just a few years ago, once again the 

norm. 

 

It’s important to remind ourselves how we are going to balance 

our budgets in the future. It will not be through tax increases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  It will not be by slashing our key 

social programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  We will achieve our goal by 

restructuring and streamlining government to lower our 

operating costs. 

 

This year we will reduce government spending by $230 million 

compared to 1995-96. That means we will save more than 

$600,000 a day, each and every day of the year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Saskatchewan people also asked us 

to cut costs by paying down the provincial debt and reducing 

interest charges. In 1995-96, interest payments totalled $851 

million. Just imagine, if we didn’t have those interest costs we 

could eliminate the sales tax and still have money left over. So 

we have to get the interest costs down. 

 

That’s why the Government of Saskatchewan recently sold a 

significant portion of its ownership in Cameco Corporation. 

The net proceeds from selling Cameco shares will be used 

exclusively to pay down debt and reduce interest costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This and other measures will allow 

us to reduce the annual interest costs on government-purpose 

debt by $100 million by 1999-2000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, by the year 2000 the  



580  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

province’s debt will be $2.4 billion lower than it was in 1995. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  This reduction will bring the total 

debt load from 68 per cent of the province’s gross domestic 

product down to 44 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  No other provincial government has 

reduced its debt so far so fast. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, we are cutting 

government spending, we are balancing the budget, and we are 

paying down the debt while preserving the cornerstones of our 

quality of life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  That’s the Saskatchewan formula 

for security and prosperity now and into the new century. That’s 

the formula that gives Saskatchewan people the freedom to 

make choices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  You saw that freedom in action this 

year. Because we had already balanced the budget, 

Saskatchewan people could choose the best way to handle the 

federal funding cuts to our social programs. We had the 

freedom to choose to devote millions of dollars in new 

provincial funding to shield our vital services from federal cuts. 

 

As we look ahead, our new four-year financial plan gives 

Saskatchewan people continued freedom to control their future 

and to make choices. There are trade-offs and we must decide 

upon these together. We have to decide whether to reduce taxes 

by making further spending reductions, or by paying down the 

debt more slowly or perhaps by selling other industrial assets as 

we did with our Cameco shares. 

 

Just as the government consulted Saskatchewan people about 

ways to manage federal funding cuts, we will also ask them 

how best to achieve tax reductions. But whatever choice we 

make, sound financial management will give us the freedom to 

choose our own course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, this budget is about 

change and about the freedom to deal with change according to 

our Saskatchewan values. It prepares Saskatchewan for the new 

century by delivering on our promises. It builds prosperity and 

jobs for the future. It safeguards our health, post-secondary 

education, and social programs. It streamlines government to 

cut costs. And most importantly, it gives us and our children a 

unique privilege. It gives us all the financial freedom to decide 

and control our own future. That means Saskatchewan people  

can look forward to the 21st century with a sense of confidence 

and security. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Confidence because their future 

promises more jobs, balanced budgets, reduced taxes, and less 

public debt. Security because the cornerstones of our quality of 

life  our health, education, and social programs  will be 

there for them, their children, and their grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have built a society where 

people and government work together to maintain our shared 

values of community, cooperation, and compassion. Our 

challenges will not divide us; our dreams must unite us. 

 

Some governments believe that all they need to do to meet 

fiscal challenges is to get out of the way. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people believe the government can lead the way. 

 

The 1996-97 budget prepares us for the 21st century in which 

Saskatchewan will continue to be the best province in the best 

country in the whole world, in which to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the 

Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

in response to the address by the Minister of Finance. Mr. 

Speaker, the blaming budget is now tabled before us. While this 

budget represents the priorities of this government, it doesn’t 

represent the aims, hopes, needs, or the strong character of 

Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan residents made their mark 

on this world through their strength of conviction, their 

courage, and their compassion. 

 

The blaming budget before us today lacks conviction. It lacks 

courage. And it lacks compassion. Where Saskatchewan people 

seek to work hard and apply themselves to solving problems, 

this government chooses to blame. Where Saskatchewan people 

show concern for their neighbours, this government continues 

to ignore the plight of the jobless in this province. Where 

Saskatchewan people show pride in their rural roots, this 

government seeks to eliminate all that rural Saskatchewan 

values. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were promised a new 

day dawning  a new day with new promise and new hope. On 

the farmers’ fields that dot this province or on the fields of 

Rider green, we are a hopeful people in this Saskatchewan. We 

hold on tightly to this virtue. It sustains us just as it nurtured our 

ancestors before us. 

 

The hope offered by the members opposite is, however, an 

empty one. The new day promised by the members opposite 

was a lot like waking up on the first official day of spring this  



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

year  a whole new season according to the calendar, but more 

of the same icy, cold conditions that have given us the doldrums 

all winter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  With this promised new day were to come 

many things, Mr. Speaker. The government promised jobs 

would be a number one priority and a number one goal. They 

promised stable funding for everything under the sun. They told 

us the worst of the storm was over, and their sunny plan may 

need adjustments but it would not be undone. 

 

The jobless and the underemployed people of this province, 

however, wonder. Instead of waking up to brighter hopes for 

jobs, they wake up to hear that this government can’t help them 

and that it’s someone else’s fault. 

 

There’s no new day dawning  just more of the same icy cold, 

slippery rhetoric we’ve heard for months. People deeply 

concerned about our health system awake to the same declining 

services and strong-arm tactics of the provincial Health 

department. Rural people arise to find this government once 

again lurking around like coyotes for a chance to prey on yet 

something else that they value. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this government blames, nothing changes 

for the people who really need help. Saskatchewan needs jobs. 

This will continue to be our most pressing need. So long as this 

government blames, nothing will be accomplished. No real 

human suffering will be eased and no light will shine into the 

lives of people who really need hope. For months we’ve heard 

this government blame someone else for every problem. 

 

In fact, if we had a dollar for every time we heard the Finance 

minister say “federal cuts” this afternoon, I think we could have 

made quite a sizeable dent in our provincial debt. For months 

we’ve heard this government blame someone else for every 

problem. It’s always easy to find a scapegoat; if not the 

previous government, then it’s someone else. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you can’t believe them when they say a 

new day has dawned, well it’s just as difficult to believe them 

when they say someone else is to blame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  While the members opposite and the Finance 

minister put in yet another Oscar-winning performance in the 

best role and supporting roles for blaming, they should 

remember what this place is supposed to be all about. 

 

The Minister of Finance and her colleagues were given a 

renewed mandate to govern this past spring. They’ve been 

given a chance to do what few, if any, get to do. The voters of 

this province entrusted them with the powers needed to govern 

this province. 

 

They entrusted them to keep their word and uphold the honour 

and fight to restore hope to a great province. Do the job you’ve 

been given, I say to the members opposite; help the people who  

trusted you with the job of making their lives brighter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  This is your chance. Don’t live to regret that 

you wasted time blaming when you could have been helping to 

ease the trials of those in need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each and every day across this province, 

volunteers, neighbours and friends rise to meet these 

challenges. When things get difficult, the strength and character 

of Saskatchewan people shows itself in the way we help each 

other. I urge this government to follow the example set daily by 

thousands of Saskatchewan people and just get down to the job 

of dealing with this province’s problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Don’t miss your chance to make all of our 

lives a little brighter. While this government blames the 

problems faced by Saskatchewan people on others, people are 

growing more and more sceptical of these statements. Last year 

the Minister of Finance stood in this House and promised the 

people of Saskatchewan that the number of jobs would grow by 

.9 per cent. 

 

Not only did the minister make such a modest promise but she 

went on to brag that this promise was much more modest than 

the forecast offered by major banks. Well a year later, the 

results are in. We now find that this government failed to even 

live up to this all-too-modest promise on job creation. 

According to Sask Trends Monitor, our job growth was a paltry 

.7 per cent. 

 

This government promises that its goal is 4,000 extra jobs every 

year. That works out to be job growth of almost .9 per cent. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government failed to meet its target so 

far, and they gave no new hope that they will be in any better 

position to create an environment for job growth in 

Saskatchewan in today’s budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  This budget simply rehashes past promises 

made by this government, promises that continue to fail to 

produce the jobs that we need.  

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more to this government’s sorry record on 

job creation. In a recent report, Sask Trends Monitor also warns 

that the industries which provided the modest job growth last 

year have slowed in the latter part of 1995, so Saskatchewan 

needs, and I quote, “a new engine for 1996”. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, no new engine was offered here today; no 

light for the jobless people of this province. People open the 

paper and what do they see, Mr. Speaker? They see companies 

like Estevan Brick closing, Wascana Energy shipping jobs off 

to Alberta, joined by the likes of Ford Credit. Spar in Swift 

Current and many others are having trouble keeping jobs while 

large multinationals slash jobs even though they’re profitable. 



582  Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 1996 

While the rest of the country rolls ahead creating jobs faster 

than us, our government sits here and wastes its time blaming 

instead of solving the problem. This is the legacy that the 

members opposite will have to bear if they remain on this 

present course. They can look back years after politics with an 

empty feeling of knowing they chose to blame instead of taking 

positive action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will undoubtedly do what 

they will with figures. I prefer to hope that they will devote 

their time to people rather than numbers. They can stifle the 

economy of its true job growth and still be able to say they 

created some jobs, but it won’t ease any of the real suffering 

that remains. 

 

Sure this government can give a few more dollars away and get 

anyone to create some marginal, temporary work. It won’t, 

however, change the fact that there are almost as many people 

who are underemployed as there are people without jobs in 

Saskatchewan. Almost 70,000 people in this province either 

can’t find work or can’t find enough work to support 

themselves. Most of the underemployed people are young, or 

young and female. That, Mr. Speaker, is a shameful tragedy that 

was not dealt with today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Another problem not dealt with here today is 

that almost a generation of young people, in their family 

formation years, have been lost from rural Saskatchewan. The 

very people who will build and maintain rural communities are 

gone. This government’s response, Mr. Speaker, is threats of 

amalgamation and more cuts to services and jobs in rural areas. 

 

This is a shameful way to treat rural areas, especially 

considering that they, in the resource sector, provided the 

backbone of this government’s all-too-modest job growth. 

 

To summarize one young farmer: one good season after years of 

hard times does not make a boom. I wonder for a moment if the 

Minister of Finance has considered how a sector like agriculture 

will continue to bear the burdens placed on it if grasshoppers, 

wheat midge, black diamond moths, or armyworms invade our 

fields once again this summer. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I’m going to ask for the 

cooperation of all members. I do consider it entirely 

inappropriate that members of the Assembly will be interacting 

with guests in the Assembly while debate is taking place. And 

I’ll ask members to take their seats and for the hon. member for 

Thunder Creek to proceed. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, The members 

opposite know why we don’t have the jobs we need in this 

province. They know that we need these jobs in order to secure 

our treasured social programs. The more jobs there are, the 

more taxpayers there will be. With job growth in Saskatchewan 

we will be able to provide the programs that we value. 

 

In their recent Partnership for Growth paper the Minister of 

Finance committed to reviewing the tax system by 1997 to see  

how it affects job creation and economic growth in this 

province. The goal of this is, and I quote, “to introduce a 

long-term plan to ensure the tax system promotes productive 

investment and greater job creation”. While, Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the people of this province, I will say to the 

government they might as well save the need for this review. 

 

The reason why we have a weaker economy than our 

neighbours is because this government is stifling it with taxes 

and regulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  In the budget here today we see this 

government is projected to take in another $100 million more in 

tax revenue from us without even raising the tax rates. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, that includes another 62 million in personal 

income tax. That won’t be there to help create jobs. To add 

insult to injury, those tax dollars are all too often being wasted. 

 

Since 1991 revenues from taxes in this province sky-rocketed. 

This government now collects 33 per cent more revenue from 

taxes than it did five years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan wouldn’t waste their 

time blaming if their incomes had grown by 33 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  This, Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t include 

windfalls from areas like utility charges. It’s simple, but 

unfortunately this blaming budget was proof that this 

government still doesn’t understand. They can give tax 

give-aways to big corporations, but its the mom-and-pop shops 

in this province that will create most of the jobs. They won’t lay 

off their employees just because the profit margin is getting a 

little smaller. If they're making a profit, they’ll stay here and 

provide meaningful jobs and some dignity for their employees. 

Unfortunately this government stole that profit margin with 

taxes, regulations, and utility charges. And with it, the jobs. 

 

While they blame and cry poor, this province continues to waste 

money on misguided priorities. They expand the size of cabinet. 

They build a casino with millions in cost overruns, allowing the 

total bill to hit $37 million. They provide breaks to some of the 

wealthiest corporations in the country, including chartered 

banks with billion dollar profits. They close a hospital like the 

Plains, even though they know they will have to renovate the 

building at a significant cost anyhow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, this government continues to 

jaunt around the world on trade trips, just like the Tories before 

them. This government said the ministers get the trips and the 

taxpayers get the bill. As I said before, the only thing that’s 

changed is, the cab pulls up in front of the minister’s 7,000 

square-foot mansion on its way to the airport, instead of some 

humble bungalow. 



March 28, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

We find we have executives of Crown corporations travelling 

on junkets to Chile to see people they could’ve met in Alberta 

instead. 

 

This government invests in hundreds of VLTs instead of in its 

nurses. It gives out-of-province gamblers $80 just to come to 

the casino. It has deep pockets to hire health care consultants, 

but nothing to help districts keep their nurses. What results, are 

nurses who are more stressed, who now take up the number one 

spot for compensation claims. 

 

The waste just doesn’t seem to end. They have money for 

$30,000 TV addresses. They have money for wasteful review of 

utility rates even though they already know what sort of rates 

they will impose on all of us: $600,000-plus wasted at 

SaskPower, and another 50,000 at SaskEnergy, and still another 

$100,000 high-tech consultation process for the budget. 

 

While they waste money on this, the largesse doesn’t end for 

their friends. Political staff are tucked away in our Crown 

corporations. While regular employees work hard at SaskPower 

and SaskTel with little if any wage increase, this government 

thinks nothing of compensating Don Ching for doing nothing. It 

thinks nothing of giving Jack Messer a raise and more holidays. 

It thinks nothing of giving another NDP party worker, Carole 

Bryant, a fat job at SaskPower and an even fatter raise to boot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new day dawned giving some the high life. For 

the rest of us, it’s only the dawning of a new day of 

disappointment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, while we see this government 

give us a blaming budget today, they continue to do things like 

this. This sort of waste is not part of the new day dawning. It’s 

not going to bring any hope to the people who need a job. The 

members opposite were entrusted with the task of making the 

lives of Saskatchewan people a little brighter. 

 

They may have helped brighten the lives of their appointees, big 

banks, or out-of-province gamblers, but they’ve done little for 

average Saskatchewan people. The blaming budget 

unfortunately offers no improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before adjourning debate, on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people, I urge the members opposite to do what 

they were sent to do  get to the priorities of Saskatchewan 

people: priorities like jobs, maintaining our health system and 

our rural communities. Help bring that new day dawn about and 

end the wasteful, icy, and slippery politicking that continues to 

grip this province. 

 

In closing, I will have much more to say, Mr. Speaker, but I 

would move adjournment of the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

Resumption of Budget Debate 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I move, seconded by the Premier: 

 

That debate on the motion that this Assembly do now 

resolve itself into the Committee of Finance be resumed on 

Friday, March 29, 1996. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:23 p.m. 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS  
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 565 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 565 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 565 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 566 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 566 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 566 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Komis Gold Mine  

Goulet .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 566 
Saskatchewan Farm Women 

Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 566 
Saskatoon YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 

Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 567 
Computerized Axial Tomography Rebuttal  

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 567 
Kelran Microbiologicals  

Kowalsky ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 567 
Tourism Attraction  

Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 567 
Written in Stone  

Bradley ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 568 
BDM Information Systems 

Koenker ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 568 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Government Reception Costs 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 568 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 568 
Crofford ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 569 

Gross Revenue Insurance Program Overpayments  
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 569 
Upshall......................................................................................................................................................................................... 569 

Sales Tax Harmonization  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 570 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 570 

McDowell Report  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 571 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 

Post-secondary Education 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 

Northern Highways Funding  
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 
Renaud ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 573 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 573 

POINT OF ORDER  
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 573 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 574 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES  

MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 574 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 574 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE)  
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 574 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 580 

Resumption of Budget Debate  
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 583 


