


















































April 11, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 811 
 April 11, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 
behalf of the great citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the names on the petition, Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina 
and surrounding small communities. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like 
to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
all throughout southern Saskatchewan and Regina. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 
throughout Saskatchewan, namely Regina and the Regina 
surrounding district. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
rise to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Regina and Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the Plains Health Centre in 
Regina. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people on this petition are from the 
community of Balcarres. 
 
Ms. Draude:  I rise today to also present petitions of names 
from people throughout Saskatchewan regarding the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, from 
Yorkton, from Saltcoats, Churchbridge, and all over southern 
Saskatchewan as well. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too today to 
present a petition of names from people in southern 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the concerned 
citizens of Regina. 

 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre, and the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And the people who have signed this petition are from 
Weyburn, Grenfell, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that you Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they are 
from Regina here; they’re from Lestock; they’re from a couple 
of reserves around the city. They are also from Gainsborough 
and from Carnduff and all from throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues on the 28th day of the session to also bring petitions 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 
  



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
mainly from the Lestock area, some from Lloydminster, 
Regina, and of course Regina Elphinstone constituency and 
Regina Albert South. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Monday next ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Economic Development: describe the 
services of SR Net, Saskatchewan Research Network; the 
expected disposition of the $36,000 grant to this business 
through order in council no. 175/96; and who the 
anticipated clientele of the communications research 
network will be. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce today 11 young people from the 18th 
Black Panther Scout Troop. They’ve travelled all the way to 
Regina from Prince Albert, taking advantage of this Easter 
break. And they’re here with their supervisors, Victor and Ruth 
Timm. 
 
I’ll have an opportunity to meet with them after question period 
and have a little chat, and I look forward to doing so. And I’d 
ask all members to welcome the 18th Black Panther Scout 
Troop from Prince Albert. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, some guests in your gallery. Our guests today are 
some of the members of the Snowmobile Safety Committee, 
which was formed last year to provide the government with 
recommendations on means to improve snowmobile safety in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Joining us today, and I would ask them to stand please: Chris 
Brewer, and Mrs. Brewer, president of the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association; Kim Becker of the Snowmobile 
Association and Canadian Red Cross; Bob Herbison of 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management; Don 
McMorris of Saskatchewan Safety Council; Walter McNabb of  

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. Also 
accompanying them today are safety experts from the 
Department of Highways and Transportation who worked with 
the committee  Al Popoff and Dave Abbey. 
 
The committee recommendations formed the core of our Bill to 
amend The Snowmobile Act which is before the House this 
session, Mr. Speaker. I would like the members of the 
Assembly to join with me in thanking our guests from the 
Snowmobile Safety Committee for their hard work on this 
project. Please welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would like to 
join with the government in welcoming the people that have 
been involved in constructing the new legislation for 
snowmobile safety. We think that it’s very appropriate that you 
should come to the legislature and see how your work will turn 
into law. And we’re happy that you are here and taking an 
interest, and we will be taking a very big interest in finding out 
what exactly is in the Bill and seeing how it can help the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, thanks for coming and we’re glad you’re here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
this afternoon to introduce to you and members of the 
Assembly, a gentleman seated in your gallery who is a 
corrections employee with the Department of Justice, out of . . . 
from the constituency of Yorkton. Mr. Doug Raynes has been 
involved with the department for about 12 years. He’s involved 
in leading a number of training seminars and sessions with 
employees within the corrections department. Mr. Raynes is 
also a very avid observer and critic of the operations of this 
House. I’m sure that he has more tape than we have in our 
camera section here of the legislature. 
 
So I’d like to ask Mr. Raynes to stand and ask all members of 
the Assembly to join with me in welcoming Mr. Raynes to the 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask for leave to 
introduce a notice of motion for first reading of a Bill. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Monday next move first reading of a Bill, An Act to 
enable Northern Municipalities to Name Airports within their 
boundaries. Short title, The Naming of Northern Municipal 
Airports Act. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Lac La Ronge Band Signs Financial Transfer Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet:  Mr. Speaker, yesterday I attended the 
signing of a financial transfer agreement by the Lac La Ronge 
Indian Band. The Lac La Ronge Indian Band in my 
constituency, with over 6,000 members, is Saskatchewan’s 
largest first nation with 18 reserves in the North. 
 
The signing of this five-year financial transfer agreement with 
the federal government will greatly increase its control over 
how it spends its money. This is the third agreement of its kind 
signed in Saskatchewan. Like the other two, this one recognizes 
that each band is unique and is in the best position to make 
financial decisions based on the community’s needs. 
 
Chief Harry Cook said that this is the foundation on which to 
build their financial future, giving their leaders of the band both 
increased responsibility and higher accountability. 
 
This agreement will allow the band to make more efficient and 
effective long-term management decisions in the areas that 
most directly affect them  services such as elementary and 
secondary education, social assistance, health care, 
infrastructure maintenance. As well, the band will have greater 
control over economic development and governance. Mr. 
Speaker, this agreement marks one more step towards first 
nations’ management of their own destiny and with greater 
control comes greater accountability by first nations leaders and 
first nations people. 
 
Let’s all congratulate Chief Cook and his officials for reaching 
this historic agreement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dalton Annual Curling Bonspiel 
 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rural Saskatchewan 
is being eroded and over the years we’ve seen the demise of 
many communities. 
 
Today I would like to mention the town of Dalton where the 
community spirit lives on even though the focal points of the 
store and the hall are long gone. Dalton celebrated its 25th 
Dalton Residents Only Curling Bonspiel this year at St. Front 
curling rink. Ninety-six curlers from the four western provinces 
and the Dalton district participated in this annual event. 
 
It’s held every year during the third weekend in February. This 
unique event has an interesting origin. When Bill Tennant, a 
Dalton pioneer, died, his estate received a small equity cheque 
from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. That equity cheque was 
used to start the first bonspiel. 
 
In 1972, Bill’s son, Ray Tennant, and district residents Donald 
Heden and Max Misfeldt, were appointed in life to look after 
the details of the annual event. Originally the bonspiel was open 
only to present and former residents of Dalton, but now it has 
been expanded to include direct descendants of former  

residents. 
 
This year, four curlers were honoured for curling in each of the 
past 25 bonspiels. During this year’s bonspiel a special quilt 
containing the names of all 362 curlers who have participated in 
this bonspiel in the past 25 years was displayed by the local 
ladies who stitched it. Raffle tickets were sold on the quilt to the 
names of the people who were stitched on the quilt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to join in 
congratulating this group of individuals on keeping the spirit of 
Dalton district alive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

South Saskatchewan Youth Orchestra 
 

Ms. Lorje:  Sunday was a very special day for over 60 young 
Saskatchewan musicians and their chaperons. The South 
Saskatchewan Youth Orchestra was chosen to be one of six 
special participants at the First Banff International Festival of 
Youth Orchestras. 
 
They joined with youth orchestras from Dorset, England; 
Mirandela, Portugal; Springfield, Missouri; Kansas City; and 
Saskatoon. They were given special musical instruction and 
training from some of the finest performers and musical 
educators in North America over a weeklong event that 
culminated in a series of splendid orchestral concerts. 
 
The people in the South Saskatchewan Youth Orchestra are 
very dedicated. They come to Regina weekly from places such 
as Swift Current and Moose Jaw to practice their musical skills. 
Their conductor, Alan Denike, who is also principal bassoon in 
the Regina Symphony Orchestra, has provided excellent 
direction to this group of talented and dedicated young 
musicians. It was clear to hear in their excellent concert on 
Easter Sunday in Banff. With music ranging in styles from 
Dvorak to Baker to Holst, their musicianship was superb. The 
highlight was a concerto by Boccherini featuring a solo 
performance by Blair Lofgren on cello. The audience gave him 
a well-deserved standing ovation. 
 
I congratulate all members of the South Saskatchewan Youth 
Orchestra, their parents, and their conductor, for a sterling 
performance. I wish them even greater successes as they enter 
their 20th season. Well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Festival of Plays 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the 
Humboldt Community Players on hosting the annual provincial 
festival of plays which is being held in Humboldt this week. I 
had the privilege of addressing theatre groups from throughout 
the province at the opening ceremonies last Sunday, and I also 
thoroughly enjoyed the first performance of the week given by 
the host group, the Humboldt Community Players. 
 
While Humboldt can boast at being Saskatchewan’s largest  
  



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

town, this is the first time a smaller centre has hosted a major, 
full-length festival. What Humboldt may lack in size, it 
certainly made up in spirit and cooperation. Theatre groups 
from Saskatoon, Strasbourg, Moose Jaw, Milestone, the 
Battlefords, and Humboldt are performing and entertaining at 
Festival ’96 this week in Humboldt. With 81 member-groups 
from across the province, we know that amateur drama is 
thriving. 
 
Congratulations to the Humboldt Community Players and the 
chairperson of the host group, Maury Wrubleski. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Housing Sales Up in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Kasperski:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we know from 
the movies, “If you build it, they will come.” And if you sell it, 
they will move in. And this is exactly what has happened in 
Saskatchewan in today’s housing market; both of these things. 
 
The most recent indicators suggest that housing starts and 
housing sales are up considerably — a sure sign that our 
steadily growing population is confident about the economic 
prospects here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In the province, housing starts are up as of the end of February 
by 35 per cent over last year. And sales of all homes in the first 
quarter are up by 30 per cent. An article in Tuesday’s 
Leader-Post  which we know, Mr. Speaker, is our biggest 
provincial booster  pointed out that in Regina house sales for 
the first quarter have increased by the same 30 per cent. In real 
numbers, Mr. Speaker, 266 homes were bought, up from 220 
this same time last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people do not make a major financial 
commitment, and especially a major commitment which plants 
them in one place, unless they have some confidence. It seems 
evident to me, and I think to everyone here, that these housing 
numbers are good news in themselves, and are even better times 
that suggests to where our economy is going. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increasing Violence in Society 
 
Mr. Belanger:  I rise today to call attention to a very 
disturbing problem in our society today. Almost every day there 
are more incidents of violence reported in the news. One day 
it’s a cab driver being robbed and beaten; perhaps it’s the clerks 
in convenience stores or gas stations being threatened at knife 
point. And those are only incidents reported. We often don’t 
hear about the children hiding their bruises from their fellow 
classmates because of the beating they got last night. 
 
What is most distressing about acts of violence, Mr. Speaker, is 
that every single one of them is preventable. While no thing and 
no one can force another person to commit a violent act, study 
after study shows that crime and violence is more common 
amongst people with lower incomes. These stats clearly  

demonstrate more reasons why there’s a need to stimulate the 
proper social and economic development across all levels of 
society. 
 
Both of these elements are required to fight the problem. Social 
and economic development must go hand in hand. People need 
the proper tools to climb out of this destructive cycle. In the 
meantime, we must protect the innocent and incarcerate the 
guilty. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Credit Unions Do Well 
 
Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve all heard that 
Canada’s banks have done very well for themselves this year, 
and we have also heard that one of the ways they’ve maximized 
their profits is by eliminating services to some communities. 
The member from Thunder Creek in fact made a statement to 
that effect in this Assembly several days ago. 
 
With that in mind, I believe that this Assembly should 
recognize the success of our own home-grown financial 
institution, the Saskatchewan credit union system. Our credit 
unions were formed by Saskatchewan people to meet their 
particular needs, and they have always had as a first principle of 
business, the good of their members and the communities. 
 
As a former credit union manager myself, Mr. Speaker, I was 
extremely pleased to see Saskatchewan credit unions turning in 
a record-breaking year in 1995 — a tribute to their commitment 
to community and to the sound prairie business sense. And, Mr. 
Speaker, another sign that the Saskatchewan economy is hitting 
on all cylinders. 
 
The credit unions pay tax at the same rate as any other business 
in Saskatchewan  22 per cent on earnings under $200,000 and 
close to 50 per cent on anything over that. 
 
In 1995 Saskatchewan’s 167 credit unions reached after-tax 
earnings of $42.5 million. A record, Mr. Speaker. Total assets 
rose by 6 per cent to 5.7 billion. 
 
Showing customer confidence in our economy, loans rose by 7 
per cent; and demonstrating the soundness of the economy, the 
number of delinquent loans plunged. 
 
As we used to say, if it’s a good service and friendly advice 
you’re looking for, you’ll get it here. You can credit union on it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cadet Band Concert 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
evening I had the pleasure, along with a number of other MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly), of attending the cadet 
band concert at the Centre of the Arts. And as you attended it as 
well, you can certainly attest to the fact that it was a tremendous 
presentation. 
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

Cadets from all over western Canadian prairie provinces were 
involved in it. It was an extremely professional event. I must 
admit that when I went to it, I was expecting something along 
the lines of a high school calibre type band, and it was anything 
but. Extremely professional, jazz, big-band songs, bagpipe 
solos, many, many numbers. It was extremely well presented, 
very precisioned work. If you recall the young fellow twirling 
the sceptre, I couldn’t help but think if he ever lost that, 
somebody in the crowd was going to be dead for sure. 
 
But it was indeed one of the nicer events that I’ve attended as 
an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), and I think all 
members next year, when they put on a presentation like that, 
would be well advised to take it in. 
 
So I would offer on behalf of myself and any of the other 
members that attended, and certainly this House, our 
congratulations to the Cadet Honour Band for their presentation 
last night. It was very enjoyable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health District Funding 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
received a call today from Nancy Tank, a registered nurse who 
is employed at the Radville health centre. She phoned me 
because of the fact that she and about 70 co-workers were 
informed during a staff meeting yesterday that they will not be 
receiving their regular pay cheque tomorrow because the South 
Central Health District has insufficient funds with which to pay 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was informed that the Minister of Health has 
been made aware of this situation. Will he please now inform 
this House and the health care workers in Radville what action 
he’s taking? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: There are many instances, Mr. Speaker, 
where information is presented by that member that is 
inaccurate, and I’m not going to recite all of them because we 
don’t have sufficient time here in question period. But I want to 
say to the member that my office was advised by the South 
Central Health District this morning that funding to the centre 
in Radville is continuing; that there is going to be no problem 
with people that work at that centre being paid. That is the 
information I have from the health district. And I’ve found that 
information from the health districts tends to be somewhat more 
reliable than information that comes from that member, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the track record of the 
minister is the one that’s a little questionable because he’s 
apologized in this House before for being more than wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain then why he has not 
communicated this to the 70 health care workers at the Radville 
health centre, who are waiting on pins and needles, I might add. 
We spoke with a nurse from this facility only minutes before  

question period today, and at that point she did not know 
whether she was going to receive a pay cheque tomorrow, next 
week, or the week after that. 
 
So will the minister explain when he intends to share this 
information with the health centre staff in Radville, and will he 
explain if other districts are experiencing the same kind of 
problems? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member says that I apologized to 
the House when I made an error, and I did do that, Mr. Speaker. 
And I might say that if we took the time to listen to the member 
apologize, if he ever would, when he made an error, we never 
would get to any other business in the House, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a list here of errors the member has made, and the Liberal 
Party has made, just in this session, but I won’t go into it. 
 
But I want to say to the House and to the member that he knows 
that the centre he’s talking about receives its funding from the 
South Central Health District. It does not receive its funding 
directly from the Department of Health. 
 
So the member says, am I communicating with the employees? 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the responsibility of that health district to pay 
the employer of those employees. It’s the responsibility of the 
health district and the employer to communicate with those 
employees. I have every confidence that they will be doing so 
 more confidence than I have in the information provided by 
the member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about 
responsibility. You’re the Minister of Health, getting a lot of 
money each and every year to make sure the citizens of this 
province receive proper health care, and now you’ve failed 
again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our caucus continuously calls on this government 
to priorize its health care spending to address the needs of those 
who require medical care. However this does not mean that 
those who provide front-line care should not be paid. This case 
highlights the fact that our health districts are facing serious 
funding problems. 
 
Will the minister explain what commitment he is willing to 
make today to ensure that health districts have sufficient funds 
to provide quality health care and appropriate funding to pay 
the salaries of nurses and front-line workers who provide these 
services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  My advice to the people, Mr. Speaker, 
would be not to take too seriously what this members says. We 
had a motion in this Chamber a few weeks ago to say to the 
Liberal government, please don’t cut health care spending by 35 
per cent; please don’t cut funding for health in Saskatchewan by 
about $50 million. And that member refused  
  



816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

to vote in favour of that motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So then what we did is, my colleagues on this side of the House 
said that for every dollar the Liberals were taking out of health 
care, we would put a dollar back in. And that member voted 
against that as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there isn’t much that we can do to keep that member happy, 
Mr. Speaker. His job is to complain; that’s what he’ll do. He 
thinks part of his job is to spread fear among the population; 
that’s what he’ll do. But what we’ll do, Mr. Speaker, is fund the 
health care system properly  something that that member and 
that party refuse to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Managers’ Overtime Pay 
 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has given the people of Saskatchewan many 
reasons to be shocked by its spending decisions since June 
election. Using SaskTel as only one example, this government 
chose to hire Don Ching as the head of SaskTel at an annual 
salary of $167,000. They also chose to retain the services of 
former president Fred Van Parys at the same amount. And, Mr. 
Speaker, now we hear the 650 managers who are working in 
place of the striking SaskTel employees are being paid $50 for 
each hour of overtime they work. 
 
Will the minister confirm that this fact is true? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 
opportunity to answer that question. It is true that the 650 
managers that have been deployed to centres around the 
province to keep the service going are getting their regular 
managers’ pay for the regular hours they put in and they’re 
getting $50 an hour for overtime. And I think rather than 
carping about the cost of it, that the opposition should be 
thanking those managers for leaving their families, for going to 
other parts of the province to keep the service going, instead of 
harping about the cost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, what the minister is telling us 
is just forget about the money. It’s no problem; we’ll pay them 
whatever they want. We got two presidents of SaskTel  that 
doesn’t matter either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the fact that managers are working 12-hour 
shifts, or four hours of overtime during each shift, this means 
each manager is being paid $200 in overtime each day of the 
strike. The fact that all 650 managers are putting in these hours 
means the overtime bill  and I stress this is just the overtime 
bill  will total $130,000 each day that this strike continues. 
 
How does the minister and this government justify such an 
extravagant expense? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, it’s passing strange that 
this is the same member who yesterday rose in this House and 
raised some concerns about the sustainability of the service. 
Which side is he on? Yesterday he wanted the service sustained. 
Now he complains that we’re paying people who want to 
sustain the service. Make up your mind. 
 
I think again that they’re doing an excellent job. There’s been 
minimal disruption  in fact it’s going quite smoothly. And 
don’t forget that there’s two and a half million dollars a month 
that’s not being paid out in salaries while the unionized workers 
are on strike. So the money to the managers who are keeping 
the service going is coming from that money. It’s not an 
additional expense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

High-risk Offender Identification 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Justice. Mr. Speaker, as much as this government wishes that 
the public’s concerns over released pedophiles would just go 
away, today, according to the Regina Leader-Post, another twist 
has been thrown into this tale. 
 
It appears obvious now that Saskatchewan is quickly becoming 
a safe haven for convicted pedophiles from those provinces that 
do warn people about sex offenders living in their area. In our 
province the police are handcuffed in their efforts to give 
similar warnings. 
 
The minister tells us to wait a few months. Well the official 
opposition has introduced a Bill that would give police the 
freedom to better protect the public. Will the minister tell the 
people of Saskatchewan what immediate action he will take to 
ensure the safety of our children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Leader 
of the Opposition for that question. We too agree that this is a 
serious problem in our province. We also realize that it has 
many implications. What we are doing is that I am meeting with 
Mr. Rock and Mr. Gray on Monday morning in Ottawa and this 
is one of the subjects that we are going to spend some time 
talking about. 
 
The big issue that we have here is that you’re dealing with 
people who have completed their sentence and you have to deal 
with the Criminal Code which is a federal Liberal 
responsibility. And we are trying to work with them to come up 
with a solution which deals with the whole country. The 
problem we have is that all jurisdictions need to work together, 
and that has to be done together with the federal Liberals, Mr. 
Rock and Mr. Gray. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  I thank the minister for his answer, Mr. Speaker.  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

Again, just to get some clarifications on a Bill that was 
proposed by the official opposition. We are being told by this 
government that a few months . . . we were told . . . the people 
of Saskatchewan are telling us that a few months is simply too 
long to wait before legislation by that government is proposed. 
Sooner or later this government has got to realize the rights of 
law-abiding citizens have to outweigh those of convicted 
criminals. While they serve their time and get out to continue 
their lives, their victims suffer for the rest of their lives. 
 
Will this government commit today to pass the private 
members’ Bill put forth by the opposition, or at least 
immediately introduce its own Bill to better protect citizens 
from those who prey on the most innocent in our society? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Leader 
of the Opposition for the second question. As I’ve stated in this 
Assembly before, that this is really not the place for this kind of 
a discussion. I know it grabs headlines for the members of the 
opposition, but it’s very unfortunate that that’s where they 
would take this discussion. 
 
What we have is a situation where in Manitoba they have a 
protocol which we have been reviewing carefully. We have 
looked at the suggestions made by the opposition and we’re 
examining that as well. 
 
We’re working closely with the police chiefs. I talked with 
Chief Owen Maguire yesterday afternoon. I’ll be seeing him 
again in another hour. We are dealing with this problem, and 
we’re trying to come up with a solution that is a Saskatchewan 
solution which will mesh in with a Canadian solution, which we 
will work together with the federal Liberals to accomplish. 
 
But this is the type of thing that should not be discussed in this 
legislature in this format because what it does is it just creates 
fear in the community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker. I have another question for the 
Minister of Justice as well. Mr. Minister, with all due respect, 
this is indeed the place to have this type of discussion. 
 
Saskatoon police have now confirmed that two high-risk sex 
offenders, one of them a child molester who has refused 
treatment, have relocated from Manitoba to Saskatoon. He left 
Manitoba, they left Manitoba, to avoid the province’s 
community notification protocol. That’s the reason they left, 
Mr. Minister, to avoid it. They’re coming here because there is 
no such process in place. 
 
While you continue to drag your feet, more and more dangerous 
sex offenders are moving to Saskatchewan to take advantage of 
the fact that there is no law here in this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, blaming it on the federal government just isn’t 
going to wash with the parents of Saskatoon. Will you today 
commit to  as you said, you are going to be having  

discussions with the police chief from Saskatoon  will you 
commit to today, Mr. Minister, to allowing the police in 
Saskatoon, the police chief, to do whatever he feels is necessary 
to address this situation in Saskatoon. 
 
And if that includes a community notification process, will you 
allow for that this afternoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the Leader 
of the Third Party for that question as well. 
 
The whole situation is, in Saskatchewan, that it is possible. 
There’s no law preventing the police from going ahead and 
releasing the information the way they did. I talked with Chief 
Maguire yesterday about this issue. He says it’s a very difficult 
job for them to decide when to do this. 
 
He has the same mechanism available, which he can use, which 
he will possibly use if that’s what needs to be done here. But 
practically, it’s not my role as Minister of Justice in 
Saskatchewan to be telling the local police to do this. What my 
role is, is to set out a policy which we can deal with in the 
whole province. We’re doing that in conjunction with all of the 
appropriate people. And the kind of discussion, and the way the 
questions are asked here, does nothing to help solve the 
problem. Let’s work together to solve the problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, if 
you don’t know what your role as Minister of Justice is, maybe 
we can help you out a little bit. 
 
In Manitoba they put in place a protocol system. They put a 
protocol system in place to help with the situation, Mr. Minister 
. . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order. Order. The House will 
come to order and let the Leader of the Third Party put his 
question. 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the 
problem is here now. The people in Saskatoon, the police in 
Saskatoon, people all over this province, believes there needs to 
be a process put in place, a protocol put in place, right now. We 
can’t wait any longer while you continue to drag your feet. We 
can’t wait any longer while innocent people are being affected, 
right across this province. Are you going to just sit around and 
hope the person that is doing these kinds of things are just going 
to go away? Because that isn’t realistic, Mr. Minister. 
 
Let’s formalize the process. You said that the police chief is 
prepared to do what is necessary. Well, Mr. Minister, we are 
prepared in this House as well. If you want leave to introduce a 
protocol this afternoon, we are prepared to give you that. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s formalize the process. Are you prepared to 
do that this afternoon? 
 
  



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 
for the further question about this matter. As I explained 
previously, I’m meeting with Mr. Rock and Mr. Gray in Ottawa 
on Monday. This is a part of the discussion that we’re having. 
And basically what is going on in Saskatchewan is that we are 
working carefully with the chiefs of police, and with the people 
in the community, and we are coming up with the appropriate 
policy here. 
 
I think the fallacy to what we are hearing from the members of 
the opposition is that this magic naming of the offender with 
some procedure is going to solve the problem. It’s not going to 
solve the problem we have in our community. We need to work 
together to come up with a solution that will provide protection 
for our children and our families, and we need to do it in a 
Saskatchewan way. Thanks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Managers’ Overtime Pay 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the minister for SaskTel this morning. Madam Minister, we 
understand that you are paying SaskTel managers $50 an hour 
for overtime that they are putting in during the current strike. 
 
My first point, Madam Minister, is this: this seems to be a little 
bit outrageous for work that would normally and usually be 
done for probably less than half that amount of money. And my 
second point is that are these people not under contract and 
therefore required to do whatever job is necessary to get the job 
done? 
 
Madam Minister, why are SaskTel managers being paid so 
much to fill in during a strike, which is something that I would 
think should be just a part of their normal job requirements? 
 
Now will you confirm, Madam Minister, also, the numbers that 
the Liberals have put forward today and tell us how much, in 
your opinion, the overtime will be costing and how many hours 
will they actually be putting in during this strike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I can reconfirm for the 
member opposite the numbers that I spoke of in answer to the 
question recently $50 an hour is the overtime rate, which 
represents approximately time and a half for a manager’s salary. 
 
I think that rather than harping about the amount, the people of 
this province should be grateful to these 650 people, Mr. 
Speaker, who are working day and night all over this province, 
who left their homes and their families on short notice to 
provide service to the people of this province. I think we should 
be grateful for their contribution rather than critical. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Madam  

Minister, I hardly think that the word harping is appropriate 
here because what we are attempting to do is to offer you some 
solutions and some alternatives. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, does this also then mean that once Don 
Ching finally shows up for work next week that he’ll be getting 
an extra $50 an hour to top off his $167,000 of salary? 
 
And, Madam Minister, rather than paying an additional $50 an 
hour to a bunch of managers who are already making a pretty 
good salary, why didn’t you simply hire some replacement 
workers? I’m sure that given Saskatchewan’s dismal job 
climate, you could have found some people who are willing to 
work for a lot less than $50 an hour. In fact I know a lot of farm 
families where I think both the husband and the wife would be 
quite happy to come into the city or into the towns and do this 
job for you for probably $15 an hour. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, have you considered hiring replacement 
workers? Now if you are having to train, as we understand, your 
managers to be able to do the work that is being done, would 
this have been a more cost-effective approach than paying 
managers an additional $50 an hour? Simply hire people that 
want the work. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, the vision of the 
members opposite for the working people in this province may 
be a pale shadow of Alabama north. We do not subscribe to the 
hiring of replacement workers, Mr. Speaker. And I think that 
the current solution, where the management staff is maintaining 
the service for the people of Saskatchewan, is the best possible 
arrangement under the circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Information Network 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the Regina Leader-Post 
recently ran a news item about the development of a $70 
million health information network. Shortly after this item 
appeared, I received a copy of a report from Fisher and 
Associates, a computer consulting firm. This report was 
presented to the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations one year ago, and it highlights a number of 
concerns  concerns which the author feels have not yet been 
addressed. And I’d like to send a copy of this across to the 
minister, if I could. 
 
This report indicates that the design phase of this project will 
cost about $17 million, and points out that in the development 
of most information systems, the design costs generally 
represent about one-ninth of the total cost, which would push 
the cost of the project well beyond its intended $70 million. 
 
Will the minister confirm what, if any, measures will be taken 
to ensure that a cost overrun does not take place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, we 
had the member from Wood River confusing the Radville  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

health centre with a centre run solely by the Department of 
Health, and now we have this member talking about the 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network, which is not solely 
a project of the Department of Health but is a project of SAHO, 
which is the Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations, and the health districts, and Saskatchewan 
Health. 
 
The member says that it’s thought that $70 million will be spent 
to develop a proposal. The advice I have, Mr. Speaker, is that 
$70 million would be spent to both develop and implement the 
system over a four-year period. That is the information I have. 
 
And this is not an initiative solely of the Department of Health. 
This is an initiative of the Department of Health and the health 
districts. 
 
And working in partnership, they are examining whether we 
can provide better health to people, especially people in rural 
Saskatchewan, who can benefit from direct collaboration 
between physicians in rural areas and specialists in urban areas, 
which is something I would have thought that that member 
would want us to be looking at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, it’s all the same taxpayer’s 
dollar and the minister can pass the buck all he wants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the letter I refer to also expresses concern that a 
system which will take a minimum of three and a half years to 
complete may be obsolete by the time it’s implemented. When 
you realize the tremendous rate of change that’s taking place in 
the information technology industry, will the minister explain 
how he and his government can justify such an expense when 
health care is suffering and in fact nurses and other care-givers 
are not being paid? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well there is change at a tremendous rate 
in the health care system, Mr. Speaker, something that the 
Liberal Party refuses to recognize on a day-to-day basis because 
they refuse to believe that there should be any change in the 
health care system. 
 
But I say to that member that if we can implement, in 
cooperation with people in rural Saskatchewan as represented 
by SAHO and the health districts, a system whereby a person in 
rural Saskatchewan can have better service because there’s 
instantaneous communication and technological advances in 
rural areas, communication between a physician in rural 
Saskatchewan and a specialist in urban areas, that’s what we 
should be doing to enhance the care of people in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to the Liberal Party, get with it, get on board, and 
let’s start providing people in rural Saskatchewan with a kind of 
health care that they can have if we’re prepared to move into the 
21st century — something that I think that party has 
tremendous difficulty contemplating. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, when we’re speaking about a 
project that will cost a minimum of $70 million, when we’re 
speaking of a project that will cost a minimum of $70 million to 
develop and implement  and possibly much more  there are 
obvious fiscal concerns that must be addressed, especially in 
light of hospital closures and the elimination of front-line health 
care workers. 
 
Will the minister explain where the funds will come from for 
this system and what the impact will be on health district 
funding, as many districts are already encountering deficit 
situations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well ultimately, Mr. Speaker, if we 
cooperate with the people of rural Saskatchewan and the health 
districts to improve communication between rural areas and 
urban areas, which is what we should be doing to enhance the 
treatment of people in rural Saskatchewan, the benefit for health 
districts will be probably savings of about $5 million annually. 
 
Because instead of having duplicate lab tests and X-rays and 
other services, the information concerning the lab tests done on 
a person previously in another centre would be available to the 
physician in the rural area. So the health districts and SAHO are 
very much in favour of exploring how we can enhance care for 
people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think we should get onside with people in rural 
Saskatchewan and not be like the Liberal Party and stand in the 
way of any change that will enhance health care throughout the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 67  An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act (Free Votes/“FREE”) 

 
Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Free 
Votes/“FREE”) be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker:  Question 67 is converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
  



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
speak on the second reading of The Snowmobile Amendment 
Act. This Bill makes two major changes to The Snowmobile 
Act. These amendments are a direct result of the alarming 
increase in snowmobile fatalities in the last two years. 
 
Members will recall in 1994 and ’95, 10 people died in 
snowmobile mishaps in our province. This is a terrible and 
needless waste and has caused suffering to many families. 
 
I was very concerned about this tragic loss of life. As a result, 
members will recall that I established the Snowmobile Safety 
Committee in February of 1995 to look at ways of improving 
snowmobile safety in Saskatchewan. The Snowmobile Safety 
Committee worked hard to consult stakeholders and come up 
with recommendations to improve safety for snowmobiles and I 
would like to recognize their work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We were able to put together a diverse 
group of individuals and organizations interested in snowmobile 
safety. Members of the committee included representatives 
from: the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association, the Canadian 
Red Cross, Saskatchewan Safety Council, the trappers 
association, snowmobile manufacturers, the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, individual snowmobilers, and 
several government agencies including my department, 
Environment and Resource Management, SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), and the Highway Traffic Board. 
 
The committee presented its report to me last July containing a 
number of recommendations to improve snowmobile safety. 
Two of the committee’s major recommendations are contained 
in this Bill. 
 
Before I mention these recommendations, I want to touch on the 
two other major suggestions from the committee which did not 
involve legislative changes. The committee recommended we 
provide two grants to the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association. 
 
I am pleased to advise the House we have done this. I was 
happy to provide $15,000 in grants for the updating of the 
operator training course and the certification of additional safety 
instructors. And SGI provided $15,000 to support the 
association’s recent public awareness campaign to promote 
snowmobile safety. 
 
The committee recommended, and we have agreed, that persons 
under the age of 16 must complete a training course prior to 
operating a snowmobile on public property. To improve safety, 
a person operating a snowmobile on public property requires 
some degree of knowledge for safe operating behaviour. 
Snowmobiling requires the operator to understand the 
capabilities of machines which can now travel at very high 
speeds. Operators can learn how to take evasive action to avoid 
collisions. 

Persons 16 years of age and over must have a valid driver’s 
licence in order to operate a snowmobile on public property. 
Having a driver’s licence does not automatically mean one 
knows how to operate a snowmobile, but it does demonstrate 
one has some knowledge of the rules of the road. Persons under 
the age of 16 should have to demonstrate an understanding of 
how to safely operate the machine, and understand basic safety 
rules. The Bill contains the amendment to make it mandatory 
for under-age operators to complete a training course. 
 
The second committee recommendation, Mr. Speaker, deals 
with the wearing of safety helmets. I firmly believe in the use of 
snowmobile helmets. Protective headgear can save a life of a 
snowmobiler in a collision. This Bill makes the wearing of 
helmets mandatory in most situations. Other changes in the Bill 
are consequential to the major items I have discussed here. 
 
I would be pleased to answer any questions in committee. I 
would like to express my thanks to the committee for their role 
in snowmobile safety, and I would like to express my thanks to 
the snowmobile association for their exceptional work in 
promoting snowmobile safety in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I move second reading of The Snowmobile Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome this 
chance to speak on the proposed amendments to The 
Snowmobile Act. But first let me talk about some tragic 
incidents that happened in Saskatchewan earlier this year. 
 
In late January, two men were killed when their snowmobile 
crashed into a side of a truck near Humboldt. The constable at 
the scene said the snowmobile was racing at a very high rate of 
speed when it broadsided a truck trying to cross the intersection. 
Witnesses said it appeared the snowmobile did not see the truck 
until it was too late. The men were killed instantly. 
 
Less than two weeks after that incident, a 28-year-old Oxbow 
man died after two snowmobiles collided on the frozen Souris 
River. The second driver suffered serious life-threatening head 
injuries from this accident. Investigators said visibility was 
good, but speed and alcohol may have contributed to the 
accident. One investigator said snowmobile accidents are hard 
to re-create, so all they can really do is go on what they’re told. 
The man killed in the incident was the seventh person to die in a 
snowmobile incident this winter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are extremely concerned about these 
unnecessary deaths, and according to stats, we should be 
concerned. In 1995 in Saskatchewan alone, 10 people died in 
snowmobile accidents. According to the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association, our province used to average only 
one or two snowmobile deaths per winter. That was the old 
average. So that’s an increase of 500 to 1,000 per cent. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, even one to two deaths per year is far too 
high. Obviously something needs to be done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize that this Bill is the first step towards  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

fixing what has become a very frightening situation. Mr. 
Speaker, with our long, long winters, snowmobiling is a great 
recreational sport. From small-town poker derbies to family 
weekend trips, snowmobile is a key source of fun, particularly 
in rural Saskatchewan; that snowmobiles are also used in the 
day-to-day lives of our province. Farmers use them to check 
their land or livestock. Northern residents use them in fishing 
and trapping. 
 
And when roads are impassable, snowmobiles can be an 
essential form of transportation. So in making any changes to 
the snowmobile legislation, we must remember that they’ll have 
an impact of a large number of Saskatchewan people. 
 
As we understand, the amendments put forward in this Bill 
were recommended by the Snowmobile Safety Committee. This 
committee includes members from the Canadian Red Cross, 
trappers, snowmobile manufacturers, police, aboriginal groups, 
government agencies, and the Saskatchewan Safety Council. 
 
In a nutshell, the changes would: (a) make it mandatory for 
operators and passengers to wear helmets; (b) make it 
mandatory for people under the age of 16 to take a snowmobile 
safety course prior to operating a snowmobile on public 
property; and (c), phase in over five years a mandatory training 
course for people of all ages. 
 
Exemptions would be allowed for operation on family property 
and for people who rely on snowmobiles for business purposes 
like fishing and trapping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must come out on the side of safety. We don’t 
want the sad stats to get even worse, so we support what we feel 
is a general motive underlying this Bill  the need to improve 
safety awareness. Hopefully, increased education will help 
prevent needless deaths. 
 
According to an article in the Prince Albert Daily Herald from 
March 27, the changes are being welcomed by some 
snowmobilers. The president of the Prince Albert Snow 
Runners Club said: 
 

It’s about time these changes were made before more 
people get killed. Helmets should always be worn as far as 
I’m concerned. I think most snowmobilers will embrace 
the new rules and abide by them. 

 
(1430) 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is good news. A Bill that is widely supported 
by snowmobile users should be passed into legislation. 
 
Having said that, however, I think we must look at the overall 
picture before we fully back this Bill. For example, some of our 
rural and northern constituents have raised some concern about 
access and the cost of the proposed safety course. I think the 
members opposite sometimes forget that not everyone lives 
close to a major centre. 
 
Yes, there is life outside of the cities. In this case, some of the 
very people who rely on snowmobiles most probably live very  

far away from any major centre. Does this mean the 
government will send safety instructors out to anyone who 
wants to take the course, all on taxpayers’ dollars? I think we 
probably all agree that this would be impractical. 
 
So does that mean that all people living in remote areas would 
have to cover the costs of getting to an approved course? That 
may not mean anything to city people here, but believe me, 
there could be a huge out-of-pocket expense for some of our 
residents. Is it fair to put the financial burden on them. This is 
something we must look at before this Bill is passed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, we believe this Bill has 
merit. We want to see the number of tragic deaths from 
snowmobile accidents drop. But we’re still in the midst of 
consultations with groups from throughout the province. We 
want to be sure that we can handle this issue in the best possible 
manner for everyone. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask that this Bill be passed to 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property 
Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendment 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 
1996. 
 
The members of this Assembly will recall that The Personal 
Property Security Act, 1993 was passed by this legislature at the 
recommendation of the Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan. That Act implemented third generation personal 
property security legislation to facilitate a fully automated 
personal property registry. It also provided for substantially 
uniform personal property security legislation in the four 
western provinces. 
 
Since its proclamation on April 1, 1995, the new legislation has 
been well received by the legal and business communities. 
Remote access registration by law firms and corporations is 
now widely in use. Saskatchewan residents benefit from the 
increased speed and clarity this initiative provides. 
 
However, certain technical drafting issues have been raised 
within the legal community. To this point, these concerns have 
not resulted in adverse or unintended results in the courts. 
Nevertheless it is appropriate that they be addressed by this 
amending legislation to ensure that the original policy intent of 
these provisions can be achieved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to simple drafting and housekeeping 
amendments, this Bill provides clarification with respect to the 
following issues. It eliminates an unintended distinction 
between crops and growing crops. This avoids confusion in the 
terminology used under the Act with respect to the provision of  
  



822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

secured lending for farmers. 
 
It amends the transition provisions. Under the new Act, the 
two-year re-registration rule regarding inventory interests that 
have arisen under an agreement prior to April 1, 1995 no longer 
applies in determining any priority disputes that would 
otherwise be governed under the old Act. This change will 
prevent unnecessary re-registration of these prior interests every 
two years simply to maintain priority. 
 
It expands the definition of lease to include a residential 
tenancy so leases under The Land Titles Act and leases under 
The Residential Tenancies Act can be treated in the same way. 
 
It amends the definition of financing statement to include 
financing statements registered under the old Act that are still 
valid. While this was the policy intent of the original 
provisions, some concern has been raised as to whether this has 
been stated clearly enough in the existing Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, out of an abundance of caution, this last 
amendment with respect to the definition of a financing 
statement is to be made retroactive in effect to April 1, 1995, 
the proclamation date of the original Bill. This is a necessary 
step to avoid unintended results in the transition between 
financing statements registered under the old Act and security 
agreements completed under the new Act on the basis of those 
financing statements. Again, while no specific problems have 
yet arisen with respect to this issue, it is appropriate that this 
step be taken to provide certainty. 
 
Saskatchewan has, since 1978, been viewed as a leader in the 
development and implementation of personal property security 
legislation. These technical amendments ensure that the benefits 
of certainty and simplicity in the thousands of commercial 
transactions conducted under this legislation will continue 
unhindered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Personal Property Security Act, 1993 and to make a 
consequential amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to be able to address this Bill today. We are still 
consulting with several interest groups on the proposed 
amendments, so today I would like to touch on our 
interpretation of the Bill at this time and what it means to 
people of our province. 
 
As I understand, the current Personal Property Security Act is 
unclear, particularly in terms of definitions and terminology. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not even talking about standard legalese 
here. Even lawyers we have talked to admit the wording is 
unclear, and lawyers are supposedly trained to interpret legal 
mumbo-jumbo. So obviously something should be done to 
clarify the wording and to ensure the Act is interpreted 
properly. 
 
On the surface at least, the proposed amendment provides a  

clear and more consistent meaning of the provisions. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that most of the confusion with The Personal 
Property Security Act relates to the special interest of crops. I 
know it also deals with trees, animals, minerals, and other 
chattel, but to a large extent the proposed amendments address 
confusion over crops. And in looking back at the original Act I 
can see where the confusion started. 
 
This Bill will attempt to distinguish between crops which are 
attached to land and products . . . production of crops. As it 
stands now, the generic use of the word crops is causing 
confusion and making the laws difficult to interpret. By 
distinguishing between the land and the produce it should be 
easier to determine time limits on security interests. 
 
This Bill will also help the courts decide when a security 
interest has priority, and more importantly, it clearly outlines 
the situations where the security interest is subordinate. This 
Bill also clarifies lease arrangements under The Land Titles 
Act. The proposed amendment confirms that rentals arising 
from residential tenancies are subject to the lease arrangements 
under The Land Titles Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to sum up some of the amendments to 
Bill 17 as we see it. It’s a technical Bill and I can’t pretend to 
fully understand the in’s and out’s of it. 
 
But as elected representatives, we must determine how these 
changes will affect the everyday lives of people in our 
constituencies. We are a rural caucus, Mr. Speaker, and any 
laws dealing with crops and land could have a significant 
impact on many of our constituents. 
 
If this Bill is truly nothing more than clarification of words, 
then we will not object to the changes. And if the amendments 
will help our constituents, we will fully support the changes. 
 
But as it stands right now, we have not had enough input from 
the people that this will affect. We would like more time to look 
at the intricacies of this Bill before any decision is made. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we ask the Assembly to adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 51  An Act to amend 
The Film and Video Classification Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Film and Video Classification Amendment Act, 
1996. 
 
This Bill is intended to position Saskatchewan to be able to 
fully explore other opportunities for the delivery of film and 
video classification services. 
 
Provinces are looking at ways to cooperate, reduce 
expenditures, and provide a better public service. They are also 
looking to reduce the regulatory burden on business, and the 
area of classifying films and videos provides such an  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

opportunity. 
 
Film classification boards were established in most provinces 
many years ago. Films were classified based on community 
standards, which could vary between jurisdictions. In actual fact 
there are few differences between provinces in terms of 
classifications assigned to films, even though the names given 
to classifications may vary. A national film and video 
classification system would be more effective in this 
environment. 
 
Common classification categories under a national system 
would also facilitate the development of a national public 
information program. This would enable consumers to make 
more informed choices about the films and videos they want to 
review. 
 
In an effort to facilitate the development of such a system, we 
have been engaged in discussions with other provinces and the 
film and video industry. Mr. Speaker, this industry has 
advocated for a national classification system for some time and 
is very supportive of our efforts in this direction. 
 
Although the current Act provides for the establishment of joint 
classification boards, the systems now being developed may not 
be joint boards as envisioned by the Act. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, the Act must be amended to give us more options. We 
may have different arrangements for the classification of 
various products. Amendments will enable Saskatchewan to 
adopt classification decisions made elsewhere or to delegate 
this function to another classification body. 
 
Currently the Act does not provide for this range of options. At 
present, the Saskatchewan board cannot refuse to approve a film 
for classification based on the decision of another classification 
board without actually viewing the film. This requirement does 
not allow joint boards or delegated classification systems to 
operate efficiently. The amendments I am introducing will 
address this problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan will retain responsibility for 
classification appeals. The legislation’s appeal provisions will 
be expanded to include appeal of administrative decisions such 
as registration. In addition, amendments are being made to 
better protect the rights of the owner of a film that has been 
seized under the Act where no charges have been laid or the 
person is found not to be in violation of the Act. In either of 
these situations, the film will be returned to the owner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide the flexibility for 
Saskatchewan to move forward to a more effective and efficient 
system of film and video classification. It also accommodates 
the move to the goal of a national system of classification. This 
will be an improvement for the general public as well as the 
film and video industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Film and Video Classification Act. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend many 
people went to the movies or watched rentals at home. Movies  

carry us back to days long past or movies transport us forward 
to worlds beyond our imaginations. 
 
We may even see a reflection of ourselves on the big or the 
little screen. Some are Academy quality; others have few 
redeeming qualities. Regardless, the influence on all of us by 
the film industry cannot be denied. 
 
Until now, films have all fallen under the scrutiny of the 
Saskatchewan Film Classification Board. However, with the 
amendments recommended to the Act by the Justice 
department, they would seem to be farming out the 
responsibility for policing the film industry to an authority 
outside of our province. 
 
Under these amendments, the board may refuse to classify a 
film or edit a film based on the decision of a governing body 
with no particular connection within Saskatchewan. The board 
need not view the film to refuse to classify it or to determine 
what classification it may be given. The board need not view 
the film to decide how it should be edited. 
 
In this Bill, even authority over advertising standards is given 
over to some outside body. These amendments give 
Saskatchewan the ability to join joint classification boards. As a 
result, it will not be the Saskatchewan Film Classification 
Board that will either approve or classify the film for 
distribution. 
 
The Bill also expands on the requirements for registration with 
the board, and the board’s ability to refuse to accept an 
application. 
 
The Bill, if amended, will allow the board to charge a 
registration fee. If the board is going to forfeit its responsibility 
to oversee the film industry in Saskatchewan, why on earth 
should they have the right to charge a fee, to refuse registration, 
or to seize a film? 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time there are more questions than answers 
on this Bill and therefore I must request that debate on this Bill 
be adjourned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1445) 

Bill No. 57  An Act to repeal 
The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move the 
second reading of The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding 
Repeal Act. This Bill repeals The Police Pension (Saskatoon) 
Funding Act at the request of the pension plan members and the 
city of Saskatoon Board of Police Commissioners. This will 
allow the provisions of The Pension Benefits Act, 1992 to 
govern this plan in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this issue arose when the Saskatoon police 
pension plan board of trustees recently requested amendments  
  



824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

to the legislation for their plan with respect to employee and 
employer contributions. In examining that request, officials in 
the Department of Justice recognized that both the current 
provisions of their legislation and the requested changes could 
be addressed in The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 
 
When The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act was 
introduced, I am advised that the flexibility they sought with 
respect to planned payments was not possible under the general 
pension benefits legislation of the day. In discussions between 
the Superintendent of Pensions and the plan board members, it 
became apparent that separate legislation for their plan was no 
longer required as The Pension Benefits Act, 1992, is now able 
to accommodate their needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon police pension plan will remain 
subject to the supervision of the Superintendent of Pensions 
upon repeal of this legislation. It is simply no longer necessary 
or appropriate that the pension plan be administered through 
legislation other than The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. This 
repeal legislation is supported by the board of trustees for the 
Saskatoon police pension plan, the city of Saskatoon Board of 
Police Commissioners, the Saskatoon City Police Association, 
as well as by the Superintendent of Pensions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to repeal The 
Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously this Bill, 
The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Repeal Act, is a fairly 
straightforward piece of legislation. In fact it contains just three 
very short clauses. So I won’t take much of the members’ time 
today by talking at length about Bill 57. 
 
I guess my caucus chose me to speak on this particular piece of 
legislation because they figured I had the most experience with 
police pensions. And of course, the Premier was very kind 
enough to point this out a couple of weeks back in this House. 
 
As a matter of fact, some policemen are prompted in different 
ways to leave the force that they serve. In my case, I recall, as 
my young daughter was growing up, one day I overheard her 
talking to a friend and her friend asked her, what does your 
daddy do. And she said, nothing; he’s a policeman. So I 
considered at that time that perhaps I should request a pension. 
 
Nevertheless, without wanting to sound self-serving here, the 
pensions received by all police officers, be they in municipal 
services or the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, are probably 
the most deserved in our country. And governments should take 
great care in ensuring these pension funds are in the strongest 
position possible for those men and women who served their 
communities by protecting the public. 
 
But I would remind him once again however, that unlike his 
political colleagues who have gone on to bigger rewards, and 
unlike the huge golden handshakes awaiting the Premier when 
he is retired by the voters in three or four years, policemen do 
not always receive their full pension right after they leave their 
job. 
 

While I usually breathe a heavy sigh of relief when the Bills 
I’m assigned to speak to are brief and to the point, perhaps this 
one is a little too brief and to the point. I understand the issue 
here is very straightforward but I think we will be asking for 
some minor clarifications in committee. It’s certainly not to 
delay this Bill, since it appears to be a basic housekeeping 
matter, but just to get some needed clarification on the current 
pension plan and the current legislation. 
 
The law that will be repealed by Bill 57, I understand, was 
passed by this House to give Saskatoon policemen more 
flexibility in dealing with their pension plan in a method they’d 
prefer. Since this was done, however, I understand The Pension 
Benefits Act passed by this House back in 1992 took care in 
addressing the issues that caused this inflexibility within the 
Saskatoon police pension plan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, without wanting to hold up the proceedings 
of this House unnecessarily, our caucus is prepared to pass Bill 
57 on to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
and to make a consequential amendment 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Land Titles Amendment Act, 1996. There are a 
number of amendments proposed in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. All 
of them will assist in streamlining the land titles system and 
making it more accessible to Saskatchewan people. 
 
In the current Act, Indian bands must establish a private 
corporation to purchase land. Individual bands cannot purchase 
land in the band name. Bands have told us that the current 
process is too expensive and too cumbersome. They have asked 
us to change this provision and we have done that with this Act. 
Indian bands under the federal Indian Act will be able to buy 
and register land using the formally recognized band name. 
 
Including Indian bands as part of the land titles and registration 
system will not affect the status of existing reserve lands. Land 
registered by Indian bands in their name will not acquire 
reserve status. It will be treated the same as land registered by 
individuals and corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act also amends the process for lapsing 
caveats against land. In Saskatchewan, individuals who claim 
an interest in land can register caveats in the land titles system 
against that land. By registering the caveat, the individual 
effectively makes all dealing with the land, including a transfer, 
subject to the claim in the caveat. 
 
Owners or people with an interest in the land who want to 
remove these claims use a procedure called lapsing a caveat. 
Under the present Act, the onus is on the person seeking to 
lapse the caveat to provide proper notification to the caveator of 
an intent to lapse the caveat. The Land Titles Office must be 
provided with evidence that the proper procedure was followed. 
Requiring individuals to follow strict and unfamiliar procedures  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

is often inefficient and frustrating for Land Titles staff and 
clients. 
 
Today’s Bill eliminates these problems by amending the 
existing lapsing procedure. Under this legislation, parties will 
be required to advise the registrar of their request to lapse a 
caveat. The Land Titles Office will then assume responsibility 
for notifying caveat holders. This will reduce errors 
encountered by the offices as well as streamline the process and 
provide more information for the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the remaining administrative amendments 
proposed in this Act will further simplify and streamline the 
land titles system. The Act will be amended to allow land titles 
offices to accept notarial copies of powers of attorney and death 
certificates. It will also allow them to make and accept certified 
copies of death certificates. These changes will be particularly 
welcomed by the public and will remove some practical 
problems associated with filing original documents. 
 
We are proposing removing land titles forms from the actual 
Act and placing them in the regulations, where they can be 
easily amended. The land titles system is actively pursuing 
opportunities to improve and streamline service. This will allow 
for greater flexibility to modify forms and meet the changing 
needs of the land titles system and its users. 
 
We are also making amendments to eliminate the establishment 
of qualifications for registrars and deputy registrars in the Act. 
The current provisions setting out qualifications are unique and 
outdated. They require that these officers be lawyers or have 
served a minimum amount of time within the land titles system. 
Removal of the qualifications from the Act is consistent with 
modern management practices and will allow us to set 
qualifications for our employees that meet the changing needs 
of the system. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we are also proposing minor technical 
changes to correct references to other federal and provincial 
legislation in the current Act. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 
1996 will permit Indian bands to own land in their own name, 
modify the caveat lapsing procedure, allow land titles offices to 
accept and retain copies rather than originals of certain 
documents, remove land titles forms from the Act, and provide 
for new forms in the regulations; delete the qualifications for 
registrars and deputy registrars; and correct references to 
provincial and federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to Amend the 
Land Titles Act. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not to be one 
who’s accused of always being critical of the members 
opposite, I would like to point out that some of the amendments 
that are outlined in The Land Titles Amendment Act are long 
overdue. Anyone who’s had to get items processed through 
Land Titles knows how confusing and time-consuming it can 
be. 
 

Of course these changes will not make land titles processing 
perfect, but it should help simplify these details somewhat. We 
have heard complaints from many people about how frustrating 
the land titles process can be. People who do not have a legal 
background are often bogged down and discouraged by the 
multi-layers of paperwork required to get some land titles items 
processed. 
 
One of the positive changes being made with this new Act 
affects the removal of caveats. Caveats do serve a useful 
purpose for people with claims against property, but under the 
present land titles system the person wanting to lift the caveat 
on property is also responsible for notifying the caveator. So I 
do think that’s positive that there’s changes being made. 
 
If the parties involved do not have a legal background, this 
aspect of the land titles system can be extremely confusing and 
the end result is often frustration on behalf of the parties 
involved and on behalf of the staff. We hope this change to the 
Act will cut down on the number of mistakes made in 
processing items. 
 
(1500) 
 
These amendments should rectify some other problem areas in 
the land titles system including the current requirement for 
original documents. People making land titles applications are 
forced to submit original documents under current legislation. 
Sometimes lay people, and yes, even lawyers do at times have 
problems locating original documents and it can be 
time-consuming. 
 
The amendments proposed in this Bill should correct this 
problem by allowing the registrars to accept some true copies of 
some documents. 
 
The current Land Titles Act also contains some detailed 
qualifications for registrars and deputy registrars. But the 
amendments proposed in this Act will remove those 
qualifications, and this does leave us some cause for concern. 
Some of the other changes outlined in this Bill should update 
the land titles process. 
 
The current Land Titles Act makes references to some other 
government laws that no longer exist or which now have new 
titles. The changes should eliminate some confusion over titles 
of different legislation. 
 
Bill 58 would also significantly change the way the Indian 
bands buy land. In the present land titles system, the Indian 
bands must be registered as a corporation in order to buy the 
land. Well the changes will permit the bands to skip this step 
and buy land directly, and while we support the intent behind 
this amendment, we do have a few concerns about potential 
outcome of these changes as well. 
 
It’s for this reason and some of the other problems that I 
discussed that we would like more time to review the Bill. 
Therefore at this time we wish to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
  



826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13  An Act to amend 
The Department of Social Services Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to please introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today is 
Mr. Neil Yeates, associate deputy minister; Phil Walsh, 
executive director of income security branch; and Richard 
Hazel, executive director of family and youth. They’ll be here 
for the three Bills that we’re dealing with. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I at this point would just 
like to ask the minister, what is the cited purpose for this 
amendment? Like, why did you deem the amendment was 
needed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the amendment, as I indicated 
in the second reading speech, will be to provide consistency 
between The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act and The Department of Social Services Act. This will 
enable the department staff to use the provisions of the freedom 
of information Act to release some information on some clients 
in some circumstances. 
 
And I want to again assure members of the House this will in no 
way — no way — compromise the confidentiality provisions 
which are so important when we’re dealing with clients in 
Social Services. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Well I’m not sure if that answers my next question 
here, but I’ll put it to you anyway. What is intended to replace 
the broad confidentiality provision that’s set out in section 18(1) 
 18.1. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Essentially, Mr. Chair, what we will be 
doing in the department is now operating under The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act. That will be the 
framework under which we operate. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Okay. Will this amendment effect any change in 
The Adoption Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the officials remind me that 
both The Adoption Act and The Child and Family Services Act 
are exempted and so there won’t be any effect. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. I was just wondering about that, 
because as the  you know, the repealing of subsection 18(1) 
dealing with secrecy  the words indicate to me that there may 
be some consent given to . . . for free and open access to 
identifying information, and I’m just wondering if that’s the 
case at all. And if it is, of course we would want it to be much  

clearer than it is here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, thank you, member, for that 
concern, and of course we had that same concern in putting this 
amendment forward. I would want to reassure the member that 
no, in terms of adoption or child and family services, they are 
exempt and in fact working under the freedom of information 
Act. We’re now working under a piece of legislation that is 
considerably updated and newer than the old Department of 
Social Services Act, which, I think, was crafted in the 1970s. 
 
So I appreciate your concern and we believe those concerns are 
addressed. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 14  An Act to amend 
The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to make . . . I 
made note that section 10.1 deals with the minister entering into 
an agreement with the Government of Canada to administer the 
benefits to seniors under the Saskatchewan Income Plan. I have 
a question for the minister and the question is: what will it cost 
Saskatchewan taxpayers to turn the system over to the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, what we would hope actually 
as a result of this amendment  and it is actually just this 
technical amendment that needs to be done that prevents us 
from linking with the federal government, to provide these 
benefits together with the federal government — we do expect 
that in working with the federal government we will eventually 
be in fact saving some money, because what we’re doing is in 
fact instead of having two mailings, we’ll be having one 
mailing. 
 
At this point, because we’re in some negotiations with the 
federal government, I can’t give you an exact amount on how 
much that will be. I hope a year from now, having passed this 
and having worked the detail out with the federal government, 
that I’d be able to return to the House and give you a very clear 
answer on how much the administrative savings have been. But 
we do expect savings. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Have you done any sort of projected estimate 
savings, or what the savings might be to the province in the 
long run by turning this system of benefit payments over to the 
federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We have done some preliminary work 
there, Mr. Chair, but I’d hesitate to start with some real 
numbers until we know, until we can enter in. I think we’ve 
been prevented from detailed negotiations because of this little 
glitch in the legislation. Once we can get this cleared up, then I  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

think we can get into some real negotiations. And even during 
that period I think we could have more specific information. 
Today I’m really without specific information. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Okay. Is there a plan in place to distribute 
information to the seniors who will be affected by this program 
change, and if so, who will pay for the information service? 
Will the federal government pay for that or the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think, Mr. Chair, as we approach the 
date of when this would come into effect, we would see it as 
our responsibility to clearly inform the seniors of the province 
of the new format. But I want to re-emphasize again that this 
doesn’t represent any reduction in the programing or the monies 
that will be available to Saskatchewan seniors. It’ll be the same 
money. But we’ll tag with the federal support so they receive 
one cheque instead of two. 
 
And I think my experience, remembering the time when we 
used to receive two bills for various utilities, when we 
combined that there was some appreciation about that. I think 
we can combine this kind of administrative work together with 
the federal government. I think that’ll be appreciated. But as I 
said earlier, we will be certain to notify the seniors and I think 
we’d see that as our responsibility. Again, we’ll partner with the 
federal government. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Is there going to be a reduction in staff in 
Saskatchewan  the people in the government here that are 
carrying out this program right now, will there be less? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we do expect administrative 
savings. However while we’re crafting this new delivery 
mechanism for seniors’ income supplement, we’re also crafting, 
as you know, mechanisms towards a child benefit for our 
province and a working income supplement. And it may in fact 
be the case that some of those people who now are engaged in 
doing some of the work around this program will be shifted in 
their responsibilities to do work around some of the delivery of 
new programs. So we don’t see it as causing a reduction in 
numbers. It may create some change in responsibilities within 
the department. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The other question I have for you is, is there 
going to be some way that the seniors here in Saskatchewan 
will be able to talk to a representative in Saskatchewan, you 
know, a phone number that’s available so that they will be able 
to feel like there’s a contact available to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Absolutely, Mr. Chair, absolutely. We’ll 
continue with our 1-800 number. We’ll continue with all of our 
office services across the province, and of course every MLA 
office is also available to the seniors of our province. This is 
simply a matter of delivering the money in one cheque, but the 
program continues and all the services that are with the program 
and all the access that seniors have to the department and to 
government will continue as today if not improved. 
 
Ms. Draude:  The other question I have then  the 
information that’s gone out, and I guess one of the main reasons  

why the seniors might call you is if they didn’t get a cheque, if 
the amount had changed. Is their file going to be as readily 
available to you then as it is now so that you can answer any 
questions they may have? 
 
(1515) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair. There’ll be no change in 
our ability to access information. As you may know, these . . . 
the seniors income plan now is based on the federal records. So 
it’s simply on the basis of your federal support that this plan 
kicks in, so we’re already linked in that way. This will just 
simplify with one cheque. But all of the . . . certainly all of the 
availability to records and files will be just the same as they are 
today. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m just kind of wondering 
if, in your government’s mind, if there is the savings that will 
come from the federal government providing distribution of the 
cheques, whether the savings from that will be taken and put 
back into seniors’ concerns, programs, in one way or the other 
in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  As the member knows, it’s hard to take a 
dollar here and track it through the process of government. We 
work from a General Revenue Fund and then we work through 
departmental budgets overall. 
 
But we would hope . . . Certainly in this budget it’s been 
demonstrated that we’ve done some re-arranging of funding to 
maintain the funding to programs for seniors and for others that 
we are responsible for in the department. And so it would 
certainly be my hope that any administrative savings here 
would remain to be utilized for programing within the 
department. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, how many people are affected 
by this program in terms of seniors? Do all seniors receive this 
supplement? And . . .what are we looking . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I don’t have the exact 
number, but it’s about 20,000 seniors across the province will 
be in receipt of the Saskatchewan Income Plan  about 20,000. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Twenty thousand out of what group? Like is 
this a 10th? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Twenty thousand of about 120,000 
seniors province wide. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just one 
question, or a couple, rather. The move here is specifically just 
to save administration dollars. The 20,000 that you’ve spoken 
about will not see in any way, shape, or form a decrease of their 
annual allocation as a result of this new system coming in place. 
Can you categorically say no to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I will categorically say, Mr. Chair  and 
it’s a good question  categorically say there will be no change 
in the level of benefits. This is simply the mechanism by which 
the benefit is delivered. 
  



828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

Mr. Belanger:  Has there been any concerns expressed or 
any consultations undertaken with any of the seniors’ groups in 
relation to this change in the fact that you’re only getting one 
cheque? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  There has not been, Mr. Chair, formal 
consultations, that I could document a meeting established to 
discuss this issue. But I certainly have raised this issue with 
seniors’ groups in my quiet conversations with them and 
they’ve indicated to me that if it produces administrative 
efficiencies, they’re very happy to support it. 
 
I’ve also had an informal conversation with the federal minister 
and there seems to be a welcoming support at the federal level 
to do this in partnership. So I think, overall, I’ve not found 
anyone who resists the notion. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Would you consider the option of discussing, 
either through an interpreter or through an interview or through 
some other means of communications, with people in the 
northern part of Saskatchewan that may have difficulty reading 
and writing and understanding English? 
 
As you’re probably aware, we do have a number of elders in 
northern Saskatchewan, and of the 20,000 you mention, I 
imagine that a huge number of them are from northern 
Saskatchewan, and they live on limited income, and their 
English isn’t all that great. Are you undertaking any special 
projects or any special efforts to educate them in this regard 
because many of them do not understand English? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I very much appreciate the 
member’s suggestion. At this point, we’re still early; like, the 
program change will not occur for some time because of the 
need to do this legislation and then work the details with the 
federal government. But I very much appreciate the member’s 
suggestion  that byway of communication  particularly 
people in the North or others who may have language barrier or 
even some literacy questions. 
 
I’m also reminded by many of the seniors that when we do 
provide information to seniors that we should do it in a print 
style with a print big enough that you can read. That happens 
even for some of us who are not getting to be senior; we should 
have that. 
 
But I really . . . I do appreciate the member’s suggestion. I think 
we’ll want to perhaps chat with him further about the most 
effective ways, and it may be through the use of translators in 
some communities or printed materials in the appropriate 
languages. At present, we do not have a plan in place, but I 
think, particularly based on what you’ve raised today, we’ll be 
sure to give that consideration as we move towards the program 
change. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  The other question I have is in relation to  
again going back to the northern communities  especially the 
far northern communities at Camsell Portage, Uranium City, 
Stony Rapids, Fond-du-Lac, Black Lake, Wollaston post; the 
costs are quite high in terms of food prices and the likes. Is 
there any special provisions in this whole system to  

accommodate for some of those isolation factors, in terms of 
cost, when considering the application and the income of 
elders? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chairman, in regard to the program 
affected by this Bill, the Saskatchewan Income Plan, the answer 
is no. There is no . . . this is a standard benefit across the 
province to elders and seniors. It is based upon the old age 
pension and the GIS (guaranteed income supplement) 
supplement from the federal government. If a senior is in 
receipt of those payments, then the Saskatchewan Income Plan 
will automatically kick in. But there is no differentiation in the 
Saskatchewan Income Plan to our geography or cost of living. It 
is a standard benefit, province-wide. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Do you feel that perhaps there should be 
some consideration, especially the fact that there is some food 
price differences, and I stress, huge differences? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The issue of the cost of living, and 
therefore an individual’s needs to maintain basic lifestyle, 
we try and deal with through our social assistance program, 
through the SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) program. 
And in that program there is the northern . . . through that 
program there is the northern food allowance. In this 
program, which is the Saskatchewan Income Plan, it is a flat 
benefit, standard benefit, provided to seniors across the 
province. We’re trying to deal with those issues that you 
raise, important issues, through the other programing. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Okay, one last question. Through some 
glitch in the system, that perhaps there was an overpayment 
of some sort, you know, through your branch, how will you 
go about collecting the overpayment from some of these 
elders? If there was a glitch in the system, how would you 
usually collect overpayments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, my officials tell me that it 
would be extremely rare that there would be a situation of an 
overpayment or an inappropriate payment with the 
Saskatchewan Income Plan, with the SIP benefit. You 
understand that the SIP benefit is paid when a senior in our 
province qualifies for both the old age assistance and the 
guaranteed income supplement from the federal government. 
 
When one has done the application paperwork to receive the 
guaranteed income supplement, then the Saskatchewan Income 
Plan just kicks in automatically. So the only circumstances we 
can think of where the plan would be paying out inappropriately 
is perhaps if someone has died and there has not been 
notification through the federal process. There may be that 
circumstance. Or I guess if a senior’s income level dramatically 
changed and they no longer qualified for the GIS and didn’t 
report that. But our officials here today think that would be an 
extremely rare situation. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  You mentioned savings in reference to, you 
know, this new system. And I would suggest that perhaps some 
of the savings that you do generate as a result of this new 
system being put in place, that you take into consideration the 
special circumstances of the northern elderly people. Many of  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

them are living in substandard houses. Housing is a major 
problem. High food prices are also another major problem. 
 
And because we have a lack of housing, many of the seniors in 
northern Saskatchewan automatically assume the 
responsibilities of some of their grandchildren. They raise many 
of their grandchildren. They live in extended families. So really 
they’re raising families, in many cases, living in substandard 
houses, with very low income. 
 
So would your department be in a particular position to look at 
the high costs in the North; the poor housing associated with the 
elders; the fact that they raise a lot of their grandchildren; in 
relation to the allocation to some of these potential savings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think the member draws to 
our attention that the issues in the North and affecting the 
income level and lifestyles of people living in the North are not 
the purview indeed of one department, but many departments of 
government and in fact our community generally. 
 
He is, I think, very accurate when he says some of the most 
significant issues perhaps are housing issues in the North. There 
are related health issues. There is the cost of food in the North 
and the geography. 
 
I think it is important to note, Mr. Chair, that it is precisely for 
this reason that our government has now created a ministry to 
deal with northern issues in whole, and I’ll be working certainly 
with that minister and with other ministers affected to look at 
the broad, all of the broad, issues that we need to face. 
 
To his very specific question, those savings, which will not be 
huge amounts of dollars as a result of this small change, but any 
saving that we can achieve on the administration side I’m 
anxious that we achieve, because hopefully then we can turn 
that dollar into a programing dollar that will serve the needs of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 15  An Act to amend 
The Child and Family Services Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chairman, I fully 
recognize the purpose of this amendment. The purpose is to 
provide adequate legal protection for people who report their 
honest and reasonable belief that a child is in need of 
protection, and I support that purpose. The concern I have with 
this Bill is whether clause 2 is the best way to provide that 
protection. 
 
I have a particular concern with clause 2 as I said, sub-clause 
(3.3). That’s the sub-clause which provides that if an 
application for leave to commence an action to prove a false  

allegation of child abuse fails, then the court may award court’s 
costs against the applicant. 
 
That may be a good rule, but it provides for only one set of 
circumstances. If the application for leave to commence the 
action is successful, then I think there should be an equivalent 
provision stating that the court may award costs in favour of the 
applicant and against the respondent. 
 
This could be done either at the close of the application or at the 
close of the action. I will be moving an amendment to clause 2 
(3.3) for that purpose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m wondering if the member 
could clarify for us. Does she intend to move that amendment 
and . . . I’m sorry, I didn’t quite understand the intent of her 
amendment. We’re certainly willing to look at it, but if she 
could perhaps give us a little more of her intention with the 
amendment. 
 
Ms. Julé:  I guess in looking at clause 2, Mr. Chairman, as I 
indicated in my remarks concerning the general intent of the 
Bill, I wish to move an amendment to sub-clause 3.3 of clause 2 
of this Bill. I have provided the Clerk with six signed copies of 
the amendment that I wish to propose, and I would ask that you 
distribute the copies of my amendment to the members of this 
committee so that they can follow along with my proposal. 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, perhaps with the member’s 
indulgence, what we might do by way of proceeding, if we 
could take some time to give some study to the member’s 
amendment. We’re certainly not rejecting it out of hand. If we 
could take some time  and I understand it’s the opposition’s 
desire that we should come back to this Bill on a future day in 
any event. If perhaps then we could just adjourn discussion 
today, we’ll have the officials take some time with the 
amendment and then we can come back to it after having given 
it some thought. 
 
The Chair:  I want to remind the committee that the member 
from Humboldt has not moved the amendment yet. She has 
simply supplied the amendment for discussion and so forth. So 
it has not been moved yet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Perhaps by way of proceeding, I believe 
the member from Moosomin may have some questions about 
the Bill and we could maybe work with those questions, and 
then the member from Humboldt may wish to move the 
amendment, and then we can adjourn to a future date. 
 
The Chair:  Yes, that’s agreeable. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, as you 
recall yesterday we had a bit of a debate in the Assembly on a 
question that I had raised, and I mentioned the fact that children 
are the most vulnerable in our society and protecting them 
should be a priority of all governments and all adults. In fact 
your government’s final report to the Government of 
Saskatchewan regarding new century  MAKING CHOICES  
  



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

survey  child protection is the number three priority, falling 
only behind health services and education. In fact this happens 
to rank above job creation in the survey that you had conducted. 
And so we would support any measures that you would bring 
forward to protect Saskatchewan children from neglect and 
abuse. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, you stated in your second reading 
speech that every person who has reasonable grounds to believe 
a person, or that a child is in need of protection, must report this 
to a police officer or to a child protection worker  and I’m 
going from Hansard. I’m wondering, does this mean, Mr. 
Minister, if a person wilfully does not report such suspected 
abuse that action could be taken against them? What 
specifically were you talking about when you made your second 
. . . or gave your second reading speech in that regard? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, yes, every citizen of our 
province, adult citizen of our province, has obligation under 
law, if they are aware of an abusive situation, to report that 
situation. That is the law of our province. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So what you’re basically saying, Mr. Minister, if 
I was  and let me phrase this  if I suspected that maybe 
there was an abusive situation, but I wasn’t totally sure and I 
didn’t report it, and then maybe down the road something came 
about, I could be legally held responsible for having not 
reported that. Because I guess what I’m trying to say is, if 
someone suspects something but they don’t really have the 
evidence to substantiate it, are they going to be held 
accountable later on? 
 
I think before anyone would go to any person and suggest that 
maybe there’s a wrongdoing, they should have some legitimate 
information. Because I don’t think, Mr. Minister, we want to be 
putting innocent individuals at risk over something they may 
have suspected which down the road may actually have taken 
place, but they weren’t aware of at the time. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the west 
gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 52 cadets, chaperons, 
commanding officers Captain Chris LaClare, Lieutenant Anne 
Pidwerbeski, and Lieutenant Michael Curtis. And I would like 
the Assembly to please make them welcome. We’ll be meeting 
afterwards in room 218. I look forward to meeting with you all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d like leave to as well welcome the 
guests, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d like to welcome the cadets and the 
officers and the chaperons that are here with the 43rd Air Cadet 
Squadron, I believe it is. It’s a great pleasure to have the cadets 
come from time to time and visit the legislature to see how the 
democratic process works in Saskatchewan. As flawed as it 
may be sometimes, it’s still the best system that we have for 
having representation of people within the British parliamentary 
system. 
 
How times have changed. I remember the five years I spent in 
Air Cadets, we were never allowed to go anywhere without 
being in our uniforms. But it’s nice to see you casual today and 
I hope you enjoy your trip here to the legislature and have a safe 
trip back home. I regret I won’t be joining you at 4 o’clock with 
the MLA from Cut Knife-Battleford or Battleford-Cut Knife, I 
have to perform some duties here in the House today, but I wish 
you all the very best and ask the members to welcome you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 15 
(continued) 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, perhaps I can just . . . I can 
share with the member from Moosomin the exact wording of 
the Act and the responsibility to report. It reads, in The Child 
and Family Services Act, section 12 number 1: 
 

Subject to subsections (2) and (3), every person who has 
reasonable grounds to believe that a child is in need of 
protection shall report the information to an officer or 
peace officer. 

 
And so I think the operative words here would be the “person 
who has reasonable grounds to believe”. It would, I think, have 
to be something more than suspicions, but some reasonable 
ground to believe that there was an abusive relationship. If in 
fact those reasonable grounds existed in your mind and you did 
not report, then you could at the end of the day, I think, be 
liable for prosecution. Now I’d also want to make it clear it’s 
certainly rare that such prosecutions have been followed. 
There’s certainly not a . . . there’s certainly not prosecutions 
being sought regularly on this basis. But the way the law stands 
is that if you have reasonable grounds you should — you must 
— report. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. First of all 
welcome to the cadets as well and I trust they had the privilege 
of being at the Centre last night and enjoying that terrific show. 
It was certainly something that was worth participating in. So 
welcome to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Minister, coming back to our question here, I guess the 
concern I have is the fact that I think . . . and I’m not exactly 
sure if I would consider that part of the Act as being clear 
enough. I think if when you talk about reasonable grounds, 
unfortunately while we’re trying to protect children or abused  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

individuals  and there’s no doubt in my mind that we need to 
do everything we can  but at the same time I think we must 
be careful that we’ve got a clear set of guidelines whereby 
individuals don’t just use this peace of legislation or an abusive 
situation to, if you will, or the ability to create an abusive 
situation or create the argument for it, just to get back at some 
individual that they may be angry at for a situation that may 
have evolved, whether it was a parent reprimanding a child for 
mistakes they had made or for disobedience, or even in a 
situation in schools where teachers face instances where 
students can come back at them and make accusations that may 
not be totally true. 
 
But unfortunately it seems that sometimes we jump to 
conclusions before we take the appropriate action to make sure 
that we’re really following up on it. 
 
And I want to just make sure that we’ve got at least a clear 
understanding of what it really means so that we don’t put 
people in the situation where they are forced to defend their 
innocence because of overzealous social workers, or even 
policemen trying to implement what they believe is an 
appropriate law. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think, Mr. Chair, it will be also helpful 
when we look at The Child and Family Services Act, under the 
section of child protection. When we talk about a child who is 
in need of protection, we’re here certainly not talking about 
frivolous issues, but just for instance: 
 

A child is in need of protection where: 
 
(a) as a result of action or omission by the child’s parent: 
 

(i) the child has suffered or is likely to suffer physical 
harm; 
 
(ii) (if) the child has suffered or is likely to suffer a 
serious impairment of mental or emotional functioning; 

 
And on and on. These are like various serious circumstances. 
 
Now I accept the member’s point that there is a certain risk 
here. However I think if we are going to err on any side of this 
delicate equation, we should err always on the side of safety for 
the child. 
 
The matter of defining reasonable grounds, of course, is a 
matter that would be determined and defined within the court 
setting. From my point of view, I think those words, reasonable 
grounds, are about as precise as we could find in the English 
language to describe what we hope to be the reality. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, what actions would be taken 
by let’s say a social worker, and what provisions have you 
brought forward or instilled in the Bill? If an accusation is made 
by an individual, and whether it’s through a social worker or 
even through a policeman, whereby they would do some 
background research before they would even, if you will, step 
in and say lay charge, so that we aren’t indeed bringing people 
before the courts. 

And the reason I say that, Mr. Minister . . . and you mentioned 
about the fact that maybe it were better to err on the part of 
caution, and to charge a person, and then go through the court 
process. The facts are, if a person is charged, if it comes into the 
court system, and at the end of the day if that person is found 
totally innocent, that person has still been smeared by society 
simply because of the court process and because of a charge 
being laid. And there is no way for that individual to indeed 
show beyond a shadow of a doubt that they were innocent of 
the charge being laid. 
 
So what I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is while we need to work to 
find ways of protecting children and abused, I guess, spouses  
I’ll use the word because it may be one or the other  we need 
to be careful that as well we’re not maliciously charging people. 
And that’s the area I think we need to make sure that we’re 
careful of, that we are indeed protecting the innocent amongst 
us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to say to the 
member, absolutely. And he should be reassured that before a 
charge is ever laid, there is a long period and a thorough period 
of investigation. 
 
And perhaps just for the information of the member, my 
officials tell me that, for instance here in the Regina region on a 
monthly basis, there may well be between 6 and 700 phone 
calls, reports. Of those 6 and 700, after initial assessment, 
perhaps only 10 per cent of them are deemed to be appropriate 
and call for further investigation. Of the 10 per cent that will be 
further investigated, there will be a long process of working 
with families and working with the children before any charges 
would be laid. 
 
And so it is a very, very careful process. And part of that careful 
process is in fact to ensure that any malicious reporting is 
caught real early. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Toth:  I thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
don’t get me wrong. I am certainly in support of anything 
whereby a child or anyone who is in an abusive situation is . . . 
that we offer protection, at the same time making sure that we 
do not falsely accuse individuals and then force them into an 
element where they’re forced to then pay for and cover the costs 
of proving their innocence. 
 
And in our system today, unfortunately I think so many people 
get caught in a situation where I think the law has come to the 
point that it’s easier to lay a charge and force a person to prove 
their innocence rather than to make sure that the evidence is 
there to show that a person has been guilty. 
 
So we need to be careful on that side while at the same time 
protecting a situation where there is an abuse because . . . And I 
guess when you look at it, the one thing I would also ask, when 
you’re reviewing a situation where an accusation has been 
brought forward or a suggestion has been brought forward, 
while I’m not saying we should remove people from the home 
or just walk in and, say, physically remove a person, what steps  
  



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

are taken, while you’re reviewing a report, what steps are taken 
to make sure that indeed there is protection, if it appears that 
this suggestion is legitimate, to make sure that that person is 
protected before you make any final charges or any real charges 
against a suspect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to assure the 
member that the process is thorough, that if there is a reported 
incident of abuse there will be an investigation, and through that 
process of investigation it will be determined if there is in fact a 
child protection issue here that needs to be further pursued. If 
that is determined, then there is sincere efforts to work with the 
family, work with the care-givers, to resolve the circumstances. 
And in many cases those circumstances can be resolved and the 
family can be held intact if it safe to do so. 
 
The department will only access the courts if it cannot 
absolutely ensure the safety of the child and cannot find 
resolution of that safety issue by any other means. So there is a 
very careful and relatively long process. 
 
I’m not sure I would accept the member’s observation that we 
may have gone too far to the other extreme. I think we’re trying 
to achieve a balance and I think there is a pretty fair balance in 
guaranteeing the responsibility that we have to protect children 
against the concern, that is appropriate, that there may be 
malicious reporting. 
 
To come back to the very focus of this Bill, it will in fact 
strengthen the protection of those who do report so that any 
action taken against them would only be taken after a decision 
by the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
So we are, I would argue, attempting to find that appropriate 
balance. But again, I think from my point of view, if we have to 
err on any side of this delicate balance, it would be to err on the 
side of protection of children. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, you must admit that some of the 
questions and concerns I’m raising have evolved back and go 
back to some direct areas where I’ve been called because of the 
fact that Social Services moving in. In one situation where they 
moved right into a school and removed a child, the child didn’t 
know what was happening. The parents were frantic when the 
bus didn’t stop and their child didn’t get off the bus. And I 
found that very alarming at the time, that there was no contact. 
 
And at the end of the day, I think we were able to resolve it by 
the department itself finally sitting down with the parents and 
kind of working over and going through the . . . This goes back 
four or five years ago. And we didn’t end up . . . it was a 
situation that didn’t end up before the courts, which was 
fortunate. 
 
But I think we need to make sure that there is at least some 
consultation process goes in, and that while we’re protecting 
children that parents are not left in the lurch and all of a sudden 
trying to figure out what has happened to that child if the 
department personnel comes in because of a suggestion from an 
individual that there may be some abuse taking place in the 
home. 

So those are some of the reasons I raise that point, and I’m just 
bringing that to your attention as well to make sure that we’re 
indeed in this legislation addressing the real abuse out there and 
at least, at the same, time trying to protect people from the 
malicious attack that may come against them. 
 
What happens to an individual wrongly accused of abuse and 
what recourses do they have, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I guess in any circumstance where we 
are wrongly accused, we all have our access then to the courts 
to pursue. 
 
Mr. Toth:  The unfortunate part, and I come back to that one 
other statement. If a person is wrongly accused and if you end 
up in the courts, Mr. Minister, and it’s splashed across the front 
pages that a person has been accused, even if you’re proven 
innocent at the end of the day  let’s say it’s six or eight 
months down the road before you finally get your day in court 
 there’s so much personal harm that has taken place. And it’s 
hard to rebuild that even if the courts say you’re totally 
innocent, if that can be . . . that factor from how society views 
you can be taken away. 
 
So I think it’s certainly imperative, Mr. Minister, that we indeed 
have strong leading facts so we don’t . . . try and avert any 
wrong accusations. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, have there been many cases in 
this province where individuals have been falsely accused and 
have ended up before the courts to prove their innocence, or do 
you have any numbers in regards to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to remind the 
member, we’re here talking about the family, the child and 
family services. This is the child protection. We’re not here 
talking about the criminal court system; we’re here talking 
about a child and family services and the protection of children, 
so we wouldn’t have, I think, access to numbers of those who 
may have ended up in the courts on false accusations. 
 
I want to restate to the member that before any action is taken 
by the department in terms of an apprehension of a child or 
intervention into a family situation that a very careful 
investigation is conducted and efforts are made as best as 
possible to work with family to find other resolutions before 
any apprehension will occur. 
 
On occasion, there will have to be apprehensions. We are trying 
to ensure that when it reaches that stage that that apprehension 
is done in a very sensitive manner. And I know we’ve had 
discussion about the circumstances you raised earlier that 
occurred some years ago. And we want to avoid those kind of 
situations. 
 
But there will be on occasion those situations where, for the 
protection of the child, an apprehension will have to occur. But 
we’d want it to happen in the most sensitive of all possible 
ways. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, under this Bill in regard to this  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

piece of legislation, what steps or what avenues of protection 
are offered to individuals who would bring forward legitimate 
accusations of neglect or abuse? Because it would seem to me 
that if a . . . I think if a person came with a suggestion or with a 
feeling that there is an abusive situation that may be taking 
place in the neighbourhood, that person probably would not 
want to have their identity revealed. 
 
Is it something along the lines of, like, a TIP (turn in poachers) 
program, or that avenue, that this piece of legislation is offering 
so that people are protected and therefore may feel a little freer 
in coming forward and offering this information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Deputy Chair, when a report is 
provided to the department, if the reporter wishes to remain 
anonymous, we respect that and we don’t make those names 
public. 
 
And I also would remind the member that it’s very, very rarely 
that any of the issues that are dealt through The Child and 
Family Services Act, and the court hearings there, become the 
subject of any media coverage. It’s only in the rarest of 
circumstances that would occur. But in terms of reporting, if 
confidentiality is desired, and anonymity, we respect that. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, one final question at this point. 
How are other provinces dealing with similar pieces of 
legislation? Are there provinces that have similar legislation 
before them and is the legislation that we have here today 
similar to what other jurisdictions have followed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think each province will 
have its own provisions to protect those people who report. We 
are here, through this small amendment, endeavouring to 
strengthen the provisions of protection that we have in 
Saskatchewan for those who will report abusive situations. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, are you saying, Mr. Minister, that 
you’re not aware of what other provinces have done in regards 
to this specific piece of legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I don’t have here the statutes 
of the 10 provinces and two territories of Canada. Each 
province will have its own Act and wording within that Act to 
protect those who will report abuse. 
 
What we’re trying to do is add one small but important change 
to this Act to further strengthen the protection of those who 
report. Each province will have their own protections. There’s 
no doubt about that. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was working on some 
papers here as you were talking to the member from Moosomin, 
Mr. Minister, so I would just like to ask you again, if you 
would, what prompted the amendment to this Act in the first 
place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think there will be one, or maybe 
several  not a large a number, but several  specific cases 
which have suggested that we should have this amendment. But 
it’s clearly based, I think, on something much more  

fundamental that I’m sure we agree on and that’s the need to 
have appropriate legislation to protect the children of our 
province. 
 
And we believe that by strengthening the protection of those 
who have cause to report, we are in fact protecting the children 
of our province. That’s the fundamental goal here. Now there 
have been, the department tells me, some cases where this 
would certainly be an appropriate amendment. There are cases, 
of course, which I can’t discuss publicly. 
 
But it’s based on something much more fundamental, and 
that’s, I think, our common goal  to protect the children of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Do you know, Mr. Minister, if there are a number 
of cases before the court where malicious reports have taken 
place and it’s causing a problem? I mean, is that part of why 
this amendment is happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Just to be clear with the member from 
Humboldt, Mr. Chair. No, it’s sort of the opposite here. What 
we’re trying to do is protect those who have made real reports, 
verifiable reports, and not malicious reports. We’re trying to 
protect those who have brought forward real reports of abusive 
situations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I move that we rise, report progress, and 
ask for leave to sit again, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(1600) 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13  An Act to amend 
The Department of Social Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be read 
for the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 14  An Act to amend 
The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be read for 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the Minister to please introduce his 
officials. 
  



834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With us 
today to assist in our deliberations are Mr. Con Hnatiuk, deputy 
minister of Social Services; Mr. Neil Yeates, associate deputy 
minister; Mr. Phil Walsh, executive director of income security 
branch; Mr. Richard Hazel, executive director of family and 
youth; and Mr. Bob Wihlidal, director of budget and 
management branch. 
 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too would like 
to welcome the officials that are here today with the Minister of 
Social Services and I am pleased to have the opportunity to 
discuss with you the focus of the provincial government with 
regards to the direction that it will be taking as we head into the 
21st century. 
 
With an increase in the number of people living in poverty and 
mounting social concerns and serious problems in the North, I 
am pleased to have this chance to discuss the budget for Social 
Services with the minister and his officials that are here with us 
today. 
 
I would like to begin by asking for a brief overview of the 
changes that have been occurring within the Department of 
Social Services over the last year or so. And I would like to ask 
the minister to give a brief explanation of the direction in which 
the department is heading as this government moves through its 
second term in office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I thank the member for her 
question. I don’t want to spend a great deal of time in response 
even though I could, I think, given that opening. Let me say, 
generally, that I know I share with the member and all members 
and, I believe, with the general public of Saskatchewan a deep 
concern for the issues that this department is called upon to 
address. 
 
This department is called upon to address the issues of poverty 
and low income needs across our province  East, West, North 
to South, from our largest urban centres to our smallest 
communities, each with their own set of challenges. 
 
This department is charged with responsibility around many of 
the issues that affect Saskatchewan’s children  those many 
children in our province who are today living in poverty; the 
children in our province who need the protection of the public; 
the children in our province who have found themselves in 
difficulty with the law. This department has the responsibility 
for adoption services across the province. 
 
It is a department very much focused on human service, on 
service to people, and that is the central focus of the Department 
of Social Service  providing services to people and with 
people. 
 
If you ask of new directions, I think I would remind you again 
of the significant new direction that we’ve set out, in terms of 
the delivery of social assistance, in the redesigned paper that 
has been discussed very widely in the province, and those 
discussions will continue through the course of this year and be  

refined into programs which we hope we can begin next year. 
Programs which, we hope, through redesigning the way we 
deliver resources to those in need will in fact assist those in 
need to secure independence. To move individuals who may 
now be dependent on the public purse to a circumstance of 
independence for we believe that that dignity is an important 
dignity. 
 
I personally am motivated towards the redesign of Social 
Services and some of the tasks that our department takes on by 
a number of factors, one of them being the incidence of child 
poverty. That, I believe, is an incident and a circumstance that 
no one of us in this House or in this province can be happy 
with, and that together with our creative abilities, we must find 
ways to improve the lot of Saskatchewan children for we’re not 
only dealing with this generation, but we’re dealing with future 
generations. 
 
And so in terms of new directions of the department and new 
emphasis, clearly the redesign of how we provide to those who 
need, our neighbours in need, is a prime motivation and a prime 
focus. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m going to continue 
our discussion today by asking some questions about some 
more general aspects of the Department of Social Services. 
Now it’s my understanding that the Minister of Social Services 
has the authority to provide money through an order in council 
to any organizations, agencies, etc., which he deems fit to 
receive the funding. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: is the money that is used for 
these kind of grants or contributions through an order in 
council, is that money extracted from within the $524 million 
budget or is it above and beyond the Department of Social 
Services budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, all of the monies that will be 
provided to non-government organizations, community-based 
organizations through granting and programs of the department 
are included in the budgetary number that’s represented in the 
blue book. 
 
So in the 500-plus million dollars, all of the money that’s 
expended by the department is included. All of the grants by 
OC (order in council) must be included in that number. If 
they’re not, then I would have to return to cabinet for special 
warrants. So I have to operate . . . the department must operate 
within that allocated budget amount, and it’s divided for you in 
the blue book. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Just a little more clarification on that, I guess, for 
me. I ask you to bear with me because I’m new at this. I 
understand that anything under $10,000 that you can give a 
grant for as such without an order in council. So is that the 
money  anything under $10,000 that’s included in the $524 
million? Or what about anything over the $10,000? Is that also 
included in that $524 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, every dollar that the 
Department of Social Services expends, or that I am responsible  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

for the expenditure of, is included in the $524 million. I have no 
ability to grant monies beyond those amounts. Within that 
amount we must provide all of the social assistance and all of 
the funding to third parties and otherwise. It must come out of 
that global amount. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How can you determine 
what’s going to be asked of you within the next year, then, in 
order to try to keep those sums within your estimates? How do 
you come up with that? 
 
There might be unforeseen circumstances that you may have to 
deal with that would require you to give out great sums of 
money possibly. And one of those circumstances is the growing 
number of people in poverty and food banks and so on. So how 
can you know exactly how much is going to be asked and how 
can you possibly keep it within that budget estimate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well the member puts her finger right on 
the great challenge of budgeting and providing public services 
and operating government. The member will likely know that 
the budgetary process is not a process that happens over days or 
weeks but happens over many, many months. And I mean, it 
won’t be long before we need to really start planning again for 
next . . . for the following fiscal years’ budget. 
 
When we’re trying to assess the needs, those assessments will 
be done based on historical patterns of utilization and 
programing. They’ll be based on ongoing consultations, regular 
consultations, with the variety of non-governmental 
organizations that provide services. They’re assessed and 
estimated by our network of regional offices around the 
province. All of that input is brought together and we submit to 
the legislature exactly what it is called  the estimate. The 
estimate of what we will require to provide appropriate 
services. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, these estimates will not be based 
on requests. The requests for funding will always exceed our 
ability to meet the requests. So the estimates are not sort of just 
based on what people will request, but on our assessment of 
what we can appropriately provide as best we are able and then 
appropriately allocate it to where we believe the needs will be 
met. 
 
And so it’s not a easy process for any government. It’s a 
long-term process, and it’s a process that we try as best as we 
are able to do, in consultation with actual service providers. 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Okay. Thank you. So in the Estimates you have 
stated what you used in the last fiscal year. And so am I to take 
it then that the total amount of money that you used for issuing 
grants of over $10,000 in the last fiscal year coupled with 
everything else you needed to do within the last fiscal year 
came to 500 and . . . like the amount down there, whatever  
524 million? So that was it? Okay. 
 
I’m not sure if you have this in front of you, Mr. Minister, but I 
was just wondering where the monies were used. I need some  

idea of instances where you used or issued grants of over 
$10,000. What kind of organizations or what kind of needs 
would there be out there for this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there are many who will 
receive funding in excess of $10,000. If I may speak generally 
of the kinds of organizations that would receive large amounts 
of money would be the Family Service Bureau, some of the 
welfare advocacy groups. 
 
An example, which would be well above the $10,000, would be 
the department’s funding of group homes across the province 
through community living. The member will know that at the 
end of the fiscal year when the Public Accounts are published 
every grant provided by the department, every dollar expended 
by government is recorded and to whom it has gone and its 
exact amount. 
 
We’d be pleased to provide . . . we can provide to the member 
the list of funded agencies and the amounts across the province 
if she would be interested. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So you were saying that 
the total amount of money issued by order in council you can’t 
tell me basically today? Like I’m just wondering how much was 
issued in total by order in council last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  It’s hard to separate . . . just to the 
member, it’s a little difficult to separate out orders in council 
from that which we fund through contracts. Like all the orders 
in council are public. I mean the information is publicly . . . But 
if you want totals, I guess we’d have to do the math. We can 
give you a total. Perhaps we can do it in a matter of minutes 
here  not in minutes, the deputy tells me, not in minutes. It 
will take until tomorrow. 
 
If maybe in our next estimate, or I can provide it in written 
form, the exact total of amount. But it will be very close, if you 
look to the Estimates book, it will be very close to the amount 
that was budgeted. We can give you to the penny, but it will be 
close. 
 
Now some of the monies are expended through orders in 
council. But the order in council, on the vast majority of cases, 
is a planned budgetary expense. We plan what we intend to do. 
Some of them will be done through order in council. Some of 
the expenditures are through contractual arrangements that 
we’ve made. So not all of the third-party funding goes through 
order in council. Some goes through contractual arrangement. 
But we can certainly give you a precise total of how much was 
spent in the last fiscal year. It will be relatively close to the 
number you see in the Estimates book. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would be very pleased 
if I could get that written down for me and presented to me. 
Within the next few days would be fine. And I appreciate your 
doing that. Thank you. 
 
I just have some more general questions. Where in this budget 
is the money to meet your government’s sort of promise to 
eliminate child poverty? And I know that’s a broad question,  
  



836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

but I don’t see a set-out program or sum of money to be 
allocated directly to the elimination of child poverty in our 
province. Can you sort of point out where that money will be 
coming from and how it will be used? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think the member would want to look 
not only at the budget of Social Services but across government 
to see how we together, hopefully, can begin to deal with child 
poverty in our province. You can almost take the entire budget 
of Social Services, almost its entire budget, and relate it in one 
way or another to poverty issues, although not entirely. But 
certainly all of the monies that we expend through the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan are monies directed to low 
income, poor people in our province. 
 
But the notion of addressing child poverty is not just something 
that will be done through income supports, although those are 
very important  not to deny that. And as we look towards 
creating a Saskatchewan child benefit, you will see, hopefully 
in the next estimate layout, that reflected as a specific, targeted 
benefit for children. 
 
But to deal with child poverty, we would also want to look 
across the piece. Much of the work that’s being done through 
the Department of Health, for instance, in health care and 
preventative health care, is related to poverty issues. 
 
You will find through some work being done in Municipal 
Government around housing issues; those too relate to child 
poverty. When we talk in this House and debate strengthening 
and building the economy, providing jobs  some of the debate 
that happened earlier this week  those are related to dealing 
with issues of low income and poverty. 
 
So I couldn’t today point in the budget of the Social Services 
department and say this money only is targeted to deal with 
child poverty. In some ways, much of the money we spend in 
this department is targeted to child poverty issues, and their 
families, and indeed much of what we’re doing across the 
government. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What programs, or the 
components of programs I guess, are you putting in place or do 
you have in your mind to put in place to fight the ever 
increasing numbers of children depending on social assistance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Again, Mr. Chair, the issues, the causes 
of child poverty in our province and across Canada, are not . . . 
there’s not a single cause and there’s not therefore a single 
solution. I would remind the member again of some of the 
redesign proposals that I know she has given study to and has 
made comment on. We appreciate that. In our proposals for 
redesigning the way we deliver social assistance, let me give 
you one or two examples. 
 
We’re proposing to craft in Saskatchewan, something we would 
describe as a Saskatchewan child benefit, which would provide 
some basic supports for the children of Saskatchewan, outside 
of the traditional welfare system. So that every child of our 
province in a low income circumstance could be provided with 
benefits to meet their very basic needs through a Saskatchewan  

child benefit. We’re hoping that we might be able to partner 
with the federal government in this regard, to strengthen that 
benefit. 
 
We’re proposing in addition, through our redesign proposals, 
that supplementary health benefits which are now provided to 
children if the family is on welfare, be extended to children of 
low income families, so that it wouldn’t depend on your being 
on welfare to receive your supplemental health coverage. And 
we know that it is that fact alone that keeps some families in our 
province on welfare. And by simply providing the supplemental 
health benefit to the children, we can in fact have that family 
move to independence and continue to support the child. 
 
So there are some very targeted and I think extremely important 
programing issues to deal with the poverty which exists today 
in our province. 
 
But we have, and I’m extremely proud of this, as a government 
crafted a much more interdepartmental approach to dealing with 
child poverty and to dealing with other issues affecting 
Saskatchewan children. We’ve crafted that under the title of the 
Saskatchewan’s action plan for children. The action plan has 
been in place a number of years now. To my knowledge we are 
the only province in Canada who has undertaken this kind of 
initiative for our children. 
 
What the action plan endeavours to do is to bring together not 
just one department of government dealing with one issue, but 
to bring together a broad range of governmental departments to 
deal with a broad range of issues facing Saskatchewan children. 
 
And so you will know, as a result of decisions made in this 
budget alone, we’ve increased our funding to action plan 
initiatives by $1.9 million. This will be further investment in 
child care initiatives. It will be important investments in 
education and in preschool initiatives. It will be an investment 
in the successful mothers program. I read something earlier this 
week by a noted Canadian, who said if we were sincerely 
wanting to deal with some of the issues of child poverty we 
would assist the young mother as much and as early as we can. 
 
Again I would want to say we’re taking steps in renewing our 
economy, providing employment for people. We’re taking steps 
in health around preventative medicine. All of these have 
important impact on child poverty. I repeat again that we see 
this as one of the fundamental priorities of our government. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, just one question 
regarding your discussion paper. In the discussion paper you 
state that there will be a supplement for low income families. 
Does that imply that a person will have to be working and 
getting an income in the first place? Because if not, and the 
child allotment is cut out for parents and they can’t work  I’m 
not saying if they’re disabled, but if they can’t find a job and it 
has to be that they have an income  then this is going to be a 
major, major problem. 
 
So I want you to clarify low income families. And does that 
mean no income at all? If they’re in a state where there’s no  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

income, that you will give them enough to cover not only the 
basic allowance for the parents but the children’s portion of that 
also? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I do want to clarify here. Let 
there be no mistake about this, that low income people whose 
income falls below the ability to meet the needs of themselves 
or their families will continue to have full access to our social 
assistance programs. Let there be no mistake about that. 
 
What our working income supplement proposes is that those 
who are receiving benefits because of need, and who are able to 
access some employment, that in fact we would change the 
current circumstance which in some ways punishes those 
people, because in the current circumstance there is an income 
exemption, and in most cases it would be $150, and after 
you’ve earned your first $150 outside of the system, then the 
benefits start to be reduced under social assistance. 
 
What we would like to do is enable people to earn those extra 
dollars beyond the public support, be it in job or in payments of 
other natures, and in fact assist them with a supplement to that 
income. So it’s not a circumstance where any low income 
person in our province would be denied benefits simply because 
they are not able to find work. Let that be clear. 
 
But we want to assist those who can find some income beyond 
public assistance, to encourage and to support and, hopefully, 
then earlier to see them move to a situation of independence. 
 
In the area of talking about the ability to find work and the 
workplace, I should also say that in dealing with issues of 
poverty and in dealing with issues of security to families, 
another aspect of government involvement is important here, 
and that’s the kind of things we’ve done through some labour 
standards and workplace protections. These two play a 
significant role in the lives of working families and low income 
families. 
 
Ms. Julé:  All right. Again, I was only going to ask you one 
question on the discussion paper, but there are so many things 
that people bring to me that are of concern to them, so I’m 
going to take the opportunity right now to ask you a little more. 
 
One question that has been brought up repeatedly is if, for 
instance, a mother with three children is going to . . . you know, 
is able to find some work and she . . . is she going to be 
provided some kind of funding for child care while she’s goes 
to work? And is that going to end up costing government more? 
Less? And the most important thing is in fact that people feel 
that they’re a valuable contribution to community. And I 
believe that. 
 
But we have to know whether . . . to assure these people 
whether or not they’re going to have some money for care of 
their children, or how that’s going to work into the whole 
picture here. 
 
(1630) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, that’s a good question and it’s  

an appropriate question, because many of those who today in 
Saskatchewan are low income, will be single moms with young 
children. That’s just the fact of the matter. And we need to have 
concern for their child care as we have concern for their whole 
family unit. And as we hope that the single mother can be 
provided educational tools to enable her to be into the economy 
or find work, or to access maintenance payments in some cases, 
the child care issue is important. 
 
What our hope is, that by taking in combination the kind of the 
things we’re talking in the redesign paper, a child supplement 
for the child or children of the family, combined with her ability 
perhaps to earn some income in the workplace; combined with 
a working income supplement; combined with the ability to 
maintain supplemental health benefits; combined with, in some 
cases, an ability to access maintenance support payments which 
should be accessed and should be provided; combined with the 
subsidies that now exist for child care and so on in our province 
— that through that combination of programing, we will see 
this family unit move from dependence on welfare to 
independence. 
 
And so it’s not a single program but a combination of things 
that we think — and this simply is reusing the same monies that 
we’re using today — can be more creative and assist more 
people. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. If in fact a woman in 
that situation that you were talking about is getting maintenance 
enforcement, is receiving maintenance enforcement, will she be 
then told that that is a certain amount of money that she is 
getting and therefore she will have some income support for her 
children diminished because of that? Or how will that work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  You see, this is one of the changes that 
we’d like to make, Mr. Chair. Today, in what you might 
describe as a regressive system with the maintenance payment 
that’s counted as income, the next thing you know your benefits 
are deducted because that’s more income. 
 
So we’d like to switch that around again and reward that other 
income that can come into the household, whether it be from 
employment or it be from maintenance payment, and in fact 
supplement with working income supplement, hopefully then to 
craft an income that removes someone from the system. 
 
So we kind of like, just exactly reverse of what we do today. 
And I have had some discussions at the federal level, hoping 
that working with the federal minister that we might use some 
creativity there with the federal child tax credit system and 
redirect some of that into this kind of supplement hopefully to 
lift people from dependency. 
 
Ms. Julé:  I certainly thank you for that and I hope you do 
thank the federal government if they do give you that kind of 
access. Thank you. 
 
One more question that I had in mind just a minute ago was if 
in fact we take the scenario of the mother again with two or 
three children, if in fact this mother does find work and the 
whole bureaucracy is running smoothly now to figure how  
  



838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

much in fact she will be getting as an income supplement, etc., 
etc., and the work happens to end up short-lived after three 
months, have you been able to sort of guestimate what kind of 
bureaucratic changes and expenses will be sort of the 
taxpayers’, I guess, responsibility if that kind of thing happens, 
if there’s a fluctuation in work and no-work kind of situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The member raises a very good point 
and a very good question. 
 
We think by shifting our emphasis . . . The emphasis today is on 
a needs-based system, where you will need to present yourself 
to a social worker and show your need to receive benefit. The 
redesign proposals, when we talk about the child benefit, when 
we talk about working income supplement, are an income-based 
program. It’s simply based on  and now the levels of income 
are not yet determined, something we have to continue to work 
through; we haven’t set sort of the parameters here of levels of 
income  but they will be income based. Not unlike the current 
Family Income Plan in Saskatchewan, which is income based. 
And therefore, I think much more . . . I shouldn’t say easier, but 
it’s a more simple administrative process. And in that 
circumstance, if somebody’s employment dries up, as we know 
it can, it would be a more simple process, as we have with our 
Family Income Plan, to move into more traditional support. 
 
The current . . . for instance, the current federal child tax, 
because it’s based on an annual income, operation is a little 
more difficult because you’ve got to have the whole 12 months 
of income to report. We do want to tailor our’s, income-based, 
but something around like the principle that we use on the 
Family Income Plan so it can be flexible to meet those needs. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. The problem of child prostitution in 
our province and cities is overwhelming, and it’s really very 
unacceptable, and very scary, and I am sure you agree with that. 
Just last week it was reported that there were over 100 children 
working the streets in Regina alone. So the number of child 
prostitutes also in Saskatoon is almost as high. Are there some 
provisions in this budget to combat this problem in any way or 
form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, again the member raises what 
is a very important issue. I had opportunity just yesterday 
morning to meet with the Regina Aboriginal Co-Operative, who 
have been doing some very important work around child 
prostitution in this city, and I know similar work has been done 
in the city of Saskatoon and the problem is before us. 
 
I think we all recognize that no one of us would want to tolerate 
children being involved in the practice of prostitution. I think 
we also all recognize that again this is not a single cause or a 
single solution  that many of the children who will find 
themselves on the streets will be there as a result of perhaps 
abusive situations in their own lives, as a result of poverty and 
so on. We have as a government been financially supporting 
some of the work that the Regina Aboriginal Co-Operative has 
been doing in this city and some work that has been done in 
Saskatoon. 
 

I mentioned earlier the Saskatchewan Action Plan for Children. 
Within this plan we have in past budgeted about 1.4 million, I 
believe the figure is, for prevention and support programs in the 
community, and through that funding we’ve seen a number of 
programs being put in place in communities around the 
province. 
 
Other programs which, if I may illustrate, in my own city of 
Moose Jaw just last week I had the privilege to participate in 
the opening of what’s described as a teen wellness centre. 
While not directed in any way particular to the issue of 
prostitution, it is certainly directed to the issue of children and 
youth, offering them a place to be, a place to share some 
concerns with adults, a place to receive important information 
for their own health and well-being. That has occurred through 
funding through the Department of Health, through the 
minister’s Advisory Committee on Family Planning. 
 
So again, it has to be a combination of effort from a variety of 
departments, but I know that our community seeks that we 
should find some appropriate solution to the issue of child 
prostitution. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not quite sure which 
way I want to go here. Okay, are there grants available within 
the budget, or have there been anything specifically targeted for 
safe homes for kids, for children  possibly a place that they 
can go. Because there’s so many of them on their own now out 
on the streets and it’s not like there are some, although they’re 
inadequate safe homes for battered women, etc., but it’s getting 
to the point where we almost need safe homes for kids. And is 
there anything . . . has that been thought of or is there any kind 
of a shelter for children that are ending up on the streets and 
whose lives are threatened, virtually threatened? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member may not be aware 
of this but there was in fact a pilot project in Saskatoon of a safe 
home for children. And that project having been undertaken 
now has been given assessment by the community, and it would 
appear to be the community’s observation that that is not likely 
the best use of resources to meet the need. That has been the 
conclusion of the Saskatoon community around the pilot 
project. 
 
The recommendation of the Children off the Streets group here 
in Regina that was done through the Aboriginal Co-Operative 
and the Children off the Streets committee, the 
recommendations focus on the need for a strong interagency 
approach to delivering services to children  an outreach on 
the street as opposed to the safe home concept. I report that to 
the member. That has been the experience in Saskatoon, where 
now the community is saying that perhaps a better use of 
resources is not to create the safe home. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I really 
have a great deal of respect for your efforts at interagency 
cooperation in order to try to alleviate some of these problems, 
but I must also tell you in truth that I have had a number of calls 
of people in frustration saying that this thing is obviously not 
working. And it seems to me . . . It may be in some places, and I 
sincerely hope it is. 
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

But, for instance, I have had a principal of a high school in 
Saskatoon tell me that he understood that the integrated services 
would work in a fashion that if he had problems with children 
in Social Services or children in trouble or their parents, that he 
would access a social worker through a number of phone calls. 
And so, you know, on would go the story, that everyone would 
be able to then notify the correct people from there. However, 
he’s having a great deal of trouble. 
 
And I hear this repeated over and over again, that people can’t 
access the social workers and it’s because, I believe, they’re 
overworked. I believe there’s just too many problems for the 
number of social workers out there. 
 
This particular principal phoned four different numbers and he 
said that there was a real crisis situation. And he couldn’t get 
through after four numbers and he was frustrated. And he said 
there’s growing numbers of problems in that school to the point 
where he can’t even teach any more  that the teachers are 
having a difficult time teaching because of so many social and 
personal problems of children. 
 
So is there something that we can do here somehow to ensure 
that there is better access? Is there a computer service or 
something that . . . or are we going to be able to put more social 
workers out there so that they’re not so overloaded? I’m not 
sure within the budget that you have allotted money to maybe 
this problem. If you could sort of explain to me what you intend 
to do, because I’m sure you know of this also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, first of all let me say to the 
member, if at any time she is aware of a particular concern in a 
particular circumstance, feel free to contact myself, my office, 
or the department and let us know. Because there are 
circumstances that do arise and sometimes need immediate 
attention. 
 
If I may say to the member, I sincerely would wish . . . I can’t 
operate on wishing, but I would wish that in fact there were 
more resources available to us to in fact put more people in the 
role of social worker, to hire more social workers. Given the 
fiscal realities that we’re working under and not desiring to be 
reducing benefits to people and so on, we are trying to 
reallocate and reshape as best we can. 
 
We’ve had I think some success around the province in a 
number of cases now where we have in fact social workers 
working right in the school setting. This is not by any means 
universal, but in some circumstances we’ve been able to 
accomplish that. It’s happening here for instance at Scott 
Collegiate in Regina, where a social worker is actually working 
right in the school. And that gives the hands-on connection to 
the students. It also provides hands-on integration with the 
teaching staff and the administrative staff of the school. We 
have I think in the community of Swift Current established a 
very good working relationship with social workers and 
educators. And that is important. 
 
As I look to the future, if we are able over the course of the next 
number of months to redesign the way we do the delivery of 
social services and some of our programing and in fact to  

simplify some of the delivery and programing, that may enable 
us to enable some of our current social workers to focus again 
more on the profession for which they are trained and able  
and that is social work, hands-on contact with people. And 
perhaps we can continue to build on the network of social work 
in schools. 
 
I just go back to my first point. If there’s a particular 
circumstance that you want to raise, feel free at any time to do 
that. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In regards to child 
prostitution, if I could just go back to that for a moment, are 
there any, I guess maybe we’d call it grounds available or any 
monies going towards counselling services in Saskatoon or 
Regina’s inner cities for families of children that are child 
prostitutes, for instance? Is there some kind of educational 
programs for them or for children that are just on the streets, 
again without parents or any kind of guidance? Is there some 
sort of information that can get to these people to help them in 
the form of education programs or counselling services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  There are a number of very important 
and I think very creative and successful agencies at work in 
both Regina and Saskatoon and in other communities in our 
province, trying to meet the needs of the inner city and youth in 
the inner city. 
 
The member will likely be aware of Egadz in Saskatoon, doing 
a great job. Here in Regina, the Rainbow Youth Center is doing 
great work. We have the family service bureaus, the Catholic 
family service centres. We’ll be very happy to provide for the 
member a list of all of the agencies at work which are funded 
through the department. 
 
If I could just digress maybe for a minute. I would have wished 
that every member of this legislature could have been with me 
yesterday. I had the opportunity to attend an event down at the 
Rainbow Youth Center here in Regina where we celebrated the 
graduation of seven young women, each of them single moms, 
who have completed a very intensive 12-week course preparing 
them with educational skills, with also lifestyle skills. 
 
(1645) 
 
Twelve weeks ago the member will remember, I think it was 
about 40 below zero in this province, and each of these seven 
young women took it upon themselves to enter into this course 
of study with all the requirements of having to care for their 
children throughout. And yesterday while there were only five 
in attendance, one happened to be ill, and one happened to be a 
little concerned about the stage fright and so on, but those who 
were there were proud, accomplished, and they’re ready to take 
on the world. 
 
It may be a small number of people in the total picture but a real 
victory for these individuals, and it’s that kind of thing that will 
turn the world around. And that’s happening here at the 
Rainbow Youth Center. So these programs that you mention are 
doing very good work. We’ll be very happy to provide you with 
a list of the agencies that are at work. 
  



840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 1996 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is your government 
providing funding to the Rainbow Youth Center, and how 
much, if it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the Rainbow Youth Center 
actually is funded through a variety of government departments. 
From our department the funding is about $37,000 on an annual 
basis, but I recall it is a significantly larger number from the 
Department of Health that goes into the Rainbow Youth Center. 
 
The program that I spoke of just moments ago, that the seven 
young women were involved in, was a program sponsored by 
the New Careers Corporation. And so there’s a variety of 
funding sources that come together at the Rainbow Youth, and I 
think they also access some charitable and private donations, 
and have other fund-raising projects. So it’s a combination. But 
one thing for sure is they’re doing great work. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can appreciate the 
money that has been put in. However I wish there was a little 
more and I wish there was a more basic way to take care of 
problems. I wish it was a perfect world, and you do to. But it 
isn’t. 
 
And New Careers Corporation has been . . . funding has been 
cut quite a bit to that and so that will make it more difficult if 
that’s where some of the money was coming. And, Mr. 
Minister, I would like to ask you also if the Rainbow Center has 
had funding cut by the government in this budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, Mr. Chair. No, no. There’s been no 
reduction in this year’s budget. And just on New Careers  and 
I know you’ll have an opportunity in another estimates to talk 
about New Careers  but the funding reduction there is quite 
small. It’s not a large funding reduction on that front either. 
 
Now I wish, and the member wishes, and I guess we all wish 
that we did have more resources that we could devote. And I 
think the member would want to congratulate this government 
for holding the line and being able to in fact maintain the levels 
of support as we have, knowing the loss of the federal money. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Actually we could get into a debate on that I think, 
Mr. Minister. Now I’m not exactly sure, but I understand from 
some sources that there’s probably, according to your budget, a 
1 per cent, a 1 to 2 per cent budget cut to your complete budget, 
is about all there is. And that’s the only amount affected by 
federal cuts. So I guess that you’d probably argue that because 
you use a 73 per cent number . . . but really I don’t think that 
this is the place or the time. I just wanted to kind of get that in 
because that’s my understanding. 
 
I would like to ask the minister some questions with regards to 
safe homes and transition houses and their availability to people 
in rural and northern Saskatchewan. First of all, is there 
anything like a safe house in northern Saskatchewan at all, or a 
transition house in . . . I would say from 50 miles north of 
Prince Albert right to the most northern part of Saskatchewan. 
Do we have anything like that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, there is a family service 
centre, safe house circumstance in La Ronge operated by the La 
Ronge native women’s organization. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. How many spaces are 
there or how many women are they able to accommodate at a 
given time or how many women have they accommodated 
within the past year? And how many women were turned away? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’ll have to ask the member’s 
indulgence. We’ll get you the exact number. This is a 
third-party funded, and we could get you the exact number. My 
officials believe it’s about 10 accommodated at any given time. 
But we’ll get you that exact number. 
 
I should say though to the member that in regards to protection 
of women and children in rural Saskatchewan, a tool that has 
now proven itself to be very effective, as we hoped it would be, 
is The Victims of Domestic Violence Act. It was passed in this 
House about a year ago, a little more. 
 
There was even some local coverage or some press coverage 
about it on April 3 in the Star-Phoenix, where the press is 
reporting that The Victims of Domestic Violence Act has been 
used now 220 times, and many of the applications to that Act 
have been in rural Saskatchewan. And this is where the 
authorities are notified and the abuser is actually removed from 
the home rather than having to remove, in most cases, the 
woman and the children to a safe place. This Act provides that 
the authorities may in fact remove the abuser from the home 
and therefore create a safe place in the family home. And the 
indications are that the Act is being utilized and is having an 
important and helpful affect for women in families in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé:  That’s quite intriguing, that’s interesting, and I 
think it’s great. I’m just wondering if the abuser, how long he is 
removed from the home, or she is removed from the home, and 
what help that really is if they’re allowed to come back to the 
home and the whole thing is repeated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The officials of the Department of Social 
Services don’t have that information because the Act, of course, 
is administered by the Justice department. I’m sure when the 
Minister of Justice is here that his officials can provide or will 
have that. 
 
I think what is important is that there is a tool. And again I 
would say how much more we wish we could be doing and 
finding appropriate ways to do it. But this tool seems to have 
proven itself now as being a real help. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, I’d like you to tell us today how 
many safe homes for victims of abuse in the home are available 
to women and their children across the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’ll just . . . for the member’s 
information, I can just read out the list and this will represent 
across province. There is the Regina Transition Women’s 
Society; Saskatoon Interval House; Battlefords Interval House; 
the Moose Jaw Women’s Transition Association; the Yorkton  
  



April 11, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

Women In Need Shelwin House; there’s the YWCA in Regina; 
the La Ronge Native Women’s organization; the South West 
Crisis Services in Swift Current; Wichihik Iskwewak Safe 
shelter here in Regina; the Hudson Bay Crisis Centre; the 
Prince Albert and District Community Service Centre  for a 
total of 11. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. What is the . . . 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 811 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 811 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 811 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 811 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 811 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 811 
  McLane ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 811 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 811 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 811 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 811 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 812 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 812 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 812 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kowalsky ................................................................................................................................................................................... 812 
  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 812 
  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 812 
  Serby .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 812 
  Murrell ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 830 
  Anguish ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 830 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Lac La Ronge Band Signs Financial Transfer Agreement 
  Goulet ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 813 
 Dalton Annual Curling Bonspiel 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 813 
 South Saskatchewan Youth Orchestra 
  Lorje ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 813 
 Provincial Festival of Plays 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 813 
 Housing Sales Up in Saskatchewan 
  Kasperski ................................................................................................................................................................................... 814 
 Increasing Violence in Society 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 814 
 Credit Unions Do Well 
  Sonntag ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 814 
 Cadet Band Concert 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 814 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Health District Funding 
  McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 815 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 815 
 SaskTel Managers’ Overtime Pay 
  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 816 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 816 
 High-risk Offender Identification 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 816 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 816 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 817 
 SaskTel Managers’ Overtime Pay 
  Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 818 
  Teichrob ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 818 
 Health Information Network 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 818 
  Cline ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 818 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 67  An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Free Votes/“FREE”) 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 819 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 819 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 53  An Act to amend The Snowmobile Act 
  Renaud ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 820 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 820 
 Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendment 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 821 
  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 822 
 Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video Classification Act 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 822 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 823 
 Bill No. 57  An Act to repeal The Police Pension (Saskatoon) Funding Act 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 823 
  Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 824 
 Bill No. 58  An Act to amend The Land Titles Act and to make a consequential amendment 
  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 824 
  Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 825 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 13  An Act to amend The Department of Social Services Act 
  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 826 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 826 
 Bill No. 14  An Act to amend the Saskatchewan Income Plan Act 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 826 
  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 826 
  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 827 
  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 827 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 827 
 Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act 
  Julé ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 829, 833 
  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 829 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 829 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 13  An Act to amend The Department of Social Services Act 
  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 833 
 Bill No. 14  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act 
  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 833 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund 
 Social Services  Vote 36 
  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 834 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 834 
 


