


















































May 31, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2055 
 May 31, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan with 
respect to the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names, Mr. Speaker, are from Bangor, Melville, Waldron, 
Neudorf, Regina, and other small communities such as Atwater 
in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Arcola, from 
Kisbey, from Carlyle, and Alameda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present petitions of names from people throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Regina. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition of names from concerned citizens throughout 
southern Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this decision is signed by many concerned citizens 
from the communities of Moose Jaw, Central Butte, Marquis, 
Tuxford, and Glenbain. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise . . . 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Caronport, Mortlach, and the vast majority 
of them being from the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with my 
colleagues here today and the people of Saskatchewan of course 
to continue their efforts in saving the Plains Health Centre here 
in Regina. We’re bringing forward petitions to try and highlight 
that, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
When I look through the pages, Mr. Speaker, the pages of 
people that have signed this petition, I believe each and every 
one of these people are from the community of Bengough 
represented by the member opposite. Thank you, and I so 
present,. Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order, petitions regarding the closure of 
the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and under rule 
12(7) they are hereby read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and to members of the Assembly three very 
special women in my life. 
 
First of all in your gallery, I’d like to introduce my wife and 
best friend, Carole, and seated next to her is Chrissie Hughes 
from Melfort and her stepdaughter, Doreen Hughes from 
Regina. 
 
I would like to particularly mention Chrissie Hughes, Mr. 
Speaker, who has become a very dear friend, and in keeping 
with the native traditions of respecting their elders, Chrissie is 
an elder in our community and in our church. And people in the 
Melfort area respect her a very great deal for her integrity and 
her compassion and most of all for her wisdom. And she is . . . 
it’s not polite to tell people how old a lady is, but she is closer 
to 90 than to 80. We welcome her very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce some very special guests in the east 
gallery. They are 32 grade 8 students from Porcupine Plain 
Composite School, with their teachers, Allan Horlick and Grant 
Ziola. I’m looking forward to having my picture taken and 
having a chat with them, and we’ll see you later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2056  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And through 
you, to all members of the Assembly, I would like to join the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena to welcome the grade 8 class 
from Porcupine Plain. Many of the students that go to the 
Porcupine Plain School, Mr. Speaker, live in the constituency of 
Carrot River Valley. And I’m sure that they’re going to enjoy 
very much this summer, Mr. Speaker, the opening of their new 
swimming pool. 
 
So I want everyone to welcome them. And please enjoy your 
visit, and have a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you to the other members of this House, 52 grade 
11 and 12 students from Valley Christian Academy near Osler. 
It’s an associate school with an excellent reputation, and they’re 
always full to the rafters with students that want to come. And 
also their teachers, Mr. Henry Penner and Scott Dyck. And I 
must say, Mr. Henry Penner and I taught together in a different 
school at a different time. 
 
So would you welcome them to this House and to this city 
today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to introduce to the Assembly 22 students from 
the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) campus, 8th Avenue North, who are in your 
gallery. They are accompanied by their teacher, Nancy Jacoby. 
These are adult basic education students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Friday is often a spirited day. I can only express 
the hope that what they see and hear today does not set their 
education back too far. 
 
With that, I’d like to ask all members to join me in welcoming 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Parent Support Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
fundamental belief of our society is that every individual  
each child, each adult  has intrinsic value and is entitled to 
equal opportunity and consideration. Sadly, as we know, the 
reality of our society does not always meet that expectation. 
 
A case in point is the fact that children born into challenging 
situations are likely to suffer the consequences throughout their 
life, with subsequent increased costs to society. Children at risk 
are more likely to have chronic health problems, do poorly in 
school, and in general, be at risk of getting caught in the cycle 
of poverty. 
 

It is a pleasure for me to report as a result, that the Midwest 
Health District, in order to reduce this risk has, with the help of 
a grant from the Saskatchewan action plan for children, 
introduced a new parent support program. 
 
The parent support program will work to address special 
challenges faced by parents in my constituency. A parent 
mentor coordinator will be assigned to provide services to 
at-risk families. And, Mr. Speaker, in the Saskatchewan way, 
this is a plan which will directly involve the community through 
the assistance of volunteers and the planning support of the 
clergy. 
 
The parent mentor coordinator will match volunteers who are 
experienced parents with young, usually single parents. The 
experienced parent will provide support, parenting advice and 
information. This will allow at-risk, inexperienced, young 
parents to enhance their knowledge and skills, and in the 
process give their young children a better start in life. 
 
This is a good program; an example of wellness at its best. I 
wish it well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Victims of Domestic Violence Legislation 
 
Ms. Stanger: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to draw 
to the Assembly’s attention yet another example of how 
Saskatchewan is leading the way in Canada. We are proud of 
the victims of domestic violence legislation that has been in 
place in this province for more than a year now. When it was 
introduced in this House we were told that it was the first 
legislation of its kind in Canada, if not in North America. 
 
We were also informed that because of its uniqueness it would 
likely serve as a model for other jurisdictions. Well this has 
happened. After a year of implementation, the results from this 
legislation have been nothing but positive. It is working 
extremely well in serving the purpose that it intended to. It is 
helping to prevent and reduce family violence. It is directing 
more people to the help they need, both the victims and the 
offenders. 
 
We were proud of this legislation when it was introduced. We 
are proud of the positive impact that it is having on reducing 
domestic violence since being implemented. Now we can also 
be proud of how our legislation is helping other provinces. 
 
This spring Prince Edward Island introduced a victim of 
domestic violence Act that is  you guessed it  modelled on 
our legislation. Saskatchewan Justice officials have assisted 
P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island) in preparing for the 
implementation of their Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem of domestic violence has been of 
personal concern to me and many of the women in my 
constituency, and I am proud to be part of a government who is 
leading the way in Canada. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

Hearing and Speech Month and  
National Access Awareness Week 

 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to sign, and 
probably slowly with the members’ indulgence, sign a brief 
portion of the statement. 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member for Wascana Plains has 
requested leave to sign simultaneously with the statement by the 
hon. member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker:  I recognize the hon. member for Qu’Appelle 
Valley and Wascana Plains. 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m signing for 
support of Hearing Loss Awareness Month and National Access 
Awareness Week. I’m signing to let you know what it looks 
like when I’m signing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Murray:  Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains signed briefly today to let you know as well 
what it is like to not know what is being said. 
 
Hearing loss is the fastest growing disability in North America 
today. Our population is ageing, and we are surrounded by 
noise. You wouldn’t expect to see someone on an airport tarmac 
without ear protection, but did you know that a car stereo is just 
as loud as a jet engine or that a lawn mower is loud enough to 
cause damage? There are more than 100,000 people in 
Saskatchewan with a hearing loss, and it is always a profound 
loss when you can’t hear what is going on around you. 
 
Imagine doing your job without hearing instructions from 
supervisors or comments from co-workers, the information you 
would miss out on because you can’t hear casual conversation 
or take part in an animated discussion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan deaf and hard-of-hearing services 
can bridge the gap between deaf and hearing. We should be 
aware of this service and look for other opportunities to include 
people with hearing disabilities at work and in our 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
recognize the month of June’s designation as Speech and 
Hearing Month. 
 
There are thousands of people who overcome speech and 
hearing impairments every day. In this day and age when  

communication is so vitally important, it’s extremely important 
that measures are taken to accommodate their needs. 
 
Fortunately new technology is making communication 
somewhat easier for many people who have hearing and speech 
impairments. Each of us can also play a role by being more 
considerate and aware of their needs. 
 
I would like to commend all people who are working to 
increase the awareness about speech and hearing impairments. 
And I would like to commend the member opposite for her 
signing of the statement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Seniors Games 
 
Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Senior citizens in my 
constituency will be taking wellness to heart on June 4. That is 
when the Saskatchewan Seniors Fitness Association district 10 
games are scheduled in Unity. The zone 7 play-offs will take 
place on that day, and a local committee has been busy for the 
past several weeks organizing the various activities. 
 
Some of the events include tennis, track and field, swimming, 
bowling, walking, golf, and old-time dancing. There are table 
games scheduled as well, including card games, scrabble, and 
shuffleboard. Organizers have also planned two literary 
categories for poetry and short-story writing. 
 
The winners of these zone play-offs will move on to the 
provincial play-offs in mid-July in Swift Current. There are 
over 12 communities that comprise district 10 who will have 
representatives competing in the 19 events. 
 
I extend my best wishes to the organizers and participants who 
are involved in these worthwhile activities. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Care Centre Rally 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday 
morning, I attended an important health care rally in Swift 
Current. A group of people marched, and some were even 
pushed in their wheelchairs, over to the district health board 
offices to protest the closure of the Swift Current Care Centre. 
 
These people are extremely upset that a care centre which 70 
elderly residents have made their home, is closing. When the 
closure was announced, many of these seniors and their families 
were appalled at the lack of consideration by the local health 
board and by this government. 
 
They fully realize that this provincial government is reneging 
on its responsibility to provide dependable, quality health care 
services for all Saskatchewan people. These protesters want the 
government and the health board to know that closing the centre 
is unacceptable, and would be and is extremely stressful on the 
elderly people who now live there. 
 



2058  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

I would like to commend all the people in Swift Current and 
area, and across Saskatchewan, who are attending meetings and 
rallies to challenge this government to live up to its health care 
commitments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Punnichy Royal Canadian Mounted Police  
Receive Commendations 

 
Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
weeks ago the member from Saskatoon South gave a statement 
recognizing Police Week. She pointed out that our police 
officers can be particularly proud of the fact that they are truly 
“peace” officers. The fact that we are not as violent a society as 
some others has a great deal to do with the reasonable manner 
in which they enforce the peace. 
 
Three members of the Punnichy RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) detachment in my constituency were recently 
given commendations for an act of law enforcement heroism 
which vividly demonstrates the point the member from 
Saskatoon South made. 
 
Constables Keith Jones and Tammy Patterson, and Auxiliary 
Constable Glen Brown, all received officers’ commendations 
for disarming an extremely dangerous individual without loss of 
life or injury to anyone involved. 
 
Constables Jones and Patterson talked down a disturbed 
individual who was threatening both himself and his family 
with a rifle. Constable Patterson cleared the vicinity of anyone 
in danger  a coordinated effort which ended peacefully and 
happily. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I join the Saskatchewan RCMP Commanding 
Officer and the Canadian RCMP Commissioner for 
commending these three officers who managed a dangerous 
situation with steady hands, cool heads, and holstered weapons. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Agreement with Rural Health Coalition 

 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
February 16, 1994 this government signed an agreement with 
the rural health care coalition. This deal was signed after the 
government, the NDP (New Democratic Party) government, 
came under enormous pressure which shut the doors  
slammed the doors of 52 rural hospitals under the guise of 
health care reform. 
 
Rallies took place all across this province. People demanded 
safe and reliable health care, and threatened court action 
besides. And so the government did strike a deal guaranteeing 
that these communities would receive proper, safe, and reliable 
access to health care services. 

Will the minister explain if his government is going to live up 
to each and every detail of this agreement that they reached?. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I believe that the spirit and 
intent of the Rural Health Coalition Agreement has been met by 
the government, and that agreement of course has to be 
considered in light of many pressures facing health districts and 
all communities within their boundaries. 
 
The agreement was intended to ensure collaboration and 
cooperation in a process that promotes effective discussion, 
problem solving, and consensus building, Mr. Speaker. And 
what it requires is reasonable people, people of goodwill in the 
institutions in the districts, sitting down with their district health 
boards, and together trying to fashion solutions that will meet 
the health care needs of the people of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, what that mushy statement 
was, was an admission that they’re not living up to the 
agreement. Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has reduced 
health care funding to a dangerously low level. This has 
resulted in staff reductions, the elimination of acute care and 
long-term care beds, and the closure of a lot of long-term care 
facilities. And that, Mr. Speaker, means the needs of the sick 
and the elderly are not  they are not — being taken care of. 
 
Will the minister and the Premier live up to their word, to their 
agreement, that Premier’s agreement, and properly fund this 
agreement so that the communities that they bargained with in 
good faith can provide those services that their citizens need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I provided the members 
opposite with a document the other day that establishes that this 
year, for the health districts, this NDP government increased 
funding to the health districts by $1.04 million. I also provided 
documentation which showed that if we had passed on the 
Liberal cut to health care, that the health districts, Mr. Speaker, 
would have incurred a loss of $27.9 million, because we had to 
back-fill for the Liberals in health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Liberals, who took the money out of health care, which 
we put back in, say spend more, spend more, spend more. And I 
say to that member that if he wants us to spend more instead of 
spending smarter, he should tell the House and tell the people 
what taxes he wants to increase. Or does he want to do what the 
member from Arm River said last week, which is to charge 
every family in the province probably a thousand dollars in 
medicare premiums? Is that the policy of the Liberal Party, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Health is 
admitting each and every time he stands on his feet that in fact 
they are not living up to this agreement. And the facts and the  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

figures that he’s quoting from go contrary to what was in the 
Leader-Post not so many days ago about 19 districts that are 
severely under-funded. And I believe they were in the rural 
areas where these rural health care coalition agreements were 
taking place. So I would ask the minister to try and stick more 
to what people would believe to be the correct answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister states that his government has lived 
up to every aspect of this agreement, yet it is clear in many of 
our communities that the terms of this agreement are not . . . 
because of a lack of funding from that government. 
 
We have brought to the attention of this House countless 
examples of where health care is failing the sick and the elderly 
as a result of this minister and this Premier. Will the Minister of 
Health explain how health districts can now continue to live up 
to the terms of the rural health care coalition agreement, given 
this government’s continuous cuts in health care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, as the member well 
knows, this government has not cut health care spending. The 
member knows that. The member also knows that the only cuts 
to health care spending this year in the province of 
Saskatchewan have been Liberal cuts. And we have said to the 
counterparts of the members opposite in Ottawa, that we 
believe that we should have a national medicare system that the 
federal Liberals should support. 
 
Now last week the member from Arm River was on his feet 
saying that we should not have a national medicare system, Mr. 
Speaker. They say we should not have national medicare; they 
say that we should have premiums for the people; they say that 
we should have user fees. And we reject that, Mr. Speaker, 
because we support medicare and we will continue to fund 
medicare, and we will build a better system. 
 
The problem with these people, Mr. Speaker, is that while we’re 
trying to change to build a better system, they want to change to 
go to an American-style medicare system, which is no system at 
all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre Closure 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I just can’t believe the continued 
arrogance of the NDP government. Just over a month ago the 
members opposite indicated that closing down the Whitespruce 
Youth Treatment Centre was not a problem. They said the 
facility was under-used and that the Calder Centre in Saskatoon 
could handle the treatment of the youths from Whitespruce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they said this even though a member of the 
citizens’ steering committee said: Calder Centre has no 
classroom facilities, no way for clients to catch up or advance 
academically or get any hands-on computer skills; recreational 
facilities are non-existent. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess the government was wrong and the  

facilities can’t handle Whitespruce clients, because in 
Wednesday’s Leader-Post SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) advertised a tender for renovations 
of Calder place. Will the minister tell us why they would pour 
taxpayers’ money into renovating Calder place and close down 
a facility in rural Saskatchewan that was perfectly capable of 
treating the needs of troubled youth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the 
opposition has said which I agree with, when it comes to 
meeting the addiction treatment services for youth, is that you 
need to have a segregated facility for youth. That is available in 
the Calder Centre, but I understand that the Calder Centre has to 
be renovated for that purpose at a cost of approximately, I 
believe, $250,000. 
 
But that is a one-time cost, Mr. Speaker, and I want to tell the 
member that the consolidation of Calder and Whitespruce is 
expected to save the taxpayers, I believe, in the order of a 
million dollars per year. A $250,000 one-time expenditure to 
save a million dollars per year is not a bad thing to do in terms 
of saving the taxpayers some money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier said that 
closing down Whitespruce would accomplish two things: one, 
meet the needs of the community in terms of providing service 
that is being provided at those centres now, and secondly, deal 
with it in a way that is good for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
Is this what the government considers good for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan? One less facility, 41 less jobs, and costly 
renovations driven even higher because of this government’s 
ridiculous Crown tendering policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Deputy Premier explain why they think 
this is a smart decision? And if employees, youth, and taxpayers 
are the losers, who exactly is the winner? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the difficulty here is 
that every time there’s any change in society you can rest 
assured that the Liberal Party is going to oppose that change. 
 
When the government has a plan to consolidate services and 
save the taxpayers money, the Liberals oppose that plan even 
though the Liberals are cutting down on health care spending 
with the support of the members opposite. They take $50 
million out of the system and create difficulty for people, not 
just in Saskatchewan but across the country, and then they tell 
us that we don’t have to take steps to change the system, to 
spend smarter and spend more effectively. 
 
And I say to the members opposite that this resistance to 
change, which is necessary when we’re about to enter into a 
new century, Mr. Speaker, is the same resistance to change 
when medicare was introduced into this province in 1962, 
which these members opposed and which they now seek to 
destroy again by the introduction of medicare premiums, user 
fees, and the dismantling of the national medicare system. 



2060  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

That’s where they stand. It’s not where we stand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims 

 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
has been two weeks since the Minister of Health met with 
Bonnie Soerensen, a Regina woman whose six-year-old son 
contracted hepatitis C through a blood transfusion. The minister 
indicated at the end of the meeting that they had that he would 
study the issue and get back to her as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time is of the essence for people like Bonnie 
Soerensen and her son. Will the Minister of Health indicate 
when she can expect a response from his office and when she 
can expect appropriate action on his behalf  her son’s behalf 
 to address these concerns? 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, Ms. Soerensen can expect a 
letter from me very shortly, which is consistent with what I said 
to Ms. Soerensen when I met with her a few weeks ago — that 
we would be looking into the matter and getting back to her. 
 
But I want to say to the member that this is quite a complex 
situation. Because when the member says that somebody should 
be compensated, there are questions in terms of the amount of 
compensation. Because somebody in the position of Ms. 
Soerensen’s son may not be assessed in such a way as to 
determine what the compensation should be. There are 
questions of who should pay the compensation. Is it the federal 
government, the provincial government, the Canadian Blood 
Committee? Is it the Red Cross? Those things have to be 
worked out, and they’re complex. 
 
But I want to say to the member, and the House, Mr. Speaker, 
that if there’s a situation where liability is properly assessed 
with respect to the Government of Saskatchewan and where the 
amount of compensation is determined, we will meet the legal 
obligations that we have to Ms. Soerensen’s son and any others 
that should properly be compensated by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the fact is Bonnie 
Soerensen’s meeting with the minister a couple of weeks ago 
was not the first dealing with the minister or that department. 
She contacted the minister’s office some eight months ago. At 
that time she was told that somebody would contact her quickly. 
No response ever came. So as the minister might appreciate, 
Bonnie Soerensen is growing impatient because time is one 
thing her son may not have a lot of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister make a commitment to take a 
leadership role and work with Bonnie Soerensen and the others 
who have contracted hepatitis C through no fault of their own, 
and provide the appropriate compensation immediately and quit 
the gamesmanship? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well speaking of gamesmanship, Mr. 
Speaker, this member is being absolutely absurd and ridiculous. 
To suggest that compensation would be paid immediately to 
people whose medical situation has not been assessed and when 
the question of who is legally liable has not been determined, 
Mr. Speaker, is simply absurd. 
 
But I can tell the member that instead of playing politics, what 
this government will do is deal with the situation in a 
reasonable and compassionate manner, and what needs properly 
to be done at the appropriate time will be done, notwithstanding 
the fact that this member just wants to play politics over what is 
a very unfortunate situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Christian Counselling Services Funding 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are to the minister, I believe it’s Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, I recently asked about your government’s 
elimination of funding to Christian Counselling Services in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, it takes less time to adopt a child through 
Christian Counselling, less money, than through the Department 
of Social Services, and the birth mother can be as involved in 
the process as she wants to be. She can choose the family her 
child will be adopted by and remain in contact afterwards. 
 
Christian Counselling, Mr. Minister, places 21 children each 
year with families at a cost of about $150,000 annually. Mr. 
Minister, if you and your colleagues would give up your MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) bonus this year, you 
could fund Christian Counselling Services for the next two 
years. 
 
Mr. Minister, why do you continue to fund programs and 
facilities like casinos that you know hurt Saskatchewan families 
while you cease funding organizations that help Saskatchewan 
families? Will you review your decision to eliminate this 
funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, the members will well 
know that in the context of developing this year’s budget, both 
for the government generally and for the Department of Social 
Services in particular, we faced some real challenges with 
withdrawal of funding from the federal government. In order to 
meet those challenges, we’ve had to look very carefully at 
everything that we do in Social Services. One area of 
importance is the services of adoption, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of looking at adoption, we know that we are trying to 
avoid duplication. We know that the adoption services being 
provided through the department are meeting needs. And in 
essence, while recognizing that Christian Counselling has done 
good work in this field, we believe that we simply cannot have  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2061 

a duplication of service and therefore have withdrawn the 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I may say, we’ve had a good working relation 
with Christian Counselling Services, both prior to the budget 
decision and since the budget decision, and we are working 
with them to this day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the minister. 
Mr. Minister, I know you think that Social Services will take 
over when Christian Counselling funds run out and that 
everything will be fine. In fact I think that’s what you just said. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, that’s not the case. There are a number of 
young mothers who have given their babies up for adoption 
through Christian Counselling who say that if they had to go 
through the Department of Social Services, they would 
probably have opted for the abortion procedure instead. In fact, 
Mr. Minister, our office spoke to one of these mothers this 
morning, and that’s exactly what she said. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are talking about $150,000 a year that saves 
the lives of Saskatchewan children. Mr. Minister, we’re talking 
about a program that you acknowledged has done the job well. 
Mr. Minister, will you keep Christian Counselling Services 
open and operating? And if in fact, Mr. Minister, you feel that 
there’s a duplication, will you not give totally the control of 
adoption over to the Christian Counselling Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  No, Mr. Speaker, we would not turn 
adoption services over to any private agency totally. That 
would, in my view, be irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member perhaps does not understand that we’ve changed 
the adoption procedure significantly in the province, where now 
we operate fundamentally with open adoption processes. This 
has been welcomed by the community and by the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, in these very difficult times we 
have to be very sure, with the resources that we have, that we 
provide the most effective mechanism. We are not in a 
circumstance today where we can provide duplication of 
service. 
 
What’s happening here is a consolidation of adoption services, 
and we know that the system that has been developed in our 
province over the last number of years is a highly effective 
service and meets the needs of both those who seek to provide 
children for adoption and to parents who seek to adopt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question today is to the Minister of Labour or his designate for 
the day. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, on numerous occasions in this House you  

and the minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) have said that you were conducting an internal 
review of the Crown tendering policy. And that review would 
be released at the end of the month is the words that you’ve 
used. 
 
Well it’s the end of the month, I guess. It’s Friday and the end 
of the month is here. So where is the review? Mr. Minister, will 
you release the results of your internal review today, just as you 
have promised as recently as May 21 of this very month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the member’s question 
demonstrates better than anything else why they are no longer 
in government. 
 
The fact is that a review was undertaken, and during the course 
of the review, agencies that want to establish a good 
relationship between the construction association, the 
construction industry, and the workers who are their bread and 
butter and doing the work for them, indicated they wanted to 
participate in an open and voluntary discussion to see what 
changes could be suggested between them. 
 
I think the member opposite ought to be congratulating the 
parties who’ve come to the table  the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association, the construction labour relations 
council, and the building trades  for coming together and 
looking for solutions that will build this province, that will build 
our industry and build the opportunities for the workers of this 
province, and not play silly, little political games trying to find 
out whether a report is due yesterday or the day before. 
 
I want to end my comments by congratulating the people who 
came to this meeting yesterday to have a congenial discussion 
about the future of their industry in Saskatchewan, who are 
looking for positive solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Mr. Speaker, my question, Mr. Speaker, is to 
the minister responsible for CIC because, quite frankly, we 
would like to talk to somebody who is prepared, not only to talk 
to the other folks, but to be honest and to keep his word. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, on May 23 in this House, you said and I quote 
— and this is from the Minister of CIC: 
 

. . . we have shared the information from the review . . . 
with the parties to the agreement. 

 
Now I assume that that means the CLR (Construction Labour 
Relations Association) and the building trades council, as they 
were the other parties who signed this agreement. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, why have you shown these people the 
review but you’re not willing to share it with anyone else? Now 
what is there in this whole process that you feel that you need to 
hide? Mr. Minister, will you release the review today, as you 
promised? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2062  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the review is not in a final, 
documented form. As I indicated twice already and on previous 
occasions, that the Saskatchewan Construction Association, to 
their credit, indicated a willingness to participate with the 
construction labour relations council and the building trades in a 
positive discussion about the future opportunities in the 
construction industry for positive relationships  the kind of 
relationships that were destroyed by the short-sighted and 
vicious legislation of the members opposite in 1982, that they 
should be ashamed of for the rest of their lives. 
 
They’ve come to the table looking for positive solutions to 
build Saskatchewan construction opportunities and 
opportunities for workers in this province; and if those 
discussions are positive I can only say that it will not be 
because of any efforts of the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
going to be to the Minister of CIC again, and it’ll be a 
supplemental. I hope that we get somewhat better than what 
we’ve been hearing. 
 
Mr. Minister, your new strategy of trying to act like an impartial 
facilitator between the construction association and the unions 
doesn’t really make any sense. You have a direct interest in 
these negotiations because it’s the government that ends up 
paying the bills, and they end up paying the bills using the 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you conducted the review. You know how 
much more money your union preference policy is going to 
cost, and has been costing. You have to know that. It’s your 
tendering policy and it’s time that you showed some leadership. 
 
Mr. Minister, what position are you taking into these 
negotiations? What is your position? And based on your 
internal review, what changes to this process . . . and what 
changes do you want to see to the CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, the position I and this 
government are taking with respect to these negotiations is that 
the affairs of the building construction industry is a matter 
between the contractors and the workers that work for them. As 
a result of the inappropriate and destructive actions of the 
members opposite, that relationship was poisoned. 
 
I can tell you that the members who sat together at the table 
yesterday shared looking for open, looking for open and real, 
opportunities for enhancing the opportunities for the 
Saskatchewan workers and for the Saskatchewan construction 
industry. 
 
I want to say one more time that I’m proud of the leadership 
we’ve taken in bringing the parties to the table, and I’m proud 
that they are taking the opportunity to look for solutions. And I 
can say again that the members opposite are going to be a long 
time waiting for another opportunity to destroy this relationship, 
because the Saskatchewan people will not allow  

them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Maintenance 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to bring to the attention 
of this House another example that demonstrates the disastrous 
state of our rural highway system. 
 
Susan Measner was recently travelling north on Highway No. 2, 
north of the junction of 2 and 11, with her family. She 
approached a small, NDP-orange flag which indicated there 
may be a pothole. Instead, she found herself driving into what 
she describes as, and I quote: “a deep, gravelly crater,” where 
she wrecked her car. When she called the Department of 
Highways she was told they would not honour her claim. When 
we contacted the department, we were told that most of them 
aren’t being honoured because most of the highways are in a 
terrible state anyway. 
 
Will the minister explain what the government’s policy is 
regarding damage claims that arise from your government’s 
failure to provide safe highways? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I want to thank the member for his 
question. I am sure the member is very well aware of the 
weather situation this spring. He’s very well aware of the 
spending by the Conservatives in the last 10 years of their 
administration, causing us $851 million interest bills. He’s very 
well aware of federal reductions to health care, education, and 
social programs, where Highways  where every department 
— has to share in the back-filling of those programs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I want to say that the highways crews are out now. It’s a lot 
like farming this year, Mr. Speaker. We had to wait for the 
highways to dry out, as the farmers had to wait for the drying of 
their fields in order to seed. The crews are out there now, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re doing a very good job in handling the damage 
that has been caused on our highways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to quote the 
last line from Mrs. Measner’s letter. She wants to avoid what 
she is going through to happen to anyone else, and maybe if 
they would fix these roads and put a commitment in to rural 
Saskatchewan and the highways, we might actually save a life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously more and more claims are coming in 
because of this government’s failure to properly maintain our 
highways. Susan Measner has now been told that she will have 
to pay her deductible; she will also have to pay a $250 
surcharge on her licence. Will the minister explain why people 
like Susan Measner are forced to pick up the tab because of this 
government’s neglect of our highway system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well, Mr. Speaker, we can talk about 
neglect to our highways system, and when we have to back-fill 
for the federal government cuts in all kinds of programs, 
certainly we have to share in that. But I believe that the 
Highway department are doing a reasonable job. 
 
The member knows very well, Mr. Speaker, that the weather 
has been bad this spring. We’ve had a long, cold winter. The 
farmers have not been able to get in their fields. Our highways 
crews have not been able to get on the roads neither. Last week 
our crews are on the roads. They’re doing an exceptional job, 
and I’m very proud of the work they do. 
 
What we are doing on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is 
preparing our transportation system for the 21st century. We’re 
not complaining. We’d like to complain but we can’t complain. 
There’s no great, huge amount of money at the end of the 
rainbow, and we have to look after federal decisions and 
Conservative overspending. 
 
But what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, to prepare for the 21st 
century, are partnerships, looking at new technologies. We’re 
looking at planning the spending of our limited funds better, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re looking at internal efficiencies, taking 
money from administration and putting it back into roads, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what we’re doing on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just note 
that a group from Moosomin has just arrived in the Assembly, 
and they’re here to observe the proceedings of the Assembly. 
And I’d like to ask the members to welcome 62 students and 
their teachers, Wendy Kindzierski, I hope I’ve got that right; 
Carolin St. Onge, and Kathleen Mohr to our proceedings this 
afternoon. 
 
I trust they have an enjoyable time. I look forward to meeting 
with them later, so welcome, students. We’ll see you later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Before orders of the day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before orders of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  To ask for leave to move a motion to 
extend hours today. The text of the motion has been provided to 
both opposition parties. 
 

Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Extended Hours 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move, seconded by the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton: 
 

That this Assembly, notwithstanding Rule 3(1) of the Rules 
and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, do observe a daily meeting time Monday 
through Thursday from 10 a.m. until 10:30 p.m., with a 
recess from 12:30 p.m. to 1:30 p.m. and from 5 p.m. to 7 
p.m., except on Fridays, when this Assembly shall meet 
from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., and from 2 p.m. to 5 p.m., with a 
recess from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m., and ending upon prorogation 
of this session of the Legislative Assembly. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I will ask all members to come 
to order when the Speaker is on . . . all members to come to 
order when the Speaker’s on his feet. Order. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to 
raise a few questions about the motion that’s been presented to 
this Assembly. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, you would have to acknowledge that the 
opposition has played a solid and a sound role in addressing 
questions and Bills and legislation and estimates that have come 
before the Assembly. In fact I think we’ve been more than 
reasonable and more than accommodating. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that as of just last week the 
government just presented some 18 new Bills to the Assembly. 
And it would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that a government that 
is showing some responsibility and showing the willingness to 
work with all parties in the Assembly has all of a sudden 
decided that it isn’t going to accept any more of the 
responsibility that it has contributed in the past and that it’s 
going to change the rules. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, they 
do have the ability because they outnumber the opposition 
members. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker  we’ve acknowledged it earlier on  
that with the number of opposition members, the workload that 
is put on each member, with committees outside of the 
legislature session, the opposition members have been certainly 
doing their part in representing all the issues and representing 
the people across this province who voted for opposition 
members  somewhat more of the electorate than voted for the 
government in the last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I find challenging and what I find very 
interesting in this motion is the fact that the government is 
saying that the work hasn’t proceeded well enough and that we 
haven’t addressed the questions fairly; we haven’t addressed  



2064  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

estimates; we haven’t addressed Bills. Mr. Speaker, take a look 
at the number of Bills that have been passed and where Royal 
Assent has been given. Take a look at the blues today. There 
isn’t a lot on the blues left to discuss and debate in this 
Assembly, other than a number of private members’ motions 
and Bills that are still sitting there waiting to be debated. And 
those could be brought up at any time. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, you will acknowledge, even at House 
leaders’ meetings, that this party and the Liberal opposition 
have indicated we are more than willing to give at different 
sittings in the evening, or have additional sittings, to address 
some of the concerns and some of the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I find interesting in this motion is that with 
the workload we have in front of us . . . and I think the Premier 
even showed that the other day. I’d indicated to the Government 
House Leader that there are two major pieces of legislation that 
would take the time of the Assembly. And the Government 
House Leader I’m sure must have relayed that to his leader, 
because just yesterday the Premier of this province said that 
they would put the district services Act on hold, through 
consultation with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association). 
 
And I’m sure the Premier has already indicated, as he indicated 
yesterday, to the questions that we’ve raised over the past three 
weeks, that that piece of legislation, yes, maybe  as I believe I 
saw on the news last night  the Premier is saying maybe it is 
better to sit back and be more reasonable rather than just put a 
piece of legislation on the book that says we will demand . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  And so I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, there really 
is not a need for this motion. I believe the Premier has shown 
some leadership. I believe the Premier has shown leadership in 
this Assembly and has shown a willingness to cooperate and 
work along with the members in this Assembly. 
 
Our caucus has indicated to the Government House Leader that 
we are willing to work to get the legislation through. We are 
willing to address the estimates. Unfortunately I believe the 
Premier is going to be away for a couple days. We have yet to 
have Executive Council brought before this Assembly, to 
debate Executive Council in this Assembly. 
 
Now if that is a concern to the House Leader, why has the 
Premier and Executive Council not been brought forward in this 
Assembly to debate estimates in Executive Council before this 
time? 
 
We’ve been discussing Finance. It’s been a few minutes here 
and a few minutes there. Mr. Speaker, if you think back over 
the years and the discussion of estimates, the interesting thing, 
Mr. Speaker, on many occasions the minister of Finance might 
be here for 3, 4 hours at a time  not 15 to 20 minutes to an 
hour at a time. And then you may end up with maybe three full 
working days discussing Finance, when on occasions in other 
years we might have sat for two weeks discussing Finance or  

discussing Health issues or discussing Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our caucus has indicated we are more than willing 
to work around the parameters of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, 
as well, if the government feels that all of a sudden it’s 
important to adjourn the Assembly, why was the Assembly not 
called into session at February 1 instead of the end of February, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  And, Mr. Speaker, why was the budget presented 
at such a late date, Mr. Speaker  all of these things that 
opposition members have no control over. The government 
controls the agenda. 
 
The government should know what they have for an agenda to 
bring to the Assembly. They should know how many Bills 
before they come to the Assembly  how many Bills, before 
they call the Assembly into session, they want to bring forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I’m not mistaken, the government had 
indicated that they’d have about a hundred Bills that they would 
be bringing forward. As much as two weeks ago or three weeks 
ago at the most, it appeared that 70 to 80 Bills was going to be 
the maximum. And then as I indicated just the other day, we 
saw another 18 Bills laid on the order paper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader is being 
irresponsible in bringing an extended hours motion in when the 
opposition parties  our party and the Liberal Party  have 
already indicated that we are more than willing to work in 
extending hours to address the limited amount of Bills and 
government business before the Assembly that we have here. 
 
Unless the government’s afraid of the fact that there’s going to 
be more questions in Highways than was anticipated, and 
maybe the minister is all of a sudden realizing that. Although he 
has a sound defence, Mr. Speaker, because of the fact that his 
department got cut back quite dramatically. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the workload left in this 
Assembly, when you look at the effort that has been put 
forward by all opposition members and the line of questioning 
and the thought-provoking questions that have been brought 
forward, the fact that we’ve been more than willing to 
accommodate many pieces of legislation . . . we’ve also 
indicated to the government the areas of legislation that we feel 
are important, that would require some time to debate. 
 
And the Premier’s already pulled one of them or suggested that 
it’s off the table, it’s not up for debate any more, and they will 
work with the local governments to come to resolve, rather than 
putting forward the districts services Act. It seems to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that all the arguments are already out there for this 
Assembly to conduct itself in a proper . . . and a format that is 
conducive to all members, that allows members to not only do 
their job in the Assembly but also to do their job in their 
constituency. 
 
And this extended hours motion, Mr. Speaker, is just an  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

irresponsible move by a government that really didn’t have a lot 
to work with and that hasn’t offered a lot. Or are they afraid, 
Mr. Speaker, of the fact that the health issue is going to become 
a very contentious issue, and they want to adjourn the Assembly 
before people across this province finally realize the 
ramifications of the reductions in spending . . . or funding to 
district health boards. And when these boards begin to inform 
their constituency as to the cuts in services and beds and the 
other issues such as we’ve seen in Swift Current with regards to 
the Swift Current Care Home, or Kamsack with regards to the 
heavy care home, Mr. Speaker, is that the reasoning to try to 
extend the hours? So that this House is forced to adjourn before 
some of the other issues come to the forefront? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very offensive that a Government House 
Leader . . . and that the Premier of this province would even 
allow his House Leader to ram a motion through this Assembly 
when there has actually been a good working relationship 
between all members of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I find it 
inappropriate that a Government House Leader should all of a 
sudden say to the opposition members, you’ve got to work 
harder, because our members have already received their $4,500 
additional bonus, and the time was running out, and they don’t 
want to sit a day longer now that they’re going to have to pay 
for it out of their pocket. 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve worked for 28 days . . . The Conservative 
caucus has actually worked in this Assembly for 28 days 
without receiving $1 in per diems. And the government 
members, who’ve accepted all of that funding, are saying, well 
we want to go on holidays now. We’ve got the money. We’ve 
got all that we can take out of it. Now it’s time to go on 
holidays. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think our opposition has shown a responsibility 
that is not being exhibited today by the Government House 
Leader, by this Premier, and by the members across the floor. 
So I find it inappropriate that this motion is even introduced 
today when there has been, certainly, Mr. Speaker, there 
certainly has been an indication and an acknowledgement and a 
working agreement and relationship with our caucus and the 
government members, and I’m sure with the Liberal caucus as 
well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I stand here today, and I cannot, I cannot, Mr. 
Speaker, vote in favour of this motion, in view of the fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I have already given my word that we will extend and 
are willing to work extra hours on days when there may not be 
. . . Our word is . . . and if my word doesn’t mean anything, Mr. 
Speaker, then I’m sorry. I’m sorry that the Government House 
Leader can’t accept the fact that my word doesn’t mean 
anything. And I believe many members on this floor have 
indicated, they have given their word. 
 
What we find, Mr. Speaker, is the Government House Leader’s 
word really doesn’t mean anything, and I find that very 
reprehensible, Mr. Speaker, so I will be voting against the 
motion. 
 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join in with the Third Party House Leader, the member 
from Moosomin, and follow up on several of the comments and 
themes that he spoke on, the reason being the member from 
Moosomin is right on. 
 
Let’s look at what happened during this session, Mr. Speaker. 
Firstly, it was the official opposition who were asking for 
months that we have a shorter fall session so that we could get a 
certain amount of the government’s business done late in the 
fall, when in fact many of the rural members of all caucuses 
were out of the field; they weren’t putting their businesses and 
their livelihoods in any sort of a problem, risk, putting them at 
jeopardy. And it’s really good to go with that fall sitting, Mr. 
Speaker . . . If you could just get these people to quit heckling 
for a moment so we could perhaps go on with the debate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the fall sitting, the 
benefits to the people of Saskatchewan  not to the New 
Democrats or the Conservatives or to the Liberals . . . but we 
are here as representatives. We’re here representing the people 
of this province. And if in fact we can do their business, 
because what we are is law makers, and if we can deal with the 
laws and the problems that affect our constituents and the 
people of Saskatchewan and if we can come together and deal 
with these laws and problems in a way and in a manner that in 
fact is efficient and well-working and brings out all the positive 
things for the people, that should be what we should be doing. 
 
And that’s what we were asking for, for a full year. In fact the 
party’s been campaigning on it  let’s have set sitting days; 
let’s have fall sittings. 
 
If they’re afraid of a fall sitting, Mr. Speaker, what then is 
wrong with coming in immediately after the January 1 date, you 
know January 7. Do the government business. They know 
months in . . . and you and I both know, Mr. Speaker  you 
better than I; you’ve been in government for a long time  that 
in fact legislation is prepared months in advance. Issues comes 
through departments months in advance. It’s . . . well hopefully 
it’s well thought out; not of course all of it is. And that’s why 
the rules of this House allow opposition parties to operate under 
the rules and have free-ranging debate. And you and I have had 
this discussion. I couldn’t agree more with your view of how 
this legislature really and truly work. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. I’m going to have to ask the hon. 
member for Wood River to not involve the Speaker in debate. It 
is highly inappropriate to involve the Speaker in debate and I’ll 
simply ask that he observe that courtesy and continue his debate 
without involving the Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Yes of course, Mr. Speaker. I seem to 
have caught a bit of a cold here listening to the chill coming 
across the floor. However, Mr. Speaker, when we take a look at 
the benefits of the fall sitting, or in fact if they find this most 
inappropriate, for whatever reason a governing party would find 
it inappropriate, why not in early January? 
 
When we take a look at the number of rural seats, of people that 
must have their farms and their occupations maintained, well  



2066  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

kept, run efficiently, we’re talking about mid-April, end of 
April, as a wrap-up. There would be absolutely nothing wrong 
with that time period, a set time period  January 1 to April 15, 
or whatever they so chose was the period of time to do this 
government business; there would be no problem. I think we 
could come in with a set budget day, a set throne speech, and a 
set ending date, and everything would work fine. 
 
The question is, why doesn’t it work fine? That’s because this 
government, as the member from Moosomin, rightly so, spoke 
on, they’ve been bringing it up later and later. We have a budget 
that came in late. And I’ll even help them out with one shot. I 
mean the Conservative governments of the past didn’t even 
bring in a budget one year. 
 
But in fact there has been some suggestions from the third 
party, our party, and even with the government, that in fact we 
should be looking at some of these things. Not to score political 
points; that’s here nor there. At the end of the day it’s for the 
people. That’s why we do it. I mean that’s why the members 
here do it. We’re trying to represent the people of 
Saskatchewan. Now if they so choose to play politics, well 
that’s, I guess, what we’re dealing with right here today. 
 
But the offer, the offer . . . being that we entered the session 
later than the opposition parties had hoped, there has been an 
offer. And it’s been placed verbally by myself as the Official 
Opposition House Leader, and it’s been in consultation with the 
MLA from Moosomin, the House Leader of the Third Party, 
and the Government House Leader, to make this place 
something different than what it was during the ‘80s. And we 
all know we don’t want to get back to some of the tricks of two 
parties, the New Democrats and Tories, and the way that they 
used to go at loggerheads. Because the people didn’t benefit. 
 
So we’re trying to say, well let’s change this so that the bucks 
that the people are spending, the people that are supposed to 
matter in Saskatchewan, you know, are getting what they pay 
for. They don’t want that sort of gamesmanship that we’re 
seeing. 
 
And so we were moving along and doing a very good job. And 
as you know, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t want to involve you, but 
there’s been a regularly scheduled meeting of House leaders 
once a week in which these kind of issues are raised. And as the 
House Leader of the Third Party has raised, this is catching us 
completely off guard. 
 
Because when the government has said, listen, we’ve got this 
line-up of Bills that we’ve got to move through, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s been time and time again when the MLA for Moosomin 
or myself says, well let’s take a good look at this. And we’ll see 
their list and say, you know, really what is the point of holding 
this up? Like let’s not do politics. If there’s a benefit to the 
people, then let’s move this through. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, everyone in this House has seen on more 
than one occasion where quite a list of Bills have been gone 
through in a short time period. And what’s surprising, what’s 
surprising, is that I have been personally thanked by the 
Government House Leader for doing that. 

So what’s happening? This is the question that the MLA for 
Moosomin and myself as House leaders, are, you know, are 
pondering with today. What has transpired when we have said 
that yes, Mr. Government House Leader, we will do what is 
necessary to help you, you know, run this government 
efficiently? 
 
Because I think by holding up some Bills or housekeeping Bills 
or things that are a benefit to Saskatchewan, those are things 
that people shouldn’t be playing politics with  not a chance, 
not a chance. So we have no intent . . . 
 
I’m going to speak for the third party because I’ll have to say 
the MLA from Moosomin is being very easy to deal with, 
unlike now the Government House Leader. 
 
But we have put these lists forward; we have helped move this 
process along and keep it speedy and keep it efficient. And you 
know what? Up until recently, things were just moving right 
along. It was really good. 
 
But of course what this government made us believe, and I 
guess it was sometime late March, early April, that in fact we’re 
working with 70 Bills this session. So as you know, what the 
opposition parties must do and have to do is try and work a 
schedule out to what . . . how they’re going to have the 
estimates come to the end, how we want to in fact work the 
Bills enough with the Government House Leader, with the 
government itself, with the Premier, so that we can ask some of 
the questions that don’t become obvious through the media or 
through avenues that people of course should be concerned 
with, are concerned with, but don’t have the answers readily 
available. 
 
That would be, how many political patronage appointments 
does that man, the Premier, make, say in a given week? And 
who would they be to? And whose relatives are they? And how 
much are they paid? And what kind of benefit package do they 
have? And what are the severance packages? You know, and so 
it’s through those sort of estimates that we find out some of this 
stuff. 
 
And you know as politicians, and it has been this way for years, 
you have to decide what is and what isn’t acceptable to even 
raise in the House, whether you have protection or not. Because 
there’s always going to be an amount of patronage. There won’t 
be the patronage that we saw in ‘80s under the Conservative 
government. We were promised that by the Premier. However, 
there was. There is no change. It’s been raised time and time 
again  that in fact there’s immense amounts of patronage. 
 
So then what happens is that we have to determine what is an 
acceptable amount of things that they do and what isn’t an 
acceptable amount to the public, to the people that paid that 
Premier’s wages to try and run this province in the best way he 
can or should be. 
 
And it’s those sort of questions. And that’s how we try and set 
up the schedule to arrive at a certain day. It’s not that politicians 
should be looking and saying, no, she’s day 61 and it’s got to 
quit. That’s what the . . . day 61 . . . that’s what in fact . . .  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

(inaudible interjection) . . . it’s day 63, yes. It was day 61 just 
two days ago. That’s what the Government House Leader told 
me would have to happen. When they hit day 61, they want to 
quit. 
 
Well you know, I wasn’t sure how to handle it, so I phoned out 
to some of the people out in my area, and I said, why would you 
elect a person who said, you know on a certain day, regardless 
of the business before you, I’ve reached what I think is the day 
to quit. Well you don’t. Of course you don’t. 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker, I remember, I remember in 1992 and I 
guess we only had one Bill left, the retroactive legislation 
against the good farmers, the farmers of this province, the 
people who helped build this province for years, the people who 
are in need of, not government aid, but government 
understanding, and they had a government program at the time 
 the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program  and 
yet that one program and that one piece of legislation, we sat on 
that one Bill, I guess it was the month of June, July, and I 
believe it was three weeks of August. On one piece of 
legislation. 
 
And that happened, that happened, because the people of this 
province said, you know, it’s just too important. It’s just too 
important to us not to have this dealt with. And that debate, I 
recall, was headed up by the then official opposition  the 
Conservative Party  they did a job whether . . . of course I 
don’t agree with the Conservative Party. Of course I don’t. And 
I don’t believe in their philosophies. I believe in some of the 
things they try and do. And I believe in that one thing was a 
good thing because they were fighting for the people. 
 
(1115) 
 
And you know, when you take all the politics aside, at the end 
of the day as long as you’re fighting for the people, you’re 
fighting for the right causes, regardless of your philosophy, 
your ideology. You’re fighting for the right causes when you’re 
fighting for the people. So I gave them that credit. 
 
But did we see this kind of legislation early on day 63? Well no 
we didn’t. The member from Cypress Hills . . . it was much 
later than that, was it not. Sure it was. So it does make one 
wonder why in fact this is happening here today. 
 
And the points that I made about this House being offered by 
the Official Opposition House Leader, and the Third Party 
House Leader, to be well run, well . . . efficient, moving Bills 
through, moving estimates through, and that has worked up 
until this date that the Government House Leader  I think it 
was the Premier  felt, no we’ve got to be cruel people now; 
the people of Saskatchewan don’t matter any more; we’re into 
politics. And being around here for whatever he’s been around 
here . . . 40, 45 years, Mr. Premier, that you’ve been around 
here? Maybe not quite that long; it just seems that long though, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact I think he forced upon the Government 
House Leader, a certain date. 
 
And it was unfairly . . . I think they are being . . . I think he’s 
being unfair to the Government House Leader by handcuffing  

him that way; by being a Premier that so chooses to put an end 
to it all. Why? Is he embarrassed of something? Well he should 
be and I suspect he is. 
 
However these kind of offers have been out there. This sort of 
well-run House has been happening. Things have been moving 
efficiently, fast, and with in mind that it was going to be a 
70-Bill session. We are at Bill No. . . . what are we at for Bills 
today? Who would know this? 
 
An Hon. Member:  I think it’s 106. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  One hundred and six Bills today. 
 
An Hon. Member:  One hundred and sixteen. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  One hundred and sixteen? We went from 
70 Bills, where they’re thinking of a 70-day session, to 116, and 
now they’re saying 61 days is enough. Well that’s quite a 
change. What does that tell you about a government? 
 
That tells me that here’s some people that think that it’s maybe 
just time to be . . . what would be the answer, Mr. Premier? 
How would you have said it years and years ago when you were 
a young MLA? Cruel? Draconian? 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Johnson:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery today is 
31 grade 12 students from Shellbrook. They are accompanied 
this morning by their teacher, Colin Neudorf. They are here to 
observe what takes place in the legislature and tour the 
Legislative Building. I expect to meet with them for answering 
questions sometime around 12:15 or thereabouts. And I would 
like everyone in the legislature to welcome these guests to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Extended Hours 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So I do have to 
wonder . . . I’m trying to pick up where I left off and not pay 
attention to some of the heckling of some of the people that 
would just as soon ram the business of the people, the people’s 
business, past us. Right. It was at 116 Bills instead of 70. 
 
Let’s talk about Bills just for a moment. Who’s got Votes and 
Proceedings? Do we have a copy of this, what happened today? 
It doesn’t matter because I know. I went through the whites, 
Mr. Speaker. I noticed. I noticed that this morning we still had 
one more Bill introduced. Now this is a government that is  



2068  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

saying, you know, we have done enough work for the people of 
the . . . well I’m not going to search for it now. We’ve done 
enough work for the people of the province. Today’s our 
cut-off. 
 
We’ve went from 70 to 116 Bills, and they’re saying we’ve got 
to have extended hours, that the business is all backed up. But 
you know what? They’re still bringing in Bills. This doesn’t 
make sense to anybody. It doesn’t make sense to the public. It 
sure doesn’t make sense to the MLAs that have been around 
and dealing with this kind of stuff for years. 
 
I see the Premier shaking his head. You know, Mr. Premier, I 
hope you get up and tell us. I hope you get up so the cameras 
are on you and explain to the people of the province why you 
are playing such a rotten, silly game today because that is what 
. . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now I’m going to remind 
the hon. member that the rules of the Assembly require debate 
to be conducted through the Chair, and I will ask that he 
cooperate with that rule. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I will 
put it through the Chair, but of course the intent and the clear 
statement is the same. You . . . or I should say the government, 
has put forward a lot of gamesmanship here. They’re still 
bringing in Bills. They have started to ram the Bills at us, and 
why? They’re trying to have people believe that there is this big 
Service Districts Act coming forward and that we would have 
to get a bunch of this work done because this Service Districts 
Act would take up too much of our time. 
 
So I sat back and though well, what would be in the Premier’s 
mind. And you know what? What I come up with over a week 
ago . . . I guess I should have and could have drafted the news 
release for the Premier that he put out yesterday. As I said to 
my caucus and I think some of the members of the Conservative 
party and others who were phoning in wondering what was 
going on, I said The Service Districts Act is going to be pulled. 
This is very clear to everybody. Nobody should be surprised. 
It’s going to get pulled because the government is trying to 
make an argument that this big workload is here, and you will 
want to do this little workload, but be very focused. 
 
Mr. Premier, who do you think you’re fooling. I mean nobody’s 
buying those old political tricks. All we want to do is speak up 
for the people of this province on the issues that are very 
important to them. Now let’s talk about what happened even . . . 
if you would just bring that Premier under control, I’d be able to 
think about what I’m trying to say here, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, let’s talk about what happened only a few days ago. A 
few days ago when I first found out that they were threatening 
to ram us and jam us with legislation, with extended hours, 
saying that you guys don’t have enough people, the 
Conservatives don’t have enough people, to carry the day and 
our huge majority will just overrule . . . Is that running a 
government? 
 
We’re going to ask you back to that open and accountable 
government that the Premier spoke of a while ago because I  

think this is what really we’re dealing with. That doesn’t sound 
open and accountable to me. 
 
But you know, initially when it was posed to us that in fact we 
would have to have this severe gamesmanship placed upon us, I 
made an offer. It’s best that it gets in public record. I made an 
offer to the Government House Leader and to the Premier, the 
man who’s sitting over there laughing, looking foolish, when he 
should be dealing with people’s business. I put an offer to them. 
 
I said listen, I think what we want to do, I think what we want 
to do, is think about what Bills it is that you’ve brought forward 
in that last batch, that last big basket of Bills they dumped on 
the people of Saskatchewan . . . Because I mean, let’s be 
honest; they’re not placing that workload on us, they’re placing 
it on the people of Saskatchewan. We do the work, we’re the 
representatives to those people, but they’re really doing it to the 
people; they’re not doing it to us. I mean so be it. As the middle 
guy, we will carry the message forward yet. 
 
But I met with the member from Moosomin and I told him 
some of the gamesmanship that was happening. So I said, I’m 
going to make a deal with the Government House Leader. And 
this might be of interest to some of the back-benchers, and 
perhaps that’s why the Premier just won’t quit his heckling and 
won’t sit back and be quiet and listen. I don’t think he wants his 
own government members to hear this. But I said listen, I’m 
going to put forward a plan to help you out, work something 
out, but the Bills that are still of immense concern to the people 
aren’t on the cards. But this supposed workload that has been 
handed to us, well we’ll deal with that  we’ll deal with that. 
 
And we’ve had members sitting up through the night, and 
we’ve had staff working through the night, and we’ve got a lot 
of people that are helping us that aren’t staff and aren’t 
members, but people that we’ve asked to prepare things for us, 
look at things, all throughout this province, to deal with this 
gamesmanship, and they have done that. 
 
And so out of that came a list of Bills that they are throwing at 
us, and I believe it was 23 Bills. And I told the Premier, right 
there, I told the Premier and the Government House Leader that 
in fact in my view I could perhaps talk to my colleagues, the 
critics of these areas, who I find out what is their view of the 
Bills and how are the people of Saskatchewan . . . what are they 
telling them about the Bills and the estimates in their critic 
areas. 
 
So this offer was put to them. Twenty-three Bills, perhaps being 
able to be moved up to 25, 26 Bills, but they still . . . well no, 
no, no, no, no, no. It’s not the Bills that are the problem. That’s 
what the Government House Leader . . . the Bills aren’t the 
problem. Oh really? What is the problem, I asked. Oh, it’s the 
estimates; the estimates are the problem. 
 
Well I said, I can take care of that also. Give me a few 
moments. I talked with some of my colleagues. I have talked to 
some of my colleagues. Listen, are you guys holding . . . I 
shouldn’t say guys; I’m sorry about that. Are you members 
holding up the government business? Because I don’t think 
that’s right. And we’ve got a well-working arrangement  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

between the three House leaders to not do that; to only do 
what’s right for the people of this province. 
 
And some of the members said, you know, I haven’t been doing 
politics, but I’ve asked several questions in this department or 
several in that, and you know really if . . . in good conscience, I 
could say I could probably wrap this or that up. 
 
And I thought that was great. I mean that’s concerned people on 
this side of the House that are really and truly saying  that are 
really and truly saying — that we’ve done a respectable and a 
good amount of work for the people in these estimates. 
 
And this in fact is where you find out certain things about what 
the government’s intention is to do with the amount of money 
that they are asking the Legislative Assembly for, what they so 
chose to spend in certain departments, on what, on what 
programs, or the new programs. 
 
And I said listen, I think we can come up . . . and we’re talking 
about this week, right here, ending at 1:30 this afternoon, okay. 
This is the week where I said, all right, 23 Bills, maybe 25 to 26 
on the outside for this week that will be voted off, along with 
four or five estimates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to ask anyone on the government side 
 that kind of offer would have never come in this Assembly 
before. I don’t imagine that . . . No Opposition House Leader 
has ever made that offer to play ball, so to speak, to that extent. 
I expected that they would thank me and really appreciate that 
somebody would want to move along the workings of the 
House. But instead, to my surprise, they got angry. Well why 
did they get angry? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Well I’m not angry at all. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well if you’re not angry, Mr. Premier, 
why don’t you just sit back and listen for a while and shut up. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now all hon. members know that the 
language which is appropriate to use in the Assembly reflects 
respect and I think  order  and I think the hon. member for 
Wood River recognized that his last phrase was not 
parliamentary. And I’ll ask him to withdraw the 
unparliamentary remark, and apologize to the House, and then 
proceed. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, it was unparliamentary. 
I’ll withdraw that remark, and I will rely on the Speaker to 
control that behaviour. 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Now the member for Wood 
River knows it is inappropriate to be commenting on the 
conduct of the Speaker, and the Speaker has asked him to 
withdraw the remark and to apologize to the House. I’ll ask the 
hon. member for Wood River to do just that and then to proceed 
with his remarks. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I withdraw the remark and apologize to 
the House. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, where are we at with, in fact, this motion? It’s 
one where we tried to arrange . . . have a workable arrangement, 
where the people’s business would be well represented, that the 
business of the House wouldn’t be held up. But they keep 
introducing Bills. 
 
I mean you got, Mr. Speaker, you got to view the picture from 
the opposition’s point of view, where the Bills just keep coming 
every day; they keep coming. And yet they’re saying, you 
people are holding it up, and there’s a workload. 
 
So this, I guess from a House Leader’s point, very rich and 
handsome package was offered up, but instead of being 
accepted, as I said, it was rejected  and rejected with anger. 
Makes everyone somewhat surprised. Why are they angry? 
 
(1130) 
 
The only reason that they could be angry . . . What would make 
the Premier angry on that offer? Could it be, could it be, Mr. 
Speaker  and then it showed up on the blues  that it’s tough 
for a government to come in with a motion for extended hours 
to ram and to jam the Bills through this Assembly; to try and 
get 10 members and 5 Conservative members . . . they’re 
hoping that they can wear us down so that we won’t thoroughly 
check the details of each and every Bill. That’s what the game 
is that’s happening here right now. And that’s why it was so 
hard for them to accept that package, because then they can’t go 
to the media and say, you know why we had to have this motion 
come forward? Because they’re being an unruly bunch. Well 
there was nothing unruly about it and I think everyone in this 
Assembly here today knows that that wasn’t the game. It had 
nothing to do with unruly. Did not at all. 
 
The MLA from Moosomin hit it on the head. You see, we had 
to figure out what is the problem then. So they can’t justify why 
they would ram legislation and ram hours at us and do dirty, 
cheap politics . . . is the way the people of the province view 
this. There must be an issue coming up. That’s the only thing 
we can think of. 
 
Well what issues would be coming up that would really be of a 
concern to this group? And they put forward an agenda to 
myself, they put forward an agenda to myself, with some time 
lines put to it. So let’s talk about these time lines. And I want 
the people who are watching out there today on TV or 
somebody who may ever read the Hansard on today to know 
exactly what’s happening  to know exactly what’s happened. 
 
They have decided that certain Bills only deserve a few hours of 
attention. And it’s tough to give them only a few hours of 
attention, and I’ll tell you why. It wasn’t so many nights ago . . . 
how many nights ago were you at Central Butte, Mr. Member 
from Arm River? 
 
An Hon. Member:  A week ago Wednesday. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  A week ago Wednesday  health care 
rally, Central Butte. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Over 600 people. 



2070  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

Mr. McPherson:  Over 600 people. The member from Arm 
River and the member from Thunder Creek who were both 
there on behalf of the official opposition and doing a fine, fine 
job and listening to what the concerns of the people had to say 
out there, they’re saying 600 people. 
 
Canora. There was what, 4 or 500 people in Canora? A lot. And 
what we’re starting to see, and the reason why on a daily basis 
. . . let’s take today for an example  how many health care 
issues were up? The full front block . . . our question period 
time dealing with health care issues that the people of this 
province are asking us to deal with  full front block; three 
different issues just today alone. That happens almost every 
day. We’re on day 63 and it’s just been one session of health 
care. 
 
That’s really what’s happening, is that they are bringing 
forward some health care Bills that are so Draconian, and they 
know at this point that the people of this province are not fully 
aware of how backwards, of how detrimental, of how 
overpowering these Bills are. And they don’t want them to find 
out. 
 
Trouble is, the people do know. These people aren’t in touch. 
They’re not talking to anyone out there, especially in the rural 
areas. That’s why they think that nobody knows. And if we only 
given them a few hours, then it’s okay. 
 
But that’s not okay. You remember, Mr. Member that’s 
heckling again  the member that is heckling severely again 
would remember that in the summer of 1992 one Bill lasted two 
months and three weeks  one Bill. 
 
Well what’s happening here is that the offer made by the 
Government House Leader, the offer made by the Government 
House Leader, was to bring in four Bills dealing with . . . 
health-related Bills. They were to get, I think it was two hours 
and 30 minutes of time to do four Bills. That’s what the offer 
was. Just so everyone’s clear, just so it’s publicly clear  the 
House Leader can wince all he wants. But if you want to play 
these kind of games, then we’ll let the people know exactly 
what’s happened up to this point. Two hours, 30 . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now you’ve been listening to the hon. 
member for Wood River make his remarks, and I find it 
interruptive that there are one or two members who are making 
consistent and constant remarks, sometimes shouting from 
across the floor. And I will ask all hon. members to show 
respect to the institution and to allow the debate to continue in 
an orderly manner. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
difficult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deal that was put forward . . . their deal, not 
mine. My deal wasn’t acceptable to them because they couldn’t 
have that much movement. They couldn’t have those number of 
Bills passing through because they couldn’t then justify this 
kind of a game. 
 
But two and a half hours, Mr. Speaker, to do four Bills that  

have such an effect on the people of this province? No one, no 
one over there that knows those were the kind of games being 
played . . . The back-benchers wouldn’t accept that. I see a lot 
of back-benchers who are not aware of these kind of deals that 
were offered to us. 
 
Now you tell me, is that what it’s all about? How, Mr. Speaker, 
does that sound open and accountable? If it is, I wish somebody 
would make it very clear to the people that we represent that 
somehow it is open and accountable to allow 15, 20 minutes per 
Bill to move from second reading, where in fact we have an 
opportunity to get up and talk about the feelings of the people 
of the province, the situations that the sick and the elderly find 
themselves in, the situations that those people that can’t receive 
health care and have to be brought up on the floor of the 
Assembly day after day . . . 
 
Whether it’s Mrs. Fitzpatrick of Eatonia receiving gangrene in 
her leg because she was moved out of the hospital before being 
taken care of; or Julie Walker was another one we raised — the 
lady who laid in the hospital in Saskatoon with a broken leg for 
a week; nobody to fix it. These are the kind of people that 
would be very concerned about what’s happening with these 
sort of health Bills. 
 
And to have 15 to 20 minutes for 10 and 5, 15 people, to speak 
on, to say what they’re hearing in their constituencies and what 
they’re hearing in their critic areas and what they’re hearing all 
throughout this province about where health care is going, that 
is unacceptable. And everyone here knows that is unacceptable. 
 
When I made that claim to the Government House Leader, he 
said it doesn’t matter what you find acceptable. You will accept 
what we say or we will bring in extended hours and we will 
force this upon you. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, what made it worse was that not only did 
they say that in fact we couldn’t give speeches on the severity 
of the health Bills that were coming forward  not only could 
we not do that  but then the Bill moves from second reading 
to Committee of the Whole stage. 
 
We were then told, you have two shots at that, and that will 
happen on Wednesday and that will happen on Thursday. And 
you have, you have, I think it was two or three hours on 
Wednesday and maybe a couple on Thursday to have all of the 
amendments and all of the clauses and all of the concerns in 
Committee of the Whole where you’re dealing with the fine 
details of a Bill dealt with. 
 
And if you don’t agree to that, same story  extended hours, 
ram this, ram that, gamesmanship, political gamesmanship. We 
can all play that. I just don’t think it’s the right way to go. I 
don’t think it had to be the right way go  that way to go. 
That’s what was offered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there isn’t one member over there that 
would have found that acceptable had they been in opposition 
and had they been to some of the health rallies such as the one 
that the member from Arm River and myself were at the other 
day in Swift Current, where yet another . . . Oh, and we can’t  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

forget about the personal care home that was shut down in 
Regina here. Martin Luther? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes, the Martin Luther . . . 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Yes, Martin Luther care home. This is 
happening all over the province. And I’m going to get back to 
that in a moment. 
 
But this was happening all over the province. And in Swift 
Current  the member from Arm River and myself were out 
there  what did we see? I guess there was about 50 people, 
mostly the people that are in need of the service. Because there 
were several, several wheelchairs, elderly people in 
wheelchairs. They’re closing down a 70-bed care home, and the 
reason is funding. It’s not that the people out there want to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  All very afraid, too. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh, as the member from Thunder Creek 
just mentioned  all very afraid. Yes, we got to talk about that. 
Because you know, I walked up to the line and here’s a lot of 
elderly people and some of the care-givers, who really from 
their heart, are there for all the right reasons  I wish others 
were  all for the right reasons, carrying placards: where will 
we go; who will look after us? These are the kind of things that 
we were looking at. 
 
And I had this elderly lady, I don’t know, she’d be 80-or-so 
years old, come up and she asked the member from Arm River 
and myself if in fact we would carry placards because nobody 
from the government . . . The member way back there in the far 
corner who was supposed to represent them wasn’t at a rally 
only days before that; wasn’t there to walk with the people that 
supposedly he represents. So she asked us, would we please, 
would we please carry these placards and try and impress upon 
the government, impress upon the Premier, why it is so 
important that they not close down any more care homes, that 
they not close down any more nursing home beds. 
 
And by not playing political games but by actually trying to 
find a solution, the member from Arm River and I of course put 
the placards on and we marched with them for a while and we 
discussed . . . And as the member from Thunder Creek . . . and 
he’s heard it time and time again in his own riding and in the 
community where his constituency office is  people are 
afraid. People are terribly afraid of what is happening. 
 
And so we talked to every one of the people in that protest  
every one. Nobody was missed. 
 
An Hon. Member:  The news coverage was exceptional. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh, and yes, exactly, the news coverage 
was immense in that corner of the province. But what we were 
able to achieve — through a little bit of negotiation, the 
member from Arm River was able to get a process going. While 
I was out talking to people on the sidewalk, he took it upon 
himself to go in and have a chat with some of the people who 
the government often looks to blame. They’re saying, well it’s 
the district boards; you know how we operate  we can only  

fund so much . . . and the federal government, federal 
government, federal government, federal government. That’s 
the song here. 
 
And a meeting was arranged and we helped, the member from 
Arm River and myself, helped get some of the people in the 
wheelchairs actually down into a basement room  it wasn’t a 
boardroom but it was some sort of a meeting room . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Conference room. 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Conference room. And we got the two 
sides talking. But you know, what became clear right away was 
that they all wanted the same thing. They all want to not have 
waiting-lists. They all want to have safe and reliable health care 
for their sick and their elderly. They all wanted these things. 
 
But they said, you know what? If the government doesn’t give 
us the money, it’s no go. You people, meaning the member 
from Arm River and myself . . . he’s the deputy Health critic 
and that’s why we were there, to discuss the seriousness of the 
health situation in this province. But they asked us both  and 
I’m talking board members and the people that need the care  
asked us, would you please go back and try and impress upon 
the Premier in whatever fashion you can to please fund health 
care, to please fund senior care, to please take of the people of 
this province, the pioneers, the people that built this province. 
Please take care of them. 
 
So of course we came back in. We came back in just to  that 
day  to try and impress upon them the seriousness. When you 
actually look into the eyes of some of the elderly people and see 
the fear, I tell you it is serious . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Some of us think it’s a holocaust, a 
health care holocaust. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well as the member from Thunder Creek 
mentioned and the term was used that day: health care should 
not have become a holocaust. It’s just that severe and it’s just 
that scary and it’s sad. It is really sad. And that’s where this is 
all going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re just not being fair to the people. They can 
ram us with the hours and they can play all the games. This 
isn’t fair. It isn’t fair to those people. 
 
Mr. Member, how many people were in wheelchairs the other 
day that we helped down those stairs? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Ten or twelve. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Ten or twelve elderly people in 
wheelchairs? I want to ask the Premier  if he ever shows up 
 does he find that’s fair? I don’t know. He shouldn’t. He 
surely shouldn’t. 
 
But when you take a look at what’s happening and why this 
debate is becoming such a heated debate and why the  



2072  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

government is now panicking . . . You know what this motion 
is? This is panic. And why are they panicking? Because the 
rallies are starting to build. 
 
They had tried a little trick here. Back when health care reform 
was first introduced, they slammed the door shut, hard, on 52 
hospitals. Of course there were rallies around the province. And 
I touched on this in question period so I won’t dwell on it, but 
we all recall how heated the debate was. We all recall how 
heated the debate was. 
 
And so they knew they had made a mistake in taking on so 
much of Saskatchewan, so much of rural Saskatchewan, with 
one blow. They thought it would be, you know, a little bit of 
anger, short lived, and closure put to it. Well the only closure 
was to the hospitals. 
 
They of course tried to appease some of the people by . . . I 
recall a meeting I was at. In fact it was in the community of 
Mankota. The hall was completely filled. People . . . I just recall 
it now, Mr. Speaker, that all around, I don’t think you could 
have squeezed a small child in that hall, and it was a big hall. 
And when they wanted me to come up to the front and speak 
. . . 
 
On the way there that day I had stopped in the community of 
Ponteix, another community that had tried to get a safe and 
reliable health care system to remain, to be restored in their 
community, by taking the government to court. But I had 
stopped to look at their facility and see what their concern was. 
And their concern was that there was a SaskTel phone, 
coin-operated phone, bolted right near the front door of that 
hospital. 
 
And if you recall that day, I had taken some pictures with one 
of these cameras that give you the picture right away. And I 
took them to Mankota. And you could have heard a pin drop 
when I held those pictures up and passed them around the hall 
and talked about the two-bit health care that Saskatchewan is 
getting. 
 
And there was so much anger and frustration, and the 
government realized then that they had made such a mistake, 
such a mistake, that they didn’t want to relive it. So what 
you’ve seen the government do, and try to do, then is take 
communities on one at a time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Exactly. 
 
As the member from Thunder Creek has spoke on different 
times in this Assembly, and rightfully so, as he’s watched it, as 
many of us have, communities being pitted against one another, 
trying to have communities say, you know, if I do this for the 
government, or if I hush up, then things will be okay now. And 
so they were taking on communities one at a time. And while 
this was all happening, of course, they wanted to make sure the 
debate was not on whether or not people had a safe and reliable 
health care system. They want to talk about something else. 
 
And that’s how the member from . . . where was she from, 
Lakeview?  the Minister of Health at that time — tried to 
make the whole health district, the board elections, to be the  

issue, so that people weren’t out there talking about well, do we 
have health care? Does my grandmother or my grandfather or 
aunts or uncles or whatever have a place to be in their senior 
years? No, she didn’t want to talk about that because we know 
the answer. And that answer is pretty hard hitting on a 
government that chastised the Grant Devine Conservative 
government for so long for having no heart. 
 
But in fact it was this government, it was this NDP government, 
that are playing the cruel and malicious games with the elderly 
and the sick. So she had to create a smokescreen. She created a 
smokescreen in health. She made sure it was always a health 
issue but not a do-you-have-health issue. It was smoke and 
mirrors. Who’s going to run health? How are we going to fund 
health? Remember some of those arguments, government 
members, where in fact we moved from the union hospital 
district Act where communities could requisition, local 
governments could requisition, funds under that Act to support 
health care facilities within their union hospital district? 
 
The government had to ensure that would come to an end. They 
could not have  they could not have — communities relive 
any fights. They could not allow communities to have access to 
funds so that they could demand health care in their 
communities. They had to put an end to it. And instead they 
brought in the  what was that Act?  hospital districts Act. 
 
This Act, this all-encompassing Act, which that too is almost 
fully run by regulations which nobody gets to see until the . . . 
because it’s done in cabinet. It’s done by a small group of rank 
politicians in a room who are doing things for political reasons 
 right?  political reasons rather than for the reasons of the 
people of this province. That’s the kind of games that were 
played: smokescreens; health board elections; who should be 
on; how many should be on; how many should be elected; how 
do we get your guy on. It was a joke. It really and truly was a 
joke, if in fact you hold it up alongside the real issue of do you 
have health care. And they know what the feelings are of the 
people of this province. That’s how we’ve moved now along to 
where we’re at today, where this government is going to do 
what it feels it must do to take on one community at a time, and 
hopefully the . . . 
 
And do you know, Mr. Speaker, if it weren’t for opposition, 
they would . . . their little trick would work. Because what’s 
happening, the people have to rally in Canora. The people up 
there do not know what’s happening in Swift Current. And the 
people of Swift Current don’t know what’s happening in 
Eatonia. And the people in Eatonia don’t know what’s 
happening . . . pick a community. 
 
And that’s what’s happening. They divide the communities in 
rural Saskatchewan and they conquer them one at a time. And 
the Finance minister, who has finally joined us, is able to call 
all the shots  able to call all the shots in health care. 
 
And when I looked into the eyes of the people in the 
wheelchairs in Swift Current the other day, and I really thought, 
you know, is what the Finance minister trying to accomplish by 
looking good, is that more important, is that more important, 
than what that person needs in that wheelchair? 



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

And as hard it is to say, you know it can’t be a funding issue, 
because at the end of the day we have got to do something for 
those pioneers. These are the pioneers who for years, built this 
province. They started with nothing, Mr. Speaker. They started 
with no hospitals or nursing homes or programs or drug plans or 
highways or schools. They started with nothing. And these were 
supposedly the tougher times. 
 
But they weren’t doing politics, you see. What they were doing 
was trying to work as communities and trying to work as 
peoples for the betterment of society as a whole. With that 
attitude, with that attitude, they were able to build 
infrastructures. They were able to build a hospital system that 
was second to none. 
 
And of course, of course your predecessors, and you use the 
name . . . You know what? I was going to say too often; that 
isn’t what I want to say. I want to say, lightly. Because they 
throw out Tommy Douglas just like, if I say Tommy Douglas 
I’ll be saved. 
 
The fact of the matter is governments, regardless of political 
stripe, right across Canada, were putting together highway 
infrastructures because it was the people, the people, who 
decided that if we all worked together we will have something 
that is good for all of us. 
 
So during those tougher years, the years that they thought that it 
couldn’t be done, I’m sure that there was many meetings held in 
kitchens or out in some rural halls or schools or wherever 
they’re held . . . that we just couldn’t do it. 
 
But as the member from Thunder Creek said, that is how 
dreams are built. And they were able to put it all together in 
those tough years. They were able to build a highway 
infrastructure, they were able to build nursing homes and 
schools, and most importantly, I guess to everyone in the 
province, they were able to build a health care system. Because 
the people were second to none. 
 
And they built integrity, honesty, and they built a dream. But 
now what we see is that dream coming to an end. When I look 
into the eyes, as the member from Arm River did, that dream’s 
coming to an end for some people. They have no idea. When 
you lock the door, where do they go? And it’s fine for the 
government to say oh, but you have to trust us  in question 
period  trust us. Nobody is going to be needing a bed. 
 
But what he wants to say, and he did slip up some months ago 
and say, because attrition will take care of a lot of our concerns. 
Shameful, shameful. It’s scandalous. It’s rude. It’s really 
disappointing is what it is, that a government would go to such 
lengths. And if they think that Tommy Douglas is not looking 
down upon them with a big frown, they are mistaken; and 
everyone else, not just Tommy Douglas  all the people of all 
political stripes that worked so hard to build a system that 
people could rely on in their later years  are looking down 
upon them and frowning; they’re mistaken. So this is where and 
why we’ve come to this point in time. 
 
We’ve got a government that got caught. They slipped up a few  

years ago when they brought in health care reform. They’re 
ashamed; the fight was intense; they don’t want to do it again; 
they know that they’re going to deal with the wrath of the 
people of this province. And that’s why you have deals where 
you’ve got 15 minutes per speech. 
 
You got, I think it was another five and a half hours for four 
Bills with lots of clauses with almost everything in regulations 
to deal with in that time period. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, if everyone in this province knew 
what had transpired in these last weeks, they would be more 
than wounded by this government. They would be ashamed to 
have said we were ever part of putting them into power. That’s 
what’s really going to happen. It’ll be taken care of. You just go 
right ahead and you ram through legislation and you forget 
about the people that sent you here, and they will reel you in at 
the appropriate time. 
 
So there is how we got to this stage. The offer was too good; 
couldn’t be accepted because then they couldn’t justify the dirty 
games that they were about to play. 
 
When we look at some of the motions that . . . well look at the 
motion that come forward today  extended hours. I see 
nowhere in the motion does it say that the Bills are not going to 
keep coming in. 
 
And they know full well when we get a Bill . . . and some of 
them are immense and the clauses are detailed, and you must 
have legal people view these things. You must have players in 
the industry, people in the industry, the people of 
Saskatchewan, view them to see how it’s going to affect them 
and impact on their lives. That takes time to get that out and get 
that dealt with. And that’s the role of opposition. 
 
(1200) 
 
But if in fact you’re sitting in here for 10 hours or 12 hours or 
16 hours a day, they know it can’t be done. And is that good for 
the people of Saskatchewan? Is it? I would think not. I don’t 
think that would be good at all. 
 
I don’t know why else they would be doing it if it weren’t for 
solely political reasons. Once again they’ve made a mistake as 
they did in GRIP. GRIP debate, what else, Mr. Member from 
Cypress Hills? You’ve been around here for a term. There was 
judges; there was Co-op upgrader; there was . . . How long 
could the list go on for? Quite a while. 
 
An Hon. Member:  An hour or two. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  An hour or two according to him, and I 
suspect it will. I fully suspect it will. If I have the opportunity to 
sit down today without the House adjourning, it will. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what has to happen  and this is not the 
way to resolve what has to happen  I think that the opposition 
. . . or the Government House Leader has perhaps got to find a 
solution to what he created. He created this little monster 
without the support of his own back-benchers, and I know that.  



2074  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

And I know that not all of his cabinet knew what his little game 
was. 
 
And I think he’s got to try  and he’s got a while to go ahead 
and do it; he’s got an hour and a half  to arrive at a solution 
with his own government as to what would be a reasonable way 
to handle this for the people of this province. 
 
And I put that challenge  he’s sitting there listening  I put 
that challenge to him. Why doesn’t he get up and go and tell 
these people how he messed up, and how he’s now going to fix 
it up by, firstly, withdrawing such Draconian behaviour . . . 
motions. And secondly by doing what is right for the people  
accepting an offer that was the most generous . . . There is no 
question it was the most generous offer put forward by an 
Opposition House Leader, I suspect, since 1907, and coming 
forward with a solution. He’s got time right now to go and start 
to work on it, and I’ll keep one eye on him as we’re talking 
about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One other problem that we’re having, and this is why one has to 
wonder why they would bring in these extended hours . . . I 
think I’ve set out exactly where the health care problem is and 
why they are in such trouble, and why they are running like . . . 
well they’re running scared. 
 
I now have to look at a few other things that are of concern. 
And they’re of concern because this is a government . . . And 
you know very well that I could do this, Mr. Speaker. I could go 
back and get all the 1991 election campaign promise and 
everything that was said from 1986 to 1991 about how great 
thou are, but the fact of the matter is, what they said and what 
they’re doing completely goes in different directions. 
 
But the one I want to talk about today with them is whether or 
not they truly are open and accountable. Because open and 
accountable, to me, tells me that things are going to be upfront. 
We’ll know what’s coming and what . . . you know, basically to 
cut to the chase, it’s to do things for all the right reasons, for the 
people. And that’s what I . . . I just touched on it earlier about 
whether or not we’re getting our answers. 
 
Now something of interest happened here the other evening and 
it had to do with the Finance minister when she was giving her 
answers to the Finance critic of the official opposition, the 
MLA for Thunder Creek. He was trying to get answers out of 
her, and she has done what I have watched her do since she was 
elected in October 1991, is refuse to answer anything. 
 
In fact what she does do is try and be insulting and rude and 
vicious, and it seems to be getting her nowhere. She’s finding 
that she doesn’t have a lot of support for her actions, and we 
would rather she not do that. 
 
I recall even in the last session when they jammed it right at the 
end, where in fact the last order of the day was that Finance 
minister and myself in a discussion about some of her finance 
tactics in a Bill. And as everyone would recall, how vicious and 
rude she was. I don’t think it did any good for the people of the 
province. Certainly didn’t do anything for me, I’ll tell you that. 
 

But it’s still happening. Her officials, from my point of view 
when I’m sitting and watching her to receive the question from 
my colleagues, her officials lean forward and they want to give 
her an answer. And she’s sitting there and she’s doing nothing. 
She waits till the question is put, she waits till the question is 
put, and she stands up and she says something that’s very 
hurtful and vicious, and that’s her response to what people in 
the province have asked us to put forward to her. 
 
And I don’t think, I don’t think, that that’s fair. I don’t think 
that that’s what this is all about. I don’t think that’s what it’s all 
about. 
 
So because of this mean and vicious . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like very much to introduce to you and through you to 
the rest of the Assembly today, a group of 18 young people who 
have come from the Alameda School to visit with us here in the 
Assembly this afternoon  I guess it’s still this morning. No, 
it’s 5 minutes after 12; you’re in the afternoon. 
 
Well welcome to the Assembly. We want to have you enjoy 
your stay here today and watch the debate and the proceedings. 
We hope that along with all of the other school children that 
have come into the Assembly over the past few weeks with the 
Assembly sitting into late May and early June, an awful lot of 
good opportunity arises for young people to come in from all 
over the province. And we’re certainly glad that you folks have 
come in from out your direction in the south-east part of the 
province. 
 
So on behalf of your member, who has to be out at another 
meeting just now, I’m very happy to take the time today to 
welcome you here. And I’m going to ask that Reed Gibson and 
Penny Baldwin take a bow. I guess they’re the chaperons that 
are with the group today. We’re glad that you took time from 
your lives to do this for your students and your community. I 
think you will go home more enriched about how our province 
works. 
 
We certainly hope that you enjoy the debate and I’ll ask all 
members to please join with me as we welcome you here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Extended Hours 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So to pick up 
where I left off in discussing the behaviour of the Finance  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

minister and the problem it puts, firstly, the official opposition 
and the third party in, is whether or not, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
getting the answers to the questions that the people of this 
province are spending a good chunk of money to have us in 
here and put forward. And we say not. 
 
To speed this process up, not my speech of course, but to speed 
the legislative process up a few years ago, there was 
arrangements made back then that in fact to sort of take the 
politics out of this place, we would then put forward, we would 
then put forward some  and it was the official opposition of 
the day, the Conservative Party, and I think it was a great idea 
and that’s why this tradition has continued  put forward a 
package of questions, with the more political hard-hitting 
questions in it. So that if in fact we wanted to put a better light 
on what happens in this House, ask the things that a lot of 
people would find perhaps more distasteful, ask them in a 
written form. And we would receive the answer in a written 
form and make that judgement, as I had said earlier today, as to 
whether or not politics need to play out; whether or not there is 
an unacceptable limit, wherever that be. 
 
I guess in each of our own hearts and minds we would set that 
 a line where patronage politics and gamesmanship by that 
guy, the Government House Leader, would be acceptable or 
unacceptable. 
 
But now when the questions get put each and every year, they 
don’t change. And they have known for what, Mr. Third Party 
House Leader  how long have they had the global questions? 
Three years they’ve been doing this?  three, four years? 
 
An Hon. Member:  About five years. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Five years? Oh, five years. So now, what I 
saw the other day . . . Five years we’ve been doing this. 
 
An Hon. Member:  It’s the traditional Conservative way of 
getting the business done. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Oh. I don’t even mind that kind of 
heckling, because it’s funny. 
 
But what happened here the other day, we have had five years 
of these questions, and the departments . . . Let’s be serious. 
These things are set up in a computer. It’s a fill-in-the-blank. 
They know when the minister from . . . the Economic 
Development minister from Elphinstone takes one of his 
several, many trips around the world to benefit, well some 
businesses, and especially his friends. 
 
An Hon. Member:  I think you call them junkets. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Junkets. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I can’t tell you how much I regret having to 
interrupt the member from Wood River, Mr. Speaker, but I 
want to introduce to you and through you to other members 
here in the Assembly, a group of 66 students from Henry 
Kelsey School in my constituency in Saskatoon. This is a 
French immersion school. 
 
The students are accompanied by their teachers, Mme. McCrea 
and M. Cloutier, as well as several parents from Henry Kelsey 
School which has a very good community association too, I 
might add, Mr. Speaker. And they recently opened a very nice 
park in our community right beside the school. And some of the 
people here have done a lot of work in that regard. 
 
I met with the students recently at the school and they had some 
questions for me which I answered. And we will be getting 
together after the students leave here, to have some drinks and 
maybe even a bit of ice cream, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member:  And he’s paying. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  But no ice cream for the members, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want all members to join with me in welcoming the students 
and the teachers and the parents to the legislature today. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Heppner:  With leave, to welcome guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
third party I too would like to welcome those students  and I 
hadn’t realized there were that many of them  from the Henry 
Kelsey School. I hope that your time here in Regina . . . and 
you’re going to have some interesting things to see, and that as 
you meet with your representative that he’ll explain what’s 
happening in the House right now. I think that’ll be rather 
interesting as well. 
 
It was good to hear of your community involvement. And being 
the Minister of Health, I’m sure that all the food that he’s going 
to give you will be very tasty; also be very healthy. On a good 
day he might even take you out for a hamburger, especially if it 
has a lot of lean meat in them. So be sure you ask him that. 
 
Have a good time in Regina and welcome here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Extended Hours 
(continued) 

  



2076  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join 
in with welcoming the visitors here in the galleries today, and 
for taking and viewing what is happening here today. Because it 
is rather interesting, I think, from a public point of view. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in continuing with the debate, and I’m sure as the 
people will enjoy what is happening here today, is why a 
government has chose to ram and jam legislation and the 
workings of the people of Saskatchewan down the throats of 
those people that are trying to represent them. That’s what’s 
happening here today. 
 
(1215) 
 
So getting on with it, why are we having this problem? Well as 
I was talking about these global answers to the global questions 
that have been a consistent, consistent question for five years, 
one has to ask, why aren’t they prepared? 
 
We’re going to get back now to an agreement, the agreements 
between House leaders months ago. Now the government  
the government that claims to be open and accountable  the 
government, the NDP government, is getting rather sloppy in 
the amount of time it takes to get things back to us. First of all it 
tells us it’s not all that open and it’s not all that accountable. 
 
The House leaders had discussions in regards to how quickly 
could we have the process here work to wrap up this House in a 
timely fashion. And it all would hinge around the global 
questions and global answers to those questions. 
 
There is no way that . . . there is no way that an opposition party 
 official opposition or the third party  in fact can say, we’re 
going to vote off estimates and not have the government 
accountable for these certain years. You can’t do that unless 
you know that these answers are coming. You have to have 
time to view them, because what this is is the real tough politics 
of what we do in here. That’s what we do in here. 
 
We want to know, is the Premier getting carried away on 
patronage? Well if those packages say no, it’s just a limit that 
somehow we’d all find acceptable, so be it. Okay? But we need 
the package to be able to find that out. 
 
During question period, has any minister answered a question in 
this session? I don’t think so. I have asked a lot of questions in 
this session, Mr. Speaker, and the answer is usually the same  
that if they would talk to their federal cousins. 
 
Well it almost has people who are watching us on TV 
wondering, why do we need a provincial government? 
Obviously one government is controlling everything. I don’t 
know, it just makes no sense. 
 
But in these global answers that we are waiting for, and that the 
Government House Leader promised  promised, gave his 
word  I only hope that he will not break that word. I only 
hope that the Government House Leader won’t break his word 
to myself or to the Third Party House Leader in having those 
globals, global answers here in a timely fashion. And that 
timely fashion was to happen in April. And do you know, Mr.  

Speaker, we only have one or two departments that have 
responded in the last few days. 
 
And the same . . . let’s talk about Crown corporations for a 
moment. The official opposition members of the Crown 
Corporations Committee have put forward much the same 
global questions for global answers so we can sort of take the 
politics out of this place. Don’t have those either. But what are 
they saying? I sat in Crown Corporations Committee the other 
day with our member from Arm River. And they’re saying well, 
no, no, no, no, we’ll vote these things off and we’ll send them 
this summer. 
 
What good are they in the summer because they’re not going to 
let us revisit . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order! Order! Now members 
know that you’re not allowed to do from your benches what 
you’re not allowed to do on the floor. And I will ask the hon. 
member from Saskatoon Southeast to stand and withdraw that 
remark and apologize to the House. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  I withdraw it. 
 
The Speaker:  I have asked the hon. member to withdraw the 
remark and apologize to the House. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  I withdraw the remark and I apologize to the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  But that is what’s happening in Crown 
Corporations Committee, that in fact we’re not getting the 
answers. Sure, they’ve got officials coming in. There’s always a 
slide projector there; we get to see charts and we get to see 
colours and figures and facts and all this stuff; and they try and 
make it as detailed and technical. So I can almost go out there 
with a pick and shovel and at the end of the day have 
technology somehow to produce a gas well and have it on 
market within a week. 
 
But a lot of the stuff that happens in here isn’t just about the 
very detailed stuff that the bureaucrats are paid to look after on 
behalf of the people in this province also; it is to see how public 
policy set by the politicians is affecting what those bureaucrats 
are to be taking care of. And that’s what we’re trying to get to 
the nub of. 
 
We’re supposed to vote off Crown corporations. We’re voting 
off Crown corporations without dealing with the public policy 
end of the Crowns. 
 
And it’s really then the same thing that’s happening here with 
the ministers. A lot of the time the ministers just are not in the 
House. And I’m not referring to anyone specific today, but it is 
tough, and rightfully so. I mean you can’t have members . . . 
members don’t just represent people by being in the legislature; 
it’s a much bigger picture than that, and we all know it. There 
are times that you must be gone. But when you are gone . . . and 
the opposition, official opposition, and the third party find an 
amount of that acceptable and we don’t pose certain questions, 
and we do delay and we help move Bills along. 



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

And that happens. In fact I recall one . . . just within minutes 
notice a few weeks back when the Justice minister said, you 
know, next week isn’t working well and I could get the officials 
here. Well I said, let’s get at it then. Get your people. If you 
need those Bills through, let’s do it. 
 
We did it; it was working well. There again, I was thanked by 
the Government House Leader. He seems to have forgotten 
those well-working relationships. 
 
So these global answers to our questions, what we need them 
for, firstly  and I was talking about the Economic 
Development minister and the junkets that he has taken all 
around the world  we need to know if in fact the ski trip in 
Chile was being charged to the people of this province. Well 
hopefully not. I can only assume it wouldn’t be and I expect it 
wouldn’t be. But we don’t know that, you see. And that’s sort 
of what we’d like to find out on the people’s behalf. So that is 
just one example. 
 
We also want to know, is there a particular minister that likes to 
use the government aircraft a little more than the rest? I mean, 
are they opposed to driving? Do they not have a driver’s 
licence? Are they a danger . . . Well I guess if you drive on 
Saskatchewan’s highways, I can see why anyone would want to 
take an airplane. 
 
But we need to know these sort of things. How many vehicles 
are being leased by the government? To whom? And you know 
it’s not just because it’s curious for us. We want to know if 
people are still getting Lexus cars as Mr. Messer and Carole 
Bryant did when they took over the reins at a very handsome 
salary of SaskPower. 
 
And of course the Premier phoned Jack up and said, you’ve got 
to give the car back. I don’t care if you have one of equal value 
but you mustn’t have a Lexus because they appear to be more 
expensive than others, and that they were pricey. And I guess 
Mr. Messer did the right thing at the time. I don’t know what 
he’s got now. I expect it’s something better than most of us do 
have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re trying to find out is in fact 
some of the answers to whether or not the Economic 
Development minister, who has now joined us, if in fact 
everything that goes on in his department of a political nature, 
of a handsomely amount of money that they spend, I guess, at 
their discretion, if it’s being done for all the right reasons and 
being done within acceptable guidelines. This is where the 
problem is. 
 
Now let me tell you from a House Leader’s perspective, dealing 
with globals, how this affected us and what we’re prepared to 
do. And the offer has been put on several occasions in the last 
few days and the last hours. It was on . . . I believe it . . . Was it 
day 61 or a couple of days ago when SaskEnergy was in, in 
estimates? Yes I think it was the day that I was first threatened 
severely with this action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I then said to the Government House Leader that, you 
know, we can help move this thing along. Let’s adjust, let’s  

adjust the daily schedule because I think there’s a few 
departments that could actually go quicker, that could actually 
go quicker than others. And if in fact you would bring in 
Energy and Mines  see, they had them once before, the 
Energy and Mines department, up in estimates  we ask our 
questions. 
 
I put it to them at that point. If you would have brought the 
globals I would be prepared to not have to have officials here so 
that we wouldn’t ask detailed technological questions, but in 
fact the minister could do the wrap-up in estimates, because it’s 
the global answers which are a more political nature and he’s 
not going to rely on his officials to do his politics anyways. 
 
So I put that offer to him: that why don’t they go out and get the 
Energy and Mines officials, or whoever they feel they should 
have if they’d just given us the globals. I had minutes to look 
through. I saw a few concerns. I saw a few people that, you 
know, clearly were from sort of a blast from the past so to 
speak, receiving some funds. And it’s only fair that the people 
of this province find out who they are, how much, and what for 
and all of those answers. 
 
But I thought, you know, for the sake of time and to have a 
well-run House, well then let’s be prepared, let’s be prepared to 
move this quickly through. So I put that then to the minister in 
charge of Energy and Mines who thought that was a great idea 
and ran out to get his officials, but the Government House 
Leader, having felt that maybe he’s getting duped for some 
reason because things are going to move too quickly through  
that’s not allowing him to justify this to the media  had to put 
the brakes on it. He got angry. He wasn’t going to deal with us. 
He was going to ram and jam us. 
 
So that’s how we get to these stages when you have people that 
perhaps aren’t as competent at their role and their job as they 
should be if things don’t work. 
 
Later that evening we had Health . . . or Education department 
estimates here. We had Bill No. 5, The Education Act, and to 
not have to have a long line-up of officials sitting out here 
getting paid, getting paid, then it was my suggestion that we 
bring those in . . . give leave of the House to in fact deal with 
Education. I talked to the Minister of Education and told her 
that if it is satisfactory to our critic and to the member from . . . 
well the Education critic of the third party, the member from 
Rosthern, if they would find it acceptable, then of course they 
would let those both vote off that evening. 
 
And do you know what I found out was that our critic . . . 
Where are you from? I should know that. Canora? Pelly? Our 
critic of Education from Canora-Pelly said yes, you know, I 
think from my perspective, he said, the work of the people of 
Saskatchewan, insofar as the legislative sitting goes, has been 
quite well taken care of up to this point and is well worked. 
 
And hats off to the member from Rosthern who said also to 
make this place a better working place, then he too would get 
right to the nub of his questions, deal with it. And that really 
and truly was opposed by the Government House Leader. 
 



2078  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

But being that that offer was put to the Minister of Education, 
who had more concern as to why her officials . . . the expensive 
costs of having those officials here, we agreed, and I think to 
the dismay of the Government House Leader, that that would 
happen. And it did and they got voted off. 
 
Don’t you find that peculiar, Mr. Speaker, when in fact it’s the 
Official Opposition House Leader that is making . . . that is 
forcing the Government House Leader to be efficient and 
effective and move the business of the people along. We 
thought it was, we thought it was quite interesting. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s sort of where we’re at getting along in 
some of these departments. 
 
An Hon. Member:  We’re bored too. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Are you bored, Mr. Member from 
Elphinstone? Well it would be much more boring if in fact  
for you  if in fact you were around to debate such issues for 
these kind of hours. Then you would find it not only boring, but 
you would find it, as we do, very frustrating when people, the 
sick and the elderly, are saying, please, if that’s all you can do 
to get us health care, is to take the Premier to task in that House, 
if that’s the way I personally have to receive my services, can 
you keep the House going just a little bit longer so we can have 
it. And I’ve assured those people in Swift Current that I would 
do that. 
 
Not to extend the hours, but I had a better plan  just to move 
the House into a mode of efficiency and yet at the end deal with 
their concerns. I could only hope that that would have worked 
on behalf of those people, like the member from Arm River had 
mentioned, the 10 people in the wheelchairs that I made that 
promise to the other day. 
 
So when we take a look at . . . and as you noticed, Mr. Speaker, 
as I was up speaking and we have been told on several 
occasions that in fact we didn’t get the globals, I noticed that I 
just received five packages. Now this is from a government that 
is making the statement that they’re not prepared. 
 
So now they’re, as we speak, as I speak and you listen, they are 
playing a bit of a game. They are trying to prove that they’re 
being fair and square with the people of the . . . 
 
(1230) 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member knows very clearly that 
he’s using the material he has as an exhibit and I will simply 
ask that the pages remove it from the . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The hon. member has used it as an exhibit. The hon. 
member has used it as an exhibit. 
 
I will ask that the . . . Order. The hon. member has used it as an 
exhibit. He understands very clearly the rules of the Assembly 
related to exhibits and that the Speaker has requested that items 
that are used in exhibit are removed from the Chamber. I will 
ask that the exhibit be given to the page to be removed from the 
Chamber. 
 

Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Toth:  Point of order. 
 
The Speaker:  The member may state his point of order. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I think on numerous occasions, 
whether it’s government members, whether its cabinet ministers 
or all members, all members tend to have information in front 
of them and tend to be flipping through pages as they’re 
perusing their notes and the information that they’re making, 
their points . . . bringing their points forward. 
 
And I find that, Mr. Speaker, I’m not exactly sure in my 
observations here this morning, I haven’t really acknowledged 
or observed whether the member has deliberately been holding 
up information in his speaking notes to be used as an exhibit. 
 
I haven’t seen anything that  headlines or whatever that could 
be construed as being an exhibit. And, Mr. Speaker, it seems to 
me that your acknowledgements or your suggestions in the 
Assembly this morning will indeed be impeding the process or 
the ability of members to represent . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Now I ask the hon. member: are you 
questioning the ruling of the Chair? Is that what the hon. 
member is doing? 
 
The Chair has made a ruling . . . Order! The Chair has made a 
ruling. It is permissible for the hon. member to put a point of 
order, and I have asked him to put his point of order, but it is 
sounding to me as though he is questioning the ruling that the 
Chair has made. 
 
If the hon. member is putting a point of order, I’ll ask him to 
put his point of order very clearly. But that does not include 
questioning the ruling the Chair has made. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess . . . I’m sorry. The 
understanding I have in the whole process . . . I’m just 
suggesting that as members it’s appropriate for members to 
have an ability to address and have the information available, 
and I’m just trying to get an understanding. Otherwise, I see the 
process in this Assembly being disrupted in the inability of the 
members to represent their views. 
 
The Speaker:  As I understand it, the hon. member, as his 
point of order, has asked whether it is possible for members to 
have material that they wish to use, and the answer is clearly 
yes, and the point of order is well taken. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well then I’m first going to rise on a point 
of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  The Chair has ruled on the point of order. The 
Chair has ruled on the point of order. The point of order that 
was asked was whether members can use material that they 
refer to, that they wish to refer to in their debate. The Chair has 
ruled that members may do that. 
 
The hon. member has not challenged the decision of the  
  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

Speaker. And I have ruled on the point of order and if the . . . Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well thank you then, Mr. Speaker. And if 
I could ask the page to bring me some globals . . . 
 
The Speaker:  No! The Chair has ruled. You shall not 
challenge the decision of the Chair. You will not direct the 
pages to return the material to you that they withdrew from the 
Chamber. The member can have material which he wishes to 
use for his debate but will not challenge the decision of the 
Chair. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Speaker, the globals that are one of 
the hang-ups today . . . the problem with moving ahead and 
doing as the government has requested, and that being to vote 
off any global or any estimates without being allowed to have 
the information available, especially in front of you while 
you’re up asking the questions, is the difficult part. It is why 
this Assembly is coming to a point where it’s unworkable. We 
can’t make this thing work if in fact we have to live by the rules 
of the government in this manner. 
 
An Hon. Member:  They’re rewriting the rules. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well as the member from Cypress Hills is 
saying, that the rules are being rewritten as the day is 
proceeding. It sure is disappointing that people would have 
those . . . harbour those feelings and why must they have those 
feelings. 
 
Getting back to the globals and in particular getting back to the 
behaviour of the Finance minister two nights ago, giving 
answers to our opposition Finance critic, the member from 
Thunder Creek, and the sharpness and the viciousness of her 
responses. It just leads one to wonder why aren’t they bringing 
this stuff forward and what are they hiding. 
 
But I enjoyed, in fact, listening to some of the answers she was 
not giving publicly but heckling back. And those were: I don’t 
have them, this is something new, I’ve never seen them. But as 
the member from Moosomin said, this is five years  and I 
thought it was three, he says it’s five . . . she’s been Finance 
minister for a few years. I know she’s dealt with them before. 
 
And yet she was answering the member from Thunder Creek, 
trying to let on to this House, as she often does  she’ll hold up 
. . . I won’t use an exhibit. She’ll hold up the budget book, the 
budget address, the Supplementary Estimates, and she’ll say, 
but if, but if the member would read, it’s right here. And you 
know what, it had nothing to do with the . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Now the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Southeast knows  Order  that she is not permitted to do 
from her seat what she is not permitted to do from the floor. 
And I have previously today required her to . . . Order. I have 
previously today required her to withdraw an unparliamentary 
remark and apologize to the House. And I ask her to do so now 
without hesitation. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Without hesitation, I withdraw the remark, Mr.  

Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  And I also required the hon. member to 
apologize for the remark. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  I apologize for calling the hon. member the name 
I did. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for 
making sure that there is decorum that remains in this House. 
 
The Speaker:  Now the hon. member knows that it is 
inappropriate to comment on the rulings of the Chair, and I will 
simply ask him, if he wishes to continue his debate, to do so 
directly. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just get all 
the exhibits away from me here. Mr. Speaker, the problem that 
we have, the problem that we have, is the rules, I guess, that we 
are being told we must live by. And I’m not questioning your 
rules. I’m talking about the government. The two members that 
are sitting there cackling and laughing as we speak  the 
Government House Leader and the former government house 
leader, the member from Elphinstone and the member from. . . 
who cares? He won’t be here next time anyways. Those are the 
kind of antics that people are finding unacceptable. 
 
So if in fact we’re not supposed to get the answers to the written 
questions . . . and it was all done just to make this a better place 
for everyone, to help the people of this province move their 
business along  move their business, not our business; it’s 
theirs. We’ve got to be straight on this. Who are we here for? 
 
An Hon. Member:  You are not straight on anything. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  I am getting sick and tired of being called 
a liar in this House. 
 
Now the problem is if we can’t have these kind of answers; it 
puts us in a position where in fact the government is going to 
ram through something in this Legislative Assembly which is 
not in the best interests of the people of the province. They’re 
going to ram through something that can’t be revisited. 
 
And that, we have to ask why? Why would you want to do 
something  and the Government House Leader, you know, I 
would love you to answer this question  why would you do 
something that you know isn’t in the best interests of the people 
that elected you, or any of us? Why would that happen? 
 
Is it because for the longest time you accused the former 
Conservative government of being the worst government on 
record? And I’m not going to dispute that. That’s not for me to 
argue about, whether they were or they weren’t, here nor there. 
I will have to stick up for them and say that I know some of the 
most good friends and honourable people in this Legislative 
Assembly today don’t follow in the guidelines that you try to 
paint them as. All right. 
 
But I’m not so sure about some of these guys across there. I  
  



2080  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

don’t know about that. I think that there’s some serious 
problems over there. There must be. There must be, because 
you see it’s not the member from Rosthern or the member from 
Cypress Hills trying to hide what’s happening in this House; it’s 
you, you’re the one. You’re the one who’s instructing. 
 
Because as you recall, it was you that I sent the letter to  
sorry, I’m going to address this through the Chair; I think it’s 
more appropriate. It is the Government House Leader that I sent 
the letter to, to ask for the globals. We arrived at the agreement. 
And it was his word that I accepted and it was his word that the 
member from Moosomin accepted, that we would have these 
sort of answers well in advance. 
 
And this is not an exhibit, Mr. Speaker; this is the Votes and 
Proceedings of the House. The problem that we’re having here 
is that the government . . . The government are not only not 
providing answers in a political fashion, but when they are 
ramming Bills . . . I think I’ve covered the estimates problem 
that we’re having, of not getting the proper answers, instead of 
getting the vicious attacks by people like the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
But when they want to ram through some of the Bills, and look 
at pages . . . I think it was 116, 117. Is that including the one 
this morning? Or the ones that they probably intend on bringing 
in Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, while they’re 
jamming the hours and still bringing in Bills? 
 
I don’t know what all it includes. But you know, when I look at 
some of the Bills that had been brought forward . . . And you 
add to that, Mr. Speaker, you add to that six, seven Bills  15 
 that the third party have brought through. Something like 
that; 15, 20 Bills that the official opposition has brought 
forward that we hear are important for the people of this 
province to debate. You add all those Bills up, and you tell me 
if 61 days is enough time for anybody to properly address them. 
 
(1245) 
 
And we take a look at some of the Bills. And the way the 
legislature has worked for years, you know better than I that 
some of the Bills that are of a more controversial nature tend to 
come up in the first session so that . . . Well especially that’s 
how it has been working when I think back in the last term and 
perhaps the term just before that. They’re of a more 
controversial nature, so that they bring in all their . . . do their 
tougher stuff. And then they sit there like, with their fingers 
crossed for like three years, thinking, I hope the people forget. 
 
And that’s why we had a government that did not have the 
courage and did not have the public onside when they decided 
to, first of all, bring in this all-encompassing health back, I 
think four years ago, five years ago, whatever. It seems like a 
lifetime. And it was a lifetime for some people. It was the end 
of a lifetime for some people. 
 
To now bring in four Draconian health Bills  I shouldn’t say 
four, maybe only three of them are, two definitely are  and 
say that in totality you have about nine hours to speak on them 
and if you don’t do that, then we will force it upon you, and  

that’s not right, especially at the same time. 
 
And let’s not forget this is also — they were going to be 
bringing in The Service Districts Act which completely 
changed the face of rural Saskatchewan as we’ve known it for 
years. To completely change the way local governments 
operate, to completely change the way local governments are 
funded in the services they provide, and who they are 
answerable to, and who they’re not answerable to, and who 
their people that are out in those areas . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Changing stories with the Premier and 
the minister. One day it was off . . . 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Well right, right. This is some of the 
problem, as the member from Arm River has raised. We have a 
government . . . And looking at The Service Districts Act which 
in fact has of yesterday been pulled because the SUMA and 
SARM representatives pulled the Premier into reality, so the 
Bill was also pulled. 
 
But for us as opposition members, official opposition members, 
to try and figure out what is happening in this session and how 
are we going to do what’s right and what’s best for the people 
of this province, when you have the minister in charge of The 
Service Districts Act overseeing this Act not in agreement with 
the Premier . . . And somehow we were to sit back and say, you 
know what  we already see they’re fighting in their own 
caucus; they’re having problems; cabinet isn’t getting along. 
 
Do we want to play into that? Ah, somebody else must be 
working on those problems. Let them have at it. 
 
Well, if it wasn’t for the member, if it wasn’t for our critic . . . 
Where is he from? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  If it wasn’t for the member from Saltcoats, 
if it wasn’t for the member from Saltcoats bringing forward, 
bringing forward . . . 
 
An Hon. Member:  Don’t use up all your good material, 
Glen. You got all day Monday to go on this and all day Tuesday 
and all day Wednesday. Don’t use up all this good material 
now, Glen. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  . . . when the Government House Leader’s 
saying his two-bits worth. If it wasn’t for the member from 
Saltcoats also bringing the issues forward on behalf of the rural 
municipal governments of the province and embarrassing the 
minister, who of course as we all know  and we might as well 
have it on public record too  so thoroughly embarrassed by 
his hard work and his knowledge of rural Saskatchewan, 
thoroughly embarrassed. A minister who was so out of touch 
that she finally caved in to SARM and SUMA and should have, 
because you shouldn’t, as a lone representative of the people, 
say that I know better than other representatives of the people. 
 
I mean that’s why we negotiate; that’s why we get things on the 
go. Right? Well as the Premier said, less fighting. Why fight?  
  



May 31, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

Shelve something; let’s negotiate. So she caved in. The Premier 
said no way. No. You must go for it. 
 
You see, because I’m an urban lawyer, he said. I’m an urban 
lawyer, as is my urban Health minister . . . lawyer Health 
minister, my urban lawyer, lawyer, lawyer, lawyer, lawyer . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . urban lawyer House Leader. Good 
point. Is there a trend that’s perhaps happening here that isn’t as 
healthy as it could be? Well perhaps, perhaps. 
 
But now The Service Districts Act, because of the severity of 
the pressure put on from the member from Saltcoats  just to 
close on this  putting extreme pressure to the minister so she 
caved in, having the Premier having to take over the ball of the 
day, and finally he caved in. Well, we have it pulled. 
 
Now that it’s pulled . . . and it was going to be a very 
time-consuming Bill at the end of this session, so the 
Government House Leader told me himself and I can only 
assume I was able to take his word  surely his word is good. 
We can only assume that he wouldn’t be not telling the truth. I 
assumed he was. I can only assume that of other members of 
this Legislative Assembly. 
 
But in fact it got pulled. So that should have really shortened up 
the time period that we’re dealing with. That should have made 
things a lot easier. That should have allowed us more time to 
deal with some of the other Bills that were of a great 
importance, great importance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well let me use an example. I think it was Bill No. 44, and that 
would have been  the member from Thunder Creek will help 
me out here  The Crown Corporations Act, Bill No. 44. 
That’s correct. Well that Bill, that Bill had some immense, what 
we viewed and the public viewed as problems with it. But it 
was also a Bill that the government, that our Finance critic, the 
official opposition Finance critic from Thunder Creek wanted to 
just put down the road for a few days. 
 
Had that message sent across to Government House Leader, to 
the Government House Leader, to say please, would you just 
put that on hold for a few days so we can ensure that we have 
time to talk to the people that are going to affected by this Bill, 
and then bring it in and we will make our points on behalf of 
the people. If they’re good points, we can only assume you 
would accept them. If they’re not, if you haven’t went and done 
your homework, if in fact all you’re doing is ramming and 
jamming and never talking to the people, then you deserve a lot 
rougher ride on a Bill like that. You deserve a tough time in 
bringing forward legislation which is forced upon people. 
 
And when we look at . . . as the member from Arm River 
pointed out in the Friday, May 31, 1996  this is the 
Leader-Post  the headline reads . . . you’ll have to excuse me, 
I think I’m losing my voice here, Mr. Speaker. Obviously they 
aren’t, by the heckling. But, “Bill, loathed by local gov’ts, 
pulled.” That says it all. 
 
We’re getting to the end of a session  a very noisy session  
and still we’re having legislation that the government isn’t sure 
of. Mr. Speaker, it wouldn’t be proper for the official  

opposition to cave in to the . . . I don’t want to say Naziism, but 
I do want to make a point . . . the socialist Naziist ways or 
whatever . . . I don’t know what they’re trying to achieve here. 
 
But to actually do this sort of stuff where the people don’t have 
a say, it’s only when they’re trying to run away. It’s only when 
they’re trying to run away from the people, and the people 
themselves find a way to reach out and grab one of these people 
by the collar and reel them back in a little bit. That’s what 
happened here  the Premier got grabbed by the collar. And 
that’s why things happen. That’s why they impressed upon him 
the significance of his defeat in the next election  next 
election. 
 
Well you know, the Arm River MLA has just made a very good 
point. If in fact, and it is, and it is so  a Bill that was so 
loathed by the people, why did they decide to ram it through in 
the first place? I’ll have to say that in a few years we’ll be in 
government I suspect; I fully suspect that. But the way we 
intend on operating our style of government would be to go out 
and consult with people, find out what is it that we can do for 
you to make this a better place for all of us. What is it that we 
can do for you, with you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, be 
servants of the people. 
 
Yes, the member from Melfort’s right on. To be servants of the 
people, to do their work. Not to come in here and say, you 
know, ideologically  ideologically I must follow this 
highway. Well you’d rather follow that highway than the ones 
that we have out there today with all those holes  those “18 
holes at the golf course” highways that the Premier joked about. 
 
But wouldn’t it be better to get back on track? Wouldn’t it be 
better to in fact have the people on side before you did this? I 
could only think it would be. That’s how we would do it. Right? 
Everyone’s agreeing. You want the people with us, right? How 
about over there? Oh everyone got busy reading. 
 
You see, it’s best if you have the people on side. Then you 
don’t have to have, you don’t have to have the kind of problems 
that we see at the end of this session. That’s what’s wrong here, 
Mr. Government House Leader, that’s what’s wrong. 
 
You’re not better than, you’re not smarter than, and you 
shouldn’t be overruling the people that elected you. That’s how 
we view it. You should be representing them. You should be at 
their level, with an understanding of their needs, their wants, 
and how to put that whole package together. If you can’t do 
that, there is a replacement in the wings. 
 
And I can talk about your replacements in a few years. In fact 
we will, in the near future, start introducing some of them in the 
gallery as they come to visit and look at the seats that they will 
be holding in the very near future. 
 
And what makes us so sure of that, Mr. Speaker, is the very fact 
that if you run government in a fashion that . . . if you run 
government in a fashion that is dictatorial, if you run 
government in a fashion that has no room for the people, you’re 
going to get dealt with . . . (inaudible) . . . And that’s what’s 
happening here. 
  



2082  Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 1996 

The people that you have to deal with are going to tell you what 
they loathe about you, what they loathe about your ideologies or 
your antics, or your ways of doing business. And you know, 
ideologies aside, you know parties of course are getting a little 
closer to the same as a rule . . . Well, not all the time. There’s 
some that go out there on a limb once in a while. 
 
But it’s the way they do business. It’s the way they do business 
and the things that they are prepared or not prepared to do to 
their people that they represent. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Show contempt. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Good point. Who are they not opposed to 
show contempt to? Who are they willing to do what to, to 
achieve a goal. 
 
And what’s often confusing not to just the official opposition 
and to third party and to the people we represent, but it’s why? 
 why would you do it? Power and manipulation. Is that it? 
It’s got to be more than that. Surely a government has more 
depth than that. Somebody help out here. There’s got to be 
more depth to that, isn’t there? Wouldn’t you run government 
for better reasons than patronage and power? Otherwise, 
otherwise we’re all in trouble, big trouble. 
 
You know, I do hear that we have members that are just itching 
to get into the debate because they’re giving speeches over there 
as we speak, and noisy speeches at that. And you know, when 
we look at how this could so easily . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Now why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude:  With leave, to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce Mr. Zach Douglas from Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation. Welcome to the House, Mr. 
Douglas. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Extended Hours 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to welcome Zach Douglas. I’ve known Zach for a number of 
years and Zach has been an employee of this province for . . . 
well I guess since the 1991 election. And I shouldn’t get in . . . 
Zach’s an old friend. I won’t get into that, whether he was hired 
in October 1991 or not. It’s probably more coincidence, Zach, 
than not. So we’ll move on . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 
it must be a good employer; you bet. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we see the problem of having a  

government that has chosen to forget the needs and the wishes 
of the people of this province bring forward a motion that 
would have us sit from early morning till late at night . . . and 
we don’t mind that work. But we’ve got to ensure . . . And do 
you know, Mr. Speaker, that in fact many of our caucus 
colleagues have breakfast at 6 in the morning? And we do. And 
we’re proud to be doing that because immediately thereafter we 
can start to work for the people of this province. 
 
And I’m sure that a few hours after that time period, when these 
people across who are ramming the legislation before us, start 
to wake up and call that morning, well they would be better 
served if they would just be a little perkier in the morning, pick 
up the phone, and phone out to places like Eatonia, phone out to 
the RM (rural municipality) of Coronach. 
 
Oh if you want to have a conversation, phone out to the RM of 
Coronach and say, I just have a short question for you; how is 
health care? Well, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. It now being 1 o’clock, this House will 
stand adjourned. And before we leave, I wish all members an 
enjoyable and peaceful weekend in your constituency with your 
families and your constituents. 
 
This House now stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2055 
Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 
Aldridge ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2055 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2055 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2055 
Draude ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2055, 2082 
Renaud ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 
Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2056 
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2063 
Johnson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2067 
Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2074 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2075 
Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2075 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Parent Support Program  

Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 
Victims of Domestic Violence Legislation  

Stanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2056 
Hearing and Speech Month and National Access Awareness Week  

Murray ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 
Hamilton ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 

Seniors Games  
Murrell ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 

Swift Current Care Centre Rally  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2057 

Punnichy Royal Canadian Mounted Police Receive Commendations  
Flavel ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2058 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Agreement with Rural Health Coalition  

McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2058 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2058 

Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre Closure  
Osika .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2059 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2059 

Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims  
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2060 
Cline........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2060 

Christian Counselling Services Funding  
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2060 
Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2060 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement  
Goohsen ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 
Wiens ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2061 

Highway Maintenance  
McLane ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2062 
Renaud ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2062 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS  

Extended Hours  
Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2063 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2065 
Lorje ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2076, 2079 
Toth ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2078 
 


