


















































March 21, 1996 Hansard


  LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 411 
  March 21, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on behalf 
of many concerned citizens of the province of Saskatchewan, I 
present a petition concerning the Plains Health Centre in 
Regina. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The signatures of concerned citizens are from Moose Jaw, 
Regina, Milestone, Wilcox, Weyburn, and many other small 
communities throughout southern Saskatchewan, and in 
Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions of hundreds of names regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
numerous southern Saskatchewan towns, and also Regina. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 
names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Regina, Swift Current, Gravelbourg, Vanguard, Neville, 
and a few more. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 
would like to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
People that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are primarily 
from Carlyle and Manor. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present petitions on behalf of the Plains Health Centre. The 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 

 
The petitions come primarily from the areas around Strasbourg 
and Earl Grey and also from Regina. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present names of 
petitions from people throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Moose Jaw, 
Regina, and all over southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Mr. Speaker, I again rise today to present 
petitions of names from people throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many concerned and 
unhappy citizens in the Odessa area. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Moose Jaw, Caronport, Regina, Mossbank, just to 
mention a few. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 
of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 
Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 
 

And the people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re from Regina, they’re from Weyburn, Yellow Grass; 
they’re from all throughout Saskatchewan. And I wish to 
present this petition to the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer is as 
follows: 



412  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the Plains 
Health Centre. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition, mainly 
from Regina, but I see all throughout southern Saskatchewan — 
Balcarres, Balgonie, Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the government to 
take action to allow an increase in the security deposits in 
rental properties; and 
 
Of citizens petitioning the Assembly to reconsider closure 
of the Plains Health Centre. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Monday next ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training regarding former employee, 
Mr. Michael A. Nelson: (1) according to OC #140/96 
dated March 12, 1996, Michael Nelson retired from his 
position as an instructor, technical institute engineer in 
1987. Why did Mr. Nelson received an ex gratia payment 
of $24,000 this month, almost 10 years after he resigned 
from his position; (2) are there any other former employees 
who have resigned over the past 10 years in line to receive 
similar ex gratia payments; (3) how was Mr. Nelson’s 
payment calculated; (4) who approved Mr. Nelson’s ex 
gratia payment? 

 
I so submit. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, regarding 
political staff and appointments, I give notice that on day no. 22 
I shall ask the following question: 
 

How many individuals are currently employed by the 
Government of Saskatchewan as the result of political 
appointments; (2) what is the average salary for each of 
these political appointments; (3) what is the total number 
of ministerial assistants currently employed by the cabinet 
ministers; and (4) what is the average salary for these 
ministerial assistants? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I want to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the legislature a class of grade 3 students from 
Cupar, Saskatchewan. They’re situated in the Speaker’s gallery. 
With them today is their teacher, Carol Stuart, Rose Leitchman,  

Jean Calibaba, Kevin Krammer, Lynn Chillog, I believe it is. 
 
I will meet with them later and hopefully they won’t have too 
tough of questions for me, and we’ll have a photo and so forth 
and meet with them afterwards. And I want to ask all members 
to please join with me in welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am especially pleased 
today to have a group of students from the Humboldt 
constituency to introduce this afternoon. 
 
There are 41 grade 8 students, 17 from Bruno and 24 from 
Cudworth. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Jake 
Jmaeff from Bruno and Mr. Jim Bridgeman from Cudworth, 
parents Irene Wurm, Marie Tegenkamp, and Larry Hrycan, and 
their bus driver from the Alvena Bus Company. 
 
I would like all members to join me in a warm welcome, 
welcoming the students and the parents to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome the students and the adults from Bruno and Cudworth. 
Having spent part of my teaching career there, I had a very good 
time. And I should also tell the staff up there, you’d better 
watch that career; you never know where you’ll end up at. 
 
Welcome here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, a group of 74 young people from Cardinal Leger 
School from the College Park area of Saskatoon. They are 
seated in the west gallery today and are accompanied by 
teachers Joanne Weninger, Stephanie Hanna, and Gisèle 
Bettcher; also by chaperon Maureen Duensing. 
 
I’ll be very pleased to meet with this energetic group of young 
people after question period and join them for drinks and a 
photo. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce 
some people from the Saltcoats constituency, Dan and Fran 
Kirkham. They are seed growers in the Saltcoats constituency 
and one of the larger farmers we have there. And I’d like to, 
through you, ask everyone to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly, in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, a fellow by the name of Darren Will.  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

Darren is a farmer in the Eldersley area and he’s visiting his 
brother Michael. And Michael has told him a lot about question 
period so he thought he’d come and just view it for himself. 
 
Please join with me in welcoming Darren. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Day Against Racial Discrimination 
 

Mr. Kasperski:  Mr. Speaker, today has been declared by the 
United Nations as International Day Against Racial 
Discrimination, a declaration reinforced as well by the Minister 
of Municipal Government for Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this day has been set aside for two reasons: to 
remember, first of all, those killed at Sharpville, South Africa in 
1960 in a peaceful demonstration against apartheid, and also to 
renew our commitment to overcome all forms of discrimination 
and racism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is also a day to meditate on the fact that in the 
span of recorded history we have come from Eden to 
Nuremberg, to Sharpville, to Bosnia, to Somalia, to Rwanda  
all names which in stark shorthand tell us the consequences of 
racism, names which remind us why this day is so important to 
all of us. 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, this is a day when we can attack 
discrimination by celebrating the cultural diversity that has so 
enriched our nation and our province. 
 
The motto of Saskatchewan is, “From Many Peoples, Strength.” 
The roll call of members in this Assembly shows us all the 
evidence we need to demonstrate this strength of our diversity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members and all the people of 
Saskatchewan will recommit themselves on this day, and all 
days, to the elimination of discrimination from our society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
recognize today’s designation as International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. It’s very appropriate; we 
have a number of children in the House today. 
 
I stand here as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
in this Assembly representing thousands of people from a wide 
range of cultural backgrounds. Yet amazingly, it was only on 
July 1, 1960 that native people in Saskatchewan actually gained 
a right to vote in provincial elections. That was only 36 years 
ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, some legal progress has been made but there is still 
discrimination in other parts of our society, whether that be in 
the workplace or the playground. We need to teach our children 
to celebrate racial and cultural differences. It is incredibly sad 
that anyone would be treated differently just because of their  

skin colour, language, or heritage. Our society should 
appreciate the mosaic of cultures that make Saskatchewan 
unique and special. 
 
We all live together on this planet, and with all the wars, the 
thousands of people starving to death, and the senseless acts of 
violence like the killings in Dunblane, Scotland, the last worry, 
the last effort that we should put is towards racial 
discrimination. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And that in Cree is: we all have to live together; that is the only 
way. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to as well join with the other MLAs in this Assembly to 
speak out on this specific day, of International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, truly we live in a wonderful land, in a wonderful 
province. And as we see around us, and around this world, there 
are many places where people do not have the opportunities, the 
privileges, the freedoms that we so readily enjoy and take for 
granted. And we want to indeed acknowledge the fact that, 
while we have worked towards recognizing the fact that all 
people are created equal regardless of their race, religion, 
nationality, or creed, there still are differences and people tend 
to at times look at other people in a different manner. I think 
it’s certainly appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we take the time to 
recognize it’s time we overcame these barriers. 
 
And I would also suggest, Mr. Speaker, as I heard on the open 
line this morning, that we’re careful not to include and involve, 
while we attempt to assimilate all peoples, that we may form a 
background attempt at discrimination. And I think it is 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we make a real effort to include 
all people in society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

South East Regional Economic Development Authority 
Officially Opens 

 
Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday, March 
19, I was pleased to join with the Minister of Economic 
Development to take part in the official launch of the South 
East Regional Economic Development Authority in Weyburn, 
SEREDA. 
 
One of the most important aspects of the REDAs (regional 
economic development authority) which are being formed 
across this province is that they involve grass roots decision 
making. The founding members of the South East REDA 
include the city of Weyburn, RMs (rural municipality) of 
Brokenshell, Scott, Wellington, and Weyburn. Also included 
are the Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration, South  



414  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

Saskatchewan Region; the District 7 Agriculture Development 
and Diversification Board; Southeast Regional College, Souris 
Valley Campus; and Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. REDA partners 
also include the Radville and Weyburn chambers of commerce, 
and the Hardy and Thorson Law Firm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by having more regional economic development 
authorities formed in Saskatchewan, we are creating new jobs 
and opportunities across Saskatchewan. To date, 13 REDAs 
have helped established 76 businesses and have created over 
300 jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to congratulate the South East REDA chairperson, 
Ted Hillstead, and all of the other stakeholders in the South 
East REDA, for their hard work in forming the economic 
development authority. I know the dynamic men and women in 
this region, by working together, will carry the REDA concept 
forward to realize its full potential. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students Against Drinking and Driving 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to recognize 
the Humboldt chapter of SADD (Students Against Drinking and 
Driving) for their efforts in promoting awareness of drinking 
and driving and for their submissions of more than 580 
legislative petitions for changes to drunk driving legislation. 
 
The Humboldt chapter was the most vocal of any Saskatchewan 
SADD group. Friday, March 15, I had the opportunity to speak 
to the student assembly at the Humboldt Collegiate to kick off 
Impaired Driving Awareness Week. Following the assembly, 
more than 200 people took to the streets in their second annual 
memory march to honour those who have been killed or injured 
in motor vehicle accidents caused by drinking drivers. 
 
Other activities planned to promote awareness include making 
presentations about drinking and driving to elementary school 
classes, and the province-wide activity sound-off, send-off, on 
March 27 from 12 noon to 12:01. 
 
The Humboldt RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), 
ambulance and fire department, will participate in this event. 
Congratulations to the Humboldt chapter of SADD and 
president Jeremy Elder. Your hard work and determination have 
paid off and you have made a great difference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Heroes 
 

Mr. Johnson:  Mr. Speaker, there are heroes in every corner 
of this province, ordinary men and women who give of 
themselves to serve others. I want to pay tribute to two such 
heroes in my constituency who last July risked their lives to 
save two other men and are rightfully being honoured for their 
actions. 

Last July 23, Mr. Albert Soucy of Leoville and Brent Turgeon 
of Spiritwood came upon a vehicle that had just rolled over into 
the ditch. There were two people trapped inside. The two men 
. . . they pulled two men from the . . . freed two men from the 
vehicle, which was totally destroyed by fire after the rescue. 
 
On March 18, Mr. Soucy is being honoured in Leoville by the 
Royal Canadian Humane Association with a bronze medal for 
bravery. Mr. Turgeon will be honoured at an event in 
Spiritwood next month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I consider myself privileged to represent these two 
heroes in the Legislative Assembly. Both deserve the warmest 
applause of this Assembly for their extraordinary courage. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Happy Birthday 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like today to 
recognize the birthday of one of our members. This man is truly 
amazing. He skates like a 16-year-old. He plays basketball like 
a 26-year-old. But he’s really just a 36-year-old MLA. And the 
people of Yellow Grass, brown grass, green grass and 
crab-grass, not to leave out quack grass, have all joined us in 
wishing Buckley Belanger a happy birthday. 
 
Buckley, we just want you to know that our dog is definitely in 
this fight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gas Price Increases 
 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, for years oil 
companies have told us that the price we pay at gas pumps is 
directly related to three variables: first the well-head prices; 
second, government taxes; and thirdly, competition. 
 
On March 20, gas pump prices at every Regina service station 
I’ve seen, and I’ve been looking, shot up 5 cents a litre. Within 
minutes all the prices went up the same 5 cents a litre. Why? 
 
Well firstly, well-head prices have been stable for the last year. 
That leaves yesterday’s 5 cent increase unexplained. 
 
Secondly, the last federal gasoline tax increase was in 1995 and 
the last provincial bump was in 1993. This still leaves the 5 
cents unexplained. 
 
Competition is the third and remaining variable. Everyone of 
course knows and accepts that there is keen competition 
between all the oil companies. This likely explains why when 
one company raises the price by 5 cents, the others instantly 
make the same move to keep up with the competition. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, since we have keen, free enterprise 
industry competition with no price fixing, yet gasoline pump 
prices jumped within minutes at virtually all Regina stations,  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

the question remains: why the 5 cent jump? Do any oil 
company executives have a new, more creative answer for the 
motoring public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Administration 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
asked the Minister of Health a number of questions in this 
House yesterday about his government’s spending choices. I 
called on the minister to justify paying tens of thousands of 
dollars to consultants to study Providence Place in Moose Jaw. 
The minister responded by stating, and I quote: 
 

. . . if I’m not paying the consultants the money, obviously 
it isn’t my place to justify paying the money because that is 
a decision of the local district health board. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it was not the district health board that hired 
these consultants, it was the Health department. Will the 
minister explain if he was intentionally trying to mislead the 
House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now I think the member will be 
aware that the rules of the House do not permit one to do 
indirectly what one is not allowed to do directly. And it is 
clearly — order — and it is clearly not permissible with the 
rules of the House to accuse a member of intentionally 
misleading the House. 
 
I will ask the member to withdraw that unparliamentary remark 
and rephrase his question succinctly and we’ll proceed from 
there. Or I will go to another questioner. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll withdraw that question, but 
I would still like the minister to clarify his statement that he 
made in the House yesterday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Yes, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
the opportunity to clarify the statement I made in the House 
yesterday. What I said yesterday was substantially correct in 
that it was the Providence board and the Moose Jaw Health 
District that asked for a study to be conducted. 
 
Where I was incorrect, however, is that the department did pay 
for the consultant on behalf of Moose Jaw rather than having 
Moose Jaw foot the bill. So I was incorrect in that regard, 
unintentionally. I apologize to the member and I apologize to 
the House. 
 
And now I’d like to know if the member from Wood River, 
who told us yesterday that a women had received a $17,000 
increase and identified her, is going to apologize, since it turns 
out that the first year she was off work for three months and not 
paid. The second year she worked a full year; that’s why she got 
paid her full salary. She didn’t get any increase. And I’d  

like to know if that member is going to apologize for that 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the 
Minister of Health, when he mentions he was substantially 
correct, does that mean being stingy with the truth? But, Mr. 
Speaker, in today’s edition of the Regina Leader-Post, John 
Borody, executive director of the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek 
District Health Board confirms, and I quote, “It is the health 
department that is picking up the consultants’ tabs”. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why he does not know 
what is going on in his own department and apologize 
completely for the comments he made in the House yesterday? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I apologized to the member. I 
apologize to the House. And I suggest that when other members 
make statements in the House which are incorrect they should 
do likewise and also apologize. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, as my colleague mentioned 
yesterday, the NDP (New Democratic Party) government’s 
district support branch, another level of bureaucracy created by 
this government, has an annual payroll of $1.2 million. 
Coincidentally, this is the same amount of money needed to run 
the geriatric and rehabilitation unit at Providence Place in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this facility will be cut off from government 
funding at the end of this month because the government has 
decided to break yet another promise and cancel funding. Will 
the minister commit to eliminating the district support branch 
and use these valuable health dollars for the purpose they are 
intended  to care for our sick and our elderly and maintain 
funding for the geriatric and rehabilitation unit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  I find it strange, Mr. Speaker, that the 
member, like the member from Wood River yesterday, says that 
we created a new branch called the district support branch. But 
what the member does not say is that the district support 
branch, when it was created in 1993, replaced six other 
branches, namely the rural health facilities branch, the 
continuing care branch, the urban hospitals branch, the mental 
health branch, the community health treatment and prevention 
services branch. Those branches were abolished and rolled into 
one branch. 
 
And these members get up and say when you replace six 
branches with one you’re creating a new level of bureaucracy. 
No, Mr. Speaker, we eliminated five levels of bureaucracy to 
create the district support branch and I think the members over 
there should come clean with the people of the province, 
because we’ve been reducing the administration in the  



416  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

Department of Health and in the health districts, and this 
information that they’re putting out is bogus information, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the 
minister shouldn’t work with too many details; it gets him into 
more problems than he can handle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Thunder Creek has 
demonstrated, the Minister of Health appears to have no 
knowledge of what is happening in his own department, and the 
contempt that his department continues to show should surprise 
no one. However I’ve discovered yet another move by his 
department that is to say at least surprising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the March 13 edition of the Moose Jaw Times 
Herald  and I have a copy of it here that I would like to send 
over to the minister so he could follow along  it’s a news 
item titled “There’s life after the pink slip,” which explains that 
a Mr. Bert Linklater was recently let go by the Moose 
Jaw/Thunder Creek District Health Board because, and I quote: 
“. . . the board’s desire to streamline its administrative structure 
and reduce costs”. Now we find that Mr. Linklater is joining the 
list of bureaucrats serving in the district support branch that I 
questioned the minister about yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, district health boards are attempting to . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. I’ll ask the member to put his question. 
Order. I’ll ask the member to put his question directly. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister 
explain why his department is then going out and rehiring the 
same people that the district health boards let go to save money 
and stop firing nurses. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well the member knows a lot about firing 
leaders, Mr. Speaker. But I want to say to the House that one 
has to be very careful when dealing with the question from the 
member, because the member was in here yesterday talking 
about the same matter. And he said that there was a woman in 
the district support branch, the branch he’s talking about, that 
had got a $17,000 pay increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I thought, well I should check into that. So I did. And I 
found out that that woman had been on an unpaid leave of 
absence for personal reasons for 3 months in the first year and 
worked 12 months in the second year. 
 
So she got paid for the first 12 months in the second year and 9 
months in the first year, which is understandable. And what 
does the member do? He comes into this House and says that 
this woman who got paid when she worked and didn’t get paid 
when she didn’t work, got a big raise. 
 
And I say that this information presented by this member is 
bogus. And I apologized when I had it wrong and I say that  

member should apologize when he’s got it wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Correctional Policies 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
question to the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has been patting itself on the 
back lately because it claims to be listening to the people of 
Saskatchewan. In fact the Premier spent $30,000 to go on 
television to tell the people how he’s listening to them. Yet 
every day we see again and again how this government is deaf 
when it comes to what the people are saying. 
 
The people are saying loud and clear that we should be getting 
tougher on criminals, not softer. Let them pay for their crime. 
Yet now we see this government prepared to let criminals out of 
provincial jails early as a cost-cutting measure. 
 
Can the Justice minister tell us if this is what the people of 
Saskatchewan told him they wanted during the taxpayer-funded 
road show he was part of in January? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for his question. And I guess I continually remind 
myself that I have a great deal of respect for the hon. member 
because of his long career with the police force. And so I do 
appreciate these questions. 
 
The whole concern we have in this province is that the 
community and people should be protected. Now correctional 
centres are a part of this whole public protection, and they 
should be used where they’re most effective — for those people 
who are high-risk and who are going to be a risk in the 
community. They’re not places where we should put people 
who are low-risk and who are not going to cause a problem in 
the community. 
 
The people of our province have said very clearly that they want 
a justice system that responds to the communities, and that’s 
what we are going to provide. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the Justice 
minister’s response, and I agree with what he is telling us. But 
as an ex-member of the RCMP I can again tell you personally 
about the thousands and thousands of dollars that are spent 
investigating crimes, catching criminals, ensuring they are put 
away to serve their time through the criminal justice process. 
We have a government that’s dragging its heels on legislation 
relating to pedophiles, and yet they’re prepared to put more 
criminals on the street. 
 
Mr. Minister, did the people really tell you they wanted this 
government’s priorities to be fire nurses or teachers and let 
criminals out early? Is that what they told us, Mr. Minister? 



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the hon. 
member for that question as well. And I guess I’d have to say 
quite frankly I’m surprised by the tone, given the sort of 
even-handed perspective that I’ve seen him use on many 
different matters. So unfortunately maybe he has to read those 
questions as part of his new job. 
 
But what I need, I think what everybody in Saskatchewan 
needs, to know is that we have one of the highest incarceration 
rates in Canada. We are locking up people in a fashion that is 
way above and beyond what we should be.  
 
Because of that and because of many things that the people in 
the community are saying, including the fact that it costs us $86 
a day to lock people up, they’re saying let’s use our money 
more efficiently. Let’s look at how we can make sure that 
offenders are held accountable for what happens or what 
they’ve done in the community, but also let’s make sure that we 
as a community are responsible in how we spend our money 
and how we use our justice money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Taxpayer Protection 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Premier or his designate. 
 
Mr. Premier, this morning the Saskatchewan taxpayers 
association delivered 28,000 names on petitions to your office 
calling upon you to pass a taxpayers’ protection Act. Taxpayers 
in this province believe your balanced budget legislation is too 
weak compared to other provinces and they want to see it 
strengthened. Taxpayers want a guarantee that this government 
will not raise taxes without consent in a province-wide 
referendum, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s a legitimate concern when taxpayers hear the Finance 
minister saying tax relief is overrated as a way in helping the 
economy. I guess that’s why in Alberta they’ve created 100,000 
jobs in the last while; in Saskatchewan we’re actually losing 
jobs, or creating very few. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you listen to the thousands of Saskatchewan 
people who signed a petition? Will you make the necessary 
amendments to strengthen Saskatchewan’s balanced budget 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I thank the member opposite for that 
question. Mr. Speaker, we have, I think, very good balanced 
budget legislation in this province. We were the first province 
in Canada to balance our budget, and last year was the first time 
that the province’s debt has declined in over 40-some years. 
 
I would say it’s very easy for people to sit on the sidelines and 
give advice, and I very rarely get into personalities, but we do 
have to look at the person that we’re dealing with here. This is  

Moira Wright who does have a track record. This person was an 
executive assistant to the Minister of Finance in the 1980s when 
this province racked up, on average, a billion dollars in debt. 
 
So I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we take advice from all kinds of 
people in the province, but I can assure you that we’re not 
going to be listening very carefully to what Moira Wright says. 
 
We balanced the budget. We paid down the debt. We will 
continue on that track. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the minister 
doesn’t think too much of the taxpayers’ association. Well they 
don’t think too much of you, Madam Minister, either, taking a 
$4,400 windfall. 
 
Madam Minister, if you’re not prepared to introduce a taxpayer 
protection Act, we are. Immediately after question period, I’ll 
be fulfilling a pledge that I signed and the former leader of the 
Liberal Party signed during the election campaign to introduce a 
meaningful taxpayer protection Act, an Act that forces 
government to get the public’s consent before raising taxes. 
 
Madam Minister, will you support that legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, you always have to 
have a sense of humour when you have the Tory Party of 
Saskatchewan giving financial advice. Now I know they don’t 
want to talk about the 1980s but we would stop talking about 
the ‘80s if they would quit acting like the ‘80s. 
 
Recently one member of your caucus said what he wanted to do 
was sell Cameco shares and spend the money, Star-Phoenix 
said, “in an astounding return to the line of reasoning used by 
Devine to mire Saskatchewan in the quagmire of debt.” The 
member opposite said, let’s find some assets, let’s sell them, 
and let’s spend the money. 
 
The Tories have taught Saskatchewan residents something, as 
the Star-Phoenix said. 
 

The Tories have taught Saskatchewan residents that the 
biggest obstacle to their economic well-being is the 
monstrous accumulated debt which will suck $850 million 
out of this province this year. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we balanced the budget; we will continue to do 
that. And we don’t need advice from them and their record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Agency System 
 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I don’t like to interrupt the  



418  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

proceedings of question period, but I’m having a very difficult 
time. I literally cannot hear the member from Cannington from 
here. I’m not looking . . . Order. The Speaker’s not seeking 
advice from any of the members. I am seeking the cooperation 
of the members. 
 
I’ll ask the member from Cannington to put his question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Stomach 
rumblings seem to have a problem over there. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the minister responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Minister, it now appears that you and Jack Messer have 
cooked up another attack on rural Saskatchewan. You’ve 
terminated all the non-commissioned agents as of March 31 this 
year. 
 
Mr. Minister, these people provide a valuable service to many 
small towns. They collect payments for SaskPower bills, and 
they do it absolutely free of charge. SaskPower doesn’t pay 
these people a thing  not one thin dime. 
 
Mr. Minister, why are you cancelling a service that many rural 
people appreciate and doesn’t cost SaskPower a thing? Isn’t this 
simply one more NDP attack on rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d like to thank the hon. member for 
his question, and certainly there is no attack on rural 
Saskatchewan by this government or any of its agencies. 
 
I would say that part of the agency system throughout 
Saskatchewan has been reviewed by the employees of 
SaskPower, by the government, by the SaskPower board, and 
we do find that there are other options in which people can pay 
their bills. They can direct mail, they can have pre-authorized 
withdrawals from their accounts for their power bills; so there 
are many other options there. 
 
And I would want the hon. members opposite to recognize that 
all of our Crown corporations are under changing times and 
we’re preparing our Crown corporations to deal with the future 
challenges and to go forward in providing good service to 
Saskatchewan residents, as they have in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we have 
here is the same organ-grinder and the same chimp, who’s 
stripping Saskatchewan of its services. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday we spoke to one of the 
non-commissioned agents in Dodsland. He said people in 
Dodsland, particularly the seniors, appreciate this local service. 
Now they have to travel to Kerrobert to pay their SaskPower 
bills and that office will be soon closed. And the thing that 
doesn’t make any sense about this, Mr. Speaker, is it’s not 
costing SaskPower a thing. Well I should correct myself on that. 
Actually the agent said that there was a cost to SaskPower 
because they bought a rubber stamp a couple of years ago to say 
“paid” on the bill, and that they were going to come and pick 
this stamp up when the office closes. I wonder how much  

that’s going to cost. 
 
Mr. Minister, these agents provide a valuable service. They do it 
for free. Why don’t you leave them alone and stop your 
revengeful attack on rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, the member states some 
things that are not completely accurate when he states that 
members have to travel to different communities to pay their 
accounts with SaskPower. This is just not the case. There are 
options of mailing in the bill; there’s the option of having 
pre-authorization for the money to be taken directly from the 
account. And if members looked at the future of technology in 
years to come, they’ll be able to pay those bills from the 
comfort of their own living-room. 
 
So there are many other options and I don’t want the people of 
Saskatchewan to not understand that there are always options 
there. And we’re understanding of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s not us that tried to decimate the processes within this 
province. It’s the previous administration, of which those are 
members who represent the same political party here in 
third-party status today in the legislature  all five of them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to also remind the member, in terms of process, in terms 
of government, in terms of business, anytime you have a 
process, there is a cost attached to it. This is not something that 
has been changed to harm anybody in Saskatchewan. It’s 
changed to prepare us for the future so we can be competitive 
and we can provide the service Saskatchewan people are used 
to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Teacher Bargaining Process 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
Education Week and I think it’s time someone asked this 
government why it is so indifferent to the plight of our entire 
education system. 
 
On December 31, 1994, the contract between the teachers and 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and 
government expired. The minister finally admitted that a new 
protocol agreement was needed, negotiated by a team of 
trustees and government appointees. Because there has been 
such a sorry lack of communication on the part of the 
government, I am asking the minister, why isn’t the agreement 
working as intended? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to thank the member for that question. As the member 
knows, it would be inappropriate for us to discuss what’s 
happening at the bargaining table. It could in fact be an unfair 
labour practice or it could violate the historic arrangements that  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

we’ve had at the bargaining table. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that information in mind, I think I will 
take my place, with all of us understanding that the collective 
bargaining process is working. They’re at the table; they’re 
discussing the issues and we’re hopeful that we will have a 
collective agreement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, the government’s wishy-washy 
policies are confusing everyone. The Premier has said, and I 
quote: this government is determined that there must be a fair 
and negotiated agreement. 
 
Well the Education minister may be negotiating, but fair is a 
different story. She has told teachers they will receive a 2 per 
cent raise. STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) president, 
Dwain Drew, recently stated that negotiations with the 
government for the 2 per cent hike will be complete. This 
despite STF . . . SSTA’s warning that they can’t handle these 
increases unless the government gives them more money. 
 
Now, before the budget is passed, will the Minister of 
Education stand up and assure the people of this province that 
the government will cover all, or at least some, of the additional 
costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. Mr. Speaker, I have not told the 
teachers anything because I am not at the bargaining table. We 
have officials, along with the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association that form the management team, and they’re at the 
bargaining table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be entirely inappropriate for any minister 
of the Crown to comment on issues that are presently on the 
table. And I think, Mr. Speaker, we will leave collective 
bargaining, not to the floor of the legislature, but to the 
management committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Last question. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not denying that teachers should be recognized for 
the valuable contributions that they make to our young people. 
If there is a negotiated pay increase, so be it. But if this 
government makes these promises and refuses to back them, 
teachers and students will be the ones left in the lurch. School 
boards, whose funding is already strapped, will be forced to cut 
back and some teachers will be laid off. This is an odd policy 
for a government that insists it wants to create jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this government so cowardly that they will sit 
back and let teachers and school boards be the scapegoats for 
poor government planning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to once again 
thank the member for the question and I just want to reiterate 
my previous position. It would be entirely inappropriate for 
members of this Legislative Assembly to come on to the floor 
of the legislature and negotiate a collective agreement between 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the management 
committee. 
 
I will just reiterate my previous position, Mr. Speaker. The 
collective bargaining process is best left to the people at the 
bargaining table, and that does not include elected members of 
this Legislative Assembly, and I think the member knows that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42  An Act respecting the 
 Protection of Saskatchewan Taxpayers 

 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
move the first reading of An Act respecting the Protection of 
Saskatchewan Taxpayers be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, 
Implementation and Operation of an 
Emergency 911 System and to make 

 consequential amendments to other Acts 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill 
respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation of 
an Emergency 911 System and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44  An Act to amend 
The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 

 
Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 
The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45  An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act 
and to make a consequential amendment to 

The Provincial Mediation Board Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Tax Enforcement Act and to make a consequential 
amendment to The Provincial Mediation Board Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 



420  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 
amend The Municipal Board Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 47  An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move the first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Agri-Food Act now be introduced and read 
a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48  A Bill to amend 
The Animal Identification Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I move the first reading of 
a Bill to amend The Animal Identification Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
to the members. I see in the east gallery my constituent and 
neighbour, John Bryde. John is retired, although judging from 
the amount of time and energy that he puts into pursuing health 
matters and issues in the province, you wouldn’t know it. He’s 
a real credit to his community and to our province and I would 
ask the members to welcome John here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I table the answer to question no. 15. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer is tabled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Convert. 
 
The Speaker:  Question no. 17 is converted to motions for 
returns (debatable). 

Question no. 18 is converted to motions for return (debatable). 
 
Question 19 is converted to motions for return (debatable). 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, today I’m pleased to move 
second reading of The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Under the current provisions of The SaskEnergy Act, TransGas 
Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of SaskEnergy 
Incorporated, has the exclusive right to transport gas within the 
province of Saskatchewan. The amendments are intended to 
clarify the transportation franchise granted to TransGas 
Limited. Presently the Act defines the TransGas franchise by 
reference to high-pressure gas transmission lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this reference in the definition of the franchise 
leads to uncertainty. Given the nature of natural gas and its 
movement, pressure can vary even if the amount is for the same 
purpose. This makes it difficult to determine a threshold for 
high pressure for the purpose of TransGas’s transportation 
franchise as currently defined in the legislation. It therefore 
creates difficulties for a producer to determine where the 
transportation franchises commence and where they end. 
 
The proposed amendment will remove the reference to high 
pressure and clarify the franchise by means of more clearly 
identifying where the franchise starts and where it stops. 
 
The focus will be on the purpose of the pipeline rather than on 
the pressure of the pipeline. The result of the proposed 
amendments will be to provide further clarity and certainty for 
the producer community on the parameters of the transportation 
franchise, as well as providing flexibility to the producer 
relating to transportation for the purposes of production 
operation in the field. 
 
For example, the proposed amendment will allow producers to 
install and operate gas field compressor boosting stations on 
existing gathering systems without violating the TransGas 
franchise. Given the present definition of the franchise, it could 
be argued that the franchise should begin at the outlet flange of 
the compressor boosting station. The new definition will make 
it clear that this is not the case. 
 
The proposed amendments will clarify the interface between the 
gas transmission and gas storage facilities. While TransGas 
does not have the exclusive right for gas gathering and storage, 
the amendments will clarify its exclusive right to transporting 
gas to and from storage facilities. 
 
The new definition will also give producers the right to 
transport gas to and from a gas storage facility where the gas 
storage facility is integrated in a gas gathering and processing 
system as defined by the Act. 



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will allow a 
producer to transport gas from its gas gathering and processing 
system, as defined in the Act, to its own oilfield production 
facility without concern for violating the franchise. This will 
allow the producer to operate much more efficiently. 
 
SaskEnergy has worked with the Department of Energy and 
Mines, the department responsible for issuing permits for new 
pipelines and for the regulation of the petroleum and natural gas 
production in the province, to clarify the TransGas franchise 
and create greater flexibility for producers to run their 
operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having provided the brief overview of the 
amending legislation, I move second reading of The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The SaskEnergy 
Amendment Act, 1996 is proposing to make changes to some 
significant aspects of the gas transportation through pipelines in 
Saskatchewan. Under present laws, TransGas Limited, which is 
owned by SaskEnergy, currently holds all rights to transport gas 
through pipelines in Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the years we have seen several private companies move 
into the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry. Unfortunately, 
many of these producers have encountered some confusing 
aspects of this legislation. The most common complaint relating 
to the gas transportation system is that the franchise is defined 
according to pipeline pressures. This proposed legislation plans 
to remove pipeline pressure from the definition of the franchise 
and will hopefully clear up some of that confusion. 
 
Two other changes are proposed in this amendment and they 
both deal with TransGas’s exclusive right to transport gas in 
Saskatchewan pipelines. These changes only apply to two 
specific instances. The first is with respect to transporting gas 
from its site of origin to an oilfield production facility, all 
within Saskatchewan. If these are both owned by the same 
person, TransGas no longer has the exclusive right to transport 
on those pipelines. 
 
The second circumstance deals with a situation that the site of 
origin of the gas and the storage facility are integrated into a 
gathering and processing system. In this case TransGas again 
loses its exclusive rights. While this would seem to break a 
long-standing monopoly, the true effects need to be researched 
further. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1430) 
 
Bill No. 37  An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure today to move second reading of an amendment to The 
Water Corporation Act. 

The amendment to section 78 of The Water Corporation Act 
will allow a leasehold interest to be granted in the land forming 
the bed and shore of a water body, where the interest is for a 
purpose related to a Crown mineral disposition. This will clear 
up an inconsistency between The Provincial Lands Act and The 
Water Corporation Act. 
 
Currently The Provincial Lands Act allows the granting of 
surface dispositions of the bed and shore of a water body on 
Crown land. Such Crown-owned beds and shores are 
administered by Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food or 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management. The 
Water Corporation Act, administered by Sask Water, currently 
prohibits the granting of an exclusive surface disposition of 
beds and shores of water bodies. 
 
Under the amendment, Agriculture and Food or Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management would administer the 
dispositions, while Sask Water would provide input to the lease 
terms. This will ensure water management concerns are 
addressed without having to change the environmental approval 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment will clear up inconsistencies in 
the legislation. I move second reading of The Water 
Corporation Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to take a 
few minutes to discuss the proposed Act to amend The Water 
Corporation Act. 
 
The purpose of this Bill is to clear up the inconsistencies that 
currently exist between The Provincial Lands Act and The 
Water Corporation Act with regard to the lease of bed shores 
and water bodies relating to the mining industry. 
 
The proposed amendments allow for the lease of shores and 
water beds where a Crown mineral lease has already been 
granted. In this, it is specified that the lease must be for a 
purpose related to a Crown mineral deposit. 
 
The mining industry in this province is a source of great pride 
to all people who live here. Not only does it provide hundreds 
of jobs to people all across our province, but it also provides a 
great deal of revenue through its exports of many of its 
products, such as potash, uranium and petroleum. 
 
Our province’s mineral production was over $4 billion last year. 
The potash industry alone exported over $1 billion worth of 
goods. You need not look any further than the Toronto Stock 
Exchange, to see the strength of shares in the Saskatchewan 
Potash Corporation, to realize the importance of this industry in 
our province. 
 
As I have said several times in this Assembly, any way that we 
can eliminate the bureaucratic red tape to encourage and foster 
economic growth and development is a step in the right 
direction. I am pleased to see that the government has taken into 
consideration some vital concerns of one of this province’s 
most important industries. 



422  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

It would be nice if the government would apply the same type 
of consultation methods to other industries in this province such 
as forestry, agriculture, and small business. 
 
The mining industry has obviously been affected by the 
inconsistencies that exist in current legislation. And as this 
Bill’s purpose is to clear up these things, I see no reason to hold 
up the debate. 
 
Our caucus will be questioning if farms and ranches will be 
denied access to water and if the mining will contaminate the 
water in the future for farmers. We also question whether this 
new power to grant access to mineral companies to water beds 
that may be vital to our farming industry is an example of 
poisoning the interests of one group against another. And we 
also have to question whether the shores of water bodies belong 
just to the people the government grants favour to or does it 
belong to everyone. 
 
But we will not hold up debate any further and this Act should 
be passed on to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 38  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move 
second reading of The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 
1996. Mr. Speaker, the safety of people of Saskatchewan has 
been and must continue to be of utmost importance to our 
government. We believe that the measures included in this Bill 
will supplement existing programs and standards, and will 
thereby enhance safety in and around electrical facilities. 
 
The Power Corporation Amendment Act, as it now reads, 
provides the authority for SaskPower employees to enter onto a 
customer’s premises for the purpose of inspecting service 
conditions, reading metres, and, if service is discontinued, to 
remove the metres and other equipment. 
 
It also provides that the corporation can cut off the electrical 
supply of energy and steam or discontinue any other service in 
certain circumstances. There may be, Mr. Speaker, 
circumstances where a hazardous or emergency situation has 
been created on a customer’s premises; for example, if 
buildings or equipment may be located dangerously close to 
electrical equipment such as power lines. 
 
There is no clear statutory authority available for SaskPower 
employees to take remedial action in such circumstances. It is 
proposed in these amendments to provide such authority for 
SaskPower employees. Depending on the particular hazardous 
or emergency situation, SaskPower employees would have the 
authority to go onto a customer’s property to take whatever 
action is necessary to deal with these potentially dangerous 
situations. 
 
If the hazardous or emergency condition is caused by the 
customer and results in costs are incurred, those costs could be 
borne by the individual customer. It is hoped that these new  

powers will only be utilized in very rare circumstances. The 
main necessity for these is to ensure that where hazardous or 
dangerous situations have been identified, that SaskPower 
employees have the power and the authority to take the 
necessary steps to remedy the situation and hopefully avoid any 
personal injury or property damage. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have before this Assembly The Power Corporation Amendment 
Act. On behalf of my associates in the caucus, I’d like to 
address a few concerns to this Bill. 
 
Much of this Act is dealing with matters that don’t cause much 
disagreement, as many of the provisions are simply 
housekeeping. There may even be an area that I think we will 
find very laudable. Safety should always be the first concern, 
whether it be the safety of SaskPower employees or the 
protection of customers and the public at large. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the existing statutes do not provide the proper 
authority needed for SaskPower employees to enter a 
customer’s premises and to take whatever corrective actions the 
authorities deem necessary; only when a perilous condition 
exists on an individual’s property. 
 
The proposals in this new Act will provide SaskPower 
employees the authority to take corrective action they deem 
necessary, even if that means entering private property. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to mention several areas that have caused 
myself and the Liberal caucus some concern. This authority to 
SaskPower employees to enter private property and dwellings 
when they see fit raises some questions as to privacy of the 
home and to privacy of landowners. 
 
One of the amendments that would allow SaskPower employees 
to enter a home or private property at any time that they deem 
reasonable causes me considerable concern. I believe that this 
treads on dangerous territory. For example, does this mean that 
a SaskPower employee can appear on my doorstep at any time 
and demand access to my house? Or for something as minor as 
reading a meter? After all, it is my house. 
 
We should also consider the rights of people who live alone. 
I’m sure some of my constituents would be fearful of a stranger 
demanding access to their home with no advance notice. Even 
if that person is identified at the doorstep as a SaskPower 
employee, completely dressed, people still have that reaction to 
strangers. Some people would consider this a blatant example 
of the invasion of privacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I strongly believe that this Bill needs more careful 
consideration and I therefore would propose that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, Develop  
and Sustain Irrigation 

 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to move second reading of The Irrigation Act, 
1996. 
 
The Irrigation Act replaces The Water Users Act, the South 
Saskatchewan River Act, and The Irrigation Districts Act. 
Consolidation of these three Acts will provide uniform 
legislation for all irrigators in the province, simplify the 
administration of irrigation, and allow the establishment of 
research projects funded, directed, and controlled by irrigators. 
 
This new legislation also allows producers within irrigation 
districts to opt out of receiving and paying for irrigation 
services if they choose. Most importantly, however, the new 
legislation promotes a user-pay model of irrigation 
development, taking the burden of replacement funding for 
off-farm projects off the shoulders of the taxpayer. Changing to 
such a user-pay model is one of the features of this new Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sask Water has discussed this policy extensively 
with irrigators and they agree that change is needed to allow 
them to meet the economic challenges of the future. I point out 
that I believe even the member from Arm River has been 
consulted as an irrigator in terms of this legislation and we’re 
hoping that they will be supportive of the initiatives contained 
therein. 
 
There’s about 332,000 acres of land currently under irrigation 
in Saskatchewan. In many cases 100 per cent of the off-farm 
projects have been paid for by various taxpayers’ programs. In 
fact the province of Saskatchewan has a substantial investment 
in irrigation, having spent more that $160 million on irrigation 
work since 1966. 
 
The existing infrastructure will need to be replaced and/or 
repaired at some point in the future. Until now funding for the 
replacement of off-farm works has been variable and often 
inadequate, posing a barrier to the possible growth of irrigation 
for economic development within Saskatchewan. 
 
Establishment of a producer-controlled district fund, funded 
100 per cent by irrigators, will ensure infrastructure is 
maintained and available for expansion to meet increased 
market development opportunities. This will help encourage the 
production of high value crops like beans and potatoes. It will 
also mean increased livestock production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, irrigation is a key factor in economic growth of 
rural Saskatchewan. This new legislation will ensure expansion 
of the irrigation industry and all the benefits that result. 
 
For example, the Lucky Lake area alone, irrigation has 
contributed to a number of economic development projects. The 
Coteau Hills Potato Corporation/Sask Ida Farms project 
consists of a $1.4 million seed potato storage facility and 800 
acres of seed potatoes. 
 
Birsay Pork Farms and Prairieland Pork Farms, 2.5 million and  

1.8 million respectively, were possible because of irrigation 
development. A feed mill was established in Birsay to supply 
feed to both pork farms. It purchases all the necessary cereal 
grains, more than some 200,000 bushels annually, from farmers 
within a 50-kilometre radius of Birsay. 
 
An airport with a 3,000-foot paved runway was built at Lucky 
Lake to allow Sask Ida officials and other potential business 
contacts to see themselves the success stories of the area. A $1 
million SaskTel Mobility cellular tower was built at Lucky Lake 
in response to the extensive trucking needed to haul potatoes in 
and out of the area. And a new motel is being built in Lucky 
Lake to meet the accommodation needs of the increased activity 
in the area. 
 
(1445) 
 
Irrigation and the resulting potato industry is also credited for 
allowing the fertilizer and chemical business to remain in a 
good operating condition in the Lucky Lake area — Mr. 
Speaker, truly economic development in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In total, Mr. Speaker, irrigation development in the Lucky Lake 
area has resulted in more than 110 new jobs in the past two 
years. This is just one example of how much irrigation has 
contributed to the economy of our province. It can, and will, 
contribute much, much more. 
 
By consolidating existing legislation, simplifying 
administration, and establishing a producer-controlled fund to 
replace ageing infrastructure, we can look forward to much 
more success stories like Lucky Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Irrigation Act, 1996. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want, first of all, 
to say, Mr. Speaker, how happy I was to have the opportunity to 
study the draft Bill as much as two months back. It was 
certainly a good gesture on the part of whoever provided that 
service to us. And I’d thank the minister, but I’m not sure that it 
came from him, but if the credit is due, we’ll let him take it. 
 
We definitely appreciate that, because certainly irrigation, Mr. 
Speaker, is a very important part of Saskatchewan, a semi-arid 
part of the world. Certainly it’s important, as has been 
demonstrated by those parts of the world where irrigation has 
been developed better than we’ve done it here. As the minister 
has pointed out, certainly at some length, there are many 
benefits that have been accrued, and certainly there are many 
more that are coming. 
 
And of course we’ve seen the example of southern Alberta 
where irrigation has been developed to a far more intense 
degree than what we’ve done. And the benefits certainly do 
accrue to the province and to the people in general. 
 
And so we definitely want to say to the minister that we support 
irrigation and irrigation projects. But we took the time, because  



424  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

we had the opportunity to have the draft legislation available to 
us, we took the time to study it in some detail. We took that 
time in consultation with irrigators in south-west Saskatchewan; 
myself to a great extent, because that, of course, is my area and 
where we need water probably more than anybody else in the 
whole province would ever need it. 
 
But there are certain problems that have developed with this 
piece of legislation. I thought in fairness though to the minister 
what we should do is to talk to the irrigators and to try to 
develop two lists — one the positive list and of course the other 
the negative list — to be fair about it, to compare those things 
that are good points and then come up with the things that need 
to be corrected. 
 
We did that with an honest approach; we hope for the minister 
to reconsider some of the things and some of the ramifications 
that are built into the legislation. It is obviously not too late at 
second reading to change some of the aspects of the Bill and the 
results that it will have on the people that it’s directed towards. 
 
And so I just want to go over the good points that we see so that 
the minister will realize that we’re trying to approach this in a 
fair manner and so that he won’t take the notion to just scrap 
the Bill and change everything. 
 
The good points, Mr. Speaker, that we see for consideration by 
the minister, is the fact that it does consolidate the three old 
Acts  The Irrigation Districts Act, The South Saskatchewan 
River Irrigation Act, and The Water Users Act. And we 
certainly do appreciate and compliment the minister for that 
attempt to simplify life in the world around us. 
 
In our caucus, and I think throughout Saskatchewan, people 
generally believe that simplicity, where possible, is beautiful. 
And we should attempt to do it in our legislation, to keep life 
and regulations as simple as we can. And after all, a 
complicated set of rules only means that people won’t 
understand them and they likely won’t abide by them or obey 
them. 
 
And so we appreciate that fact and we want to compliment the 
minister for attacking that particular problem in our society and 
through this Act. 
 
We also looked at the user-pay concept that is approached in 
this legislation. And we certainly do agree with that concept 
being developed throughout society. Users of products and 
goods should pay for them. There’s no question about that in 
our minds. However there are some problems when you 
approach the user-pay concept. You have to be very, very 
careful then that the actual users are the people who are getting 
the benefits that they’re paying for. 
 
And if there are accrued benefits to society, then also you must 
consider that society perhaps should help to pay for some of the 
costs. And in the context of irrigation, oftentimes I think that is 
a relevant factor to consider, because oftentimes there are 
spin-off benefits to society that the irrigators are providing. The 
minister himself earlier stated how the spin-off effect was going 
on in the irrigation projects with the new potato growers and all  

that. And certainly the fertilizer people are selling fertilizer. 
And those are accrued benefits to all of society. So the costs 
should be shared then equally by all of the benefactors. 
 
I want to go quickly through some of the negative points then 
on the second list that we developed from the minister. And I 
know that his officials will be watching this and will give it 
some attention. 
 
The Act goes too far in extending powers to the cabinet and to 
the minister in charge in terms of the ability to make changes 
through regulations, which are allowed to be made at the whim 
of the minister and without consultation, negotiations, or the 
legislative process of debate. 
 
Now that we referred to section 79 of the Bill, and we would 
like the minister to take a look at that because we see that as a 
very negative approach to democracy in general. And we see 
that ever too often, Mr. Speaker, throughout all of the 
legislation that this government has brought in over the past 
four years. Very simply, we have put too much power into the 
hands of too few people without any possibility that these folks 
will have to be answerable to anyone. This, simply put, 
provides the government with a dictatorial power. And quite 
frankly, we don’t believe that people in our society really want 
to live in a dictatorship, even though a benevolent dictator can 
be argued to have some benefit. Reality is that we don’t live in 
that kind of a society and I don’t think we should try to promote 
it. 
 
Number two: while the user-pay concept is becoming more 
readily acceptable in today’s society, the connection of the costs 
incurred by the district consumers providing a direct benefit 
only to those users, is not made. 
 
In other words, the work of and the results of the spin-off 
corporations may have many benefits to society but none 
directly for every district consumer who ultimately pays all of 
the costs. This is totally unfair. And I think I alluded to that a 
little earlier, Mr. Speaker, when I pointed out that many of the 
benefits that these users are providing, are for benefits to other 
people in society and yet all of the costs are going to accrue to 
those users. So that simply is not fair. 
 
And I think that the minister has to look at the possibility of 
sharing those costs, not just with the people that use the water, 
but with society in general, who benefit. Otherwise the costs 
will become so prohibitive that I do honestly believe, Mr. 
Speaker, we will kill the irrigation projects of the future in our 
province and perhaps many of the ones that exist today. 
 
Number three: this Act, under the guise of user-pay, really 
provides the government the opportunity to download a very 
expensive bureaucracy onto the backs of district users, while 
the district users have absolutely no control over those costs. 
Where the user is required to pay all of the costs through 
legislation, they have an inherent democratic right to elect a 
representation and control. 
 
Through this legislation, as one corporation spins off from the 
other, representation by the grass roots district consumers is  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

diffused by government appointees. Now, Mr. Speaker, here is 
a form of democratic principles being broken down through a 
back-door approach. 
 
What really happens in this legislation is that you have different 
corporations that operate different aspects of irrigation, but in 
the attempt to make it appear that it is democratic and that the 
democratically elected people are going to operate the process 
and the grass roots people will elect their own people to run 
these corporations, the reality is that starts off looking good at 
the first level, because you have people that are elected. But it 
also provides in this Act, as I understand it  and I hope I’m 
wrong  but I understand that the government is going to 
appoint several people that then will be on that board. 
 
They of course will be experts, and we have nothing wrong 
with that, but they will be heavily directed towards influencing 
the vote of those directors in the direction that government 
policy would generally be favoured. The next step is, of course, 
another corporation to run another aspect is set up and 
representation is elected from the first board to go to the second 
board with yet more government appointees going into the 
second corporation. The third corporation spins off again with 
yet another level of government appointees, and of course that’s 
where I talk about the diffusion of the level of precip . . .  
I’ve got this word stuck on my tongue. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Participation. 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Participation  right, thanks  the level of 
participation by the users is gradually watered down, so to 
speak, and I guess that’s appropriate in a irrigation debate. 
 
So that’s where the democracy of the thing breaks down. If the 
primary producers were to elect a majority number to each one 
of these corporate groups, that would be more fair, Mr. Minister 
 direct representation by the users who are going to pay the 
bills. And so we think we should try to work on that part of it. 
 
Under the area of appeals we see as well, Mr. Speaker, some 
serious problems. Provisions for appeals on questions of law 
only is totally unacceptable in this Act. It provides the 
government with hired bureaucrats the power to make a ruling 
that a district consumer, an irrigating farmer, must give up the 
rights to water which can be then be given to another farmer. 
This could be done on the basis of friendship, political 
favouritism, or bribery, with no recourse by the farmer who lost 
his water rights and who will be stuck with the expensive 
investments in equipment and land preparation — for an 
example, the right to rule that a farmer’s land is no longer 
suitable for irrigation without appeal as is referred to under 
section 37(1). 
 
The reality, Mr. Minister, is here that you have opened the 
system up to abuse here, and while we would hope that that 
might never happen, obviously when the door’s open there’s a 
very good chance that abuse could occur. And it is very likely to 
happen without your knowledge even or without the 
government ever intending it to happen. 
 
In a local district someone may have a friend who would like to  

get irrigation water. There may be that all of the water available 
is already being spoken for and being used up. In order to free 
up some water for a friend, the people in charge at that local 
level might decide well, Joe Blow down the road has irrigation, 
he’s got an irrigation project, but we’ll just say that his land is 
no longer suitable for irrigation and take away his share of the 
water and give it to our friend. That could happen in this 
process because the appeal process is not really strong enough 
to deal with this issue. 
 
There needs to be provisions for an independent appeal board 
with a mandate to consider every area of dispute with no court 
costs to the farmer. The Surface Rights Arbitration Board, as it 
operated between 1972 and 1982, should be used as a working 
model to be followed and duplicated  a farmer’s problems 
judged by his peers with the power to order settlements without 
involving the court system, especially the very expensive 
process of the Court of Queen’s Bench, which places a farmer 
in the very vulnerable position of being challenged to the 
Supreme Court. 
 
The fear of these costs, which will bankrupt most farmers, will 
intimidate offended farmers into submission without justice. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would suggest that your colleague  sometimes 
referred to now as the perogy king but more appropriately 
known as the House Leader for your party  should be 
consulted in this matter. Because to give credit where credit is 
due, during the 1970s I sat in on a couple of meetings  he 
probably wouldn’t have remembered me but he might  where 
we dealt with the Surface Rights Arbitration Board and these 
very same kind of problems of finding ways to give farmers 
access to appeal without having to risk the financial loss of the 
court system that could cost them their farms. 
 
I believe that that process was good, even though you people 
were involved heavily in putting it into place. I think perhaps 
again maybe you should look back at that part of what you did 
in the 1970s. I know there are a lot of people that will criticize a 
lot of things you did, but certainly I think the farmers of 
Saskatchewan that were involved appreciated the efforts that 
were made there. And they certainly have worked well for many 
years for many people. 
 
And I believe that that kind of an approach can work in this 
situation to provide fairness to the farmers involved. And you 
might even be able to use that very same board simply by 
amending the Act to give it the power to act on these matters 
and then maybe a provision to have some irrigators put on a 
panel that would sit with the chairman or something to deal 
with these very same problems. 
 
Because of the small numbers of farmers involved in irrigation 
in Saskatchewan, no great political wave can be expected. 
However, the results of this legislation as proposed will be as 
devastating to water users over time as the recent changes to 
The Workers’ Compensation Act were to the business people in 
this province. It is imperative that a campaign be mounted to 
protect this minority group before this Act becomes law, as this 
group has very little power to defend itself. Very simply put, 
Mr. Minister, I think you understand that that is a fact. 



426  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

You have changed a law very significantly that will affect a few 
people very dramatically, but they are not big in numbers and 
they do not have a lot of political clout. They probably don’t 
have a lot of money and they likely can’t stand out here and 
picket your offices. 
 
I think they pretty well have to depend on myself and perhaps a 
few speakers from the official opposition to bring this message, 
because there really isn’t very much of a vehicle for them to 
place political pressure on you. That is fairly obvious. And so 
we have to appeal to your sense of common decency as a 
politician who would intend to do the right thing by the people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I do believe that the Liberal Party wants to speak and 
adjourn this debate. If they are prepared to adjourn debate, I 
will sit down and allow them to do that. Otherwise I would 
have done that. And I’ll thank the minister. 
 
(1500) 
 
Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
take a few minutes today to discuss Bill No. 39, The Irrigation 
Act, on behalf of the Liberal caucus. I am going to be saying 
some of the things that our colleague has said. 
 
As the government is well aware, this Act will replace the three 
existing Acts  The Water Users Act, the South Saskatchewan 
River Act, and The Irrigation Districts Act. 
 
The members of the Liberal caucus do have some concerns of 
the consequences of this proposed Bill. 
 
The proposed Irrigation Act will consolidate irrigation districts 
and will have them all governed by the same legislation. But the 
suggestion that this Act will simplify the administration of 
irrigation in our province is up to question. Consolidate, yes; 
simplify, maybe. 
 
It appears to me and to my caucus members that this Bill is 
another example of the provincial government downloading 
onto municipalities. It is an attempt by the provincial 
government to distance themselves from yet another complex 
and controversial administration process. 
 
We agree that the proposed legislation will provide uniformity 
for all people involved in irrigation in Saskatchewan, but 
whether or not the process will be simplified is up in the air. 
The Act is supposed to promote a user-pay model of irrigation 
development, giving the irrigators direct control of what is to be 
done in each district. If we really think about it, when was the 
last time that any government-owned corporation, such as that 
administrating this Act, will let go of all financial control. 
 
Apart from my concerns over the simplification of the 
administration, I am not entirely sure that all districts and 
corporations involved are willing or able to cooperate in a 
manner that will effectively promote sustainable irrigation for 
farmers of our province. 
 
I have several other concerns with this proposed legislation.  

What are we losing by dismantling three Acts and replacing 
them with only one? Will anyone be left out in the cold? This 
Bill proposes that by establishing producer-controlled districts 
and funds that are financed entirely by irrigators themselves, 
that the infrastructure will be properly maintained and that it 
will be more open to expansion as the market grows. 
 
With Saskatchewan crop year only weeks away, most farmers 
have already had their seeding operations planned for the year. 
That includes cultivation and irrigation if necessary. This Act 
would come into force on proclamation. With all the 
reorganization that needs to be done, and the certain amount of 
confusion that this Bill will undoubtedly trigger, it is simply not 
feasible to push it through without further consultation. 
 
More time is definitely needed to consult stakeholders who will 
be affected by these large and complex changes being 
established in order to make the government’s life simpler. 
With over 332,000 acres of land in Saskatchewan under 
irrigation and millions of dollars being spent annually on the 
irrigation process in this province, this legislation needs to be 
looked at carefully to ensure that no one who is currently 
covered and regulated by The Water Users Act, the South 
Saskatchewan River Act, and Irrigation Districts Act will be 
passed over in the new legislation. 
 
Because the applications of this Bill are far-reaching and it 
appears to be an exercise by government to download 
responsibilities, I move that further debate on this Bill be 
adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Calvert, that Bill No. 14  An Act to 
amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 8  An Act 
to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the 
opportunity to further discuss the amendments to the proposed 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation with the Assembly. 
 
Yesterday I commented . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. I’m sure that the members will  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

want to take a little more interest in the comments of the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena than they’re allowing her to 
make here and I’ll ask the Assembly to come to order and allow 
the member from Kelvington-Wadena to proceed. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I really do want to speak further 
to this amendment. Yesterday I commented that $200 million 
involved with SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation) could be spent more wisely by helping all 
businesses through general tax cuts. 
 
The minister in charge of Economic Development is obviously 
trying in his own way to get this economy on its feet. But 
obviously, the few businesses he has dealt with through SOCO 
are just a small number of the businesses in this province and 
they may be happy with his intercession. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
minister, no matter how well-meaning he is trying to be, cannot 
help every single business on an individual basis. 
 
The only way the minister can help all business in this province 
is to create legislation, environment, and attitude in this 
province to allow businesses to help themselves. If the minister 
was really in touch with the business people, he would know 
that the barriers to success that his government has put up since 
the election in 1991 has done a thousandfold more damage to 
this province than one Crown corporation could possibly help. 
 
I’m referring to things like increases in the PST (provincial 
sales tax). I’m referring to things like increases in the utility 
rates, increases in workmen’s compensation rates, increases in 
the cost of labour regulations, and increases to taxpayers as a 
whole due to the Crown tendering policy. And the list goes on. 
 
The first item I mentioned, the increase in PST rates, along with 
the other burdens in this province, has done more damage to the 
economy than any one government department or Crown could 
help. The CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) 
conducted direct surveys with 748 businesses. And out of that, 
81.4 per cent of these businesses reported that concerns over 
the total provincial tax burden was the top priority issue for 
independent owners in the province. 
 
It was interesting to note, when the Finance minister did her 
little tour that cost the province big money, she did not ask 
people certain questions. She did not ask them if tax cuts were 
desired. Later she commented that tax cuts were not high 
priority items brought up in the consultations because people 
didn’t comment that way. I sort of liken it to talking to my 
children: when I don’t want to hear the answer, I don’t ask the 
question. And I think that’s sort of what the minister was doing. 
 
High provincial sales tax charges are not just hurting businesses 
that are close to the border. I would like to ask the Minister of 
Finance for the government’s estimation of how much revenue 
is being lost because of these high rates. Probably more than we 
take in with our 9 per cent. 
 
People from as far away as Porcupine Plain and Wadena, in my 
constituency, buy household items like washers and dryers, they 
buy computers, they buy clothes, and they buy anything they 
can fit into the back of their truck or in their trunk to save  

9 per cent when they go to Alberta. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
blame them. They go to Alberta quite often. They have to go 
there to visit their children anyway, so they can pay for their gas 
with their sales tax savings. 
 
Businesses like the one I am part of have to compete with 
Alberta firms on a daily basis. We manufacture playground 
equipment, Mr. Speaker, and we have to compete against three 
companies in Alberta. The money that people use to buy 
playground equipment is usually raised by clubs like the 
Kinsmen and Elks club, and they put on hot dog sales and they 
do fund-raising events in order to raise money. 
 
And usually a sale is in the area of $10,000. A $10,000 sale 
means $900 in provincial sales tax. That’s a lot of hot dog sales 
and that’s a lot of money. And people have to decide whether 
they should be spending that money and giving it to this 
government to spend or whether they should be buying extra 
equipment for their playground. And I don’t blame them when 
they decide to buy extra equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government cannot audit every club, search 
every car, or check every Visa slip to see if some grandma went 
over the border to buy their grandchild a birthday present and 
saved 9 per cent, although maybe that’s what the minister wants 
to do. Maybe that’s how he is going to get 30,000 people 
working by the end of this decade; he’s going to have a PST 
police. But that doesn’t sound like a sustainable job to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every 1 per cent of sales tax brings in $80 million 
in revenue. How much of that $80 million is spent on ventures 
like SOCO to help precious few businesses, or things like trips 
to Cuba where we can only hope to see some economic growth 
in the future. 
 
Selling Crown corporations and further privatization to pay 
down the debt would provide the climate for fiscal security and 
lower taxes in the years ahead. The concerns business people 
have with the magnitude of the debt and a very slow pay-down 
of the debt continues to depress the economic attitude in this 
province. 
 
Will the minister tell me how much the direct grants to 
megaprojects and government advertising cost each taxpayer? 
I’ll bet it’s enough to knock another couple of percentages off 
the PST rate. There are things that this government can be doing 
today with $200 million that would help the whole economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the money involving SOCO is a waste of 
taxpayers’ dollars. It is not a benefit to the seniors in Rose 
Valley who have just lost their hospital. It’s not a benefit to the 
kids that are going to school in Pleasantdale but they have a 
threat of their school being closed. And it’s not a benefit to 
farmers who are trying to find the cash to put their crops in. It 
only benefits a very few people in the province. 
 
I’m asking the minister to take a look at the whole Act. I’m 
asking him if additional monies that are being put into SOCO is 
making it look like just another rendition of SEDCO 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation). I’m  



428  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

asking him to decide if SOCO is really what the people of this 
province asked for when they did their little tour around the 
province here in January. 
 
I suggest that we tear up the whole Act and put the money into 
creating an environment for economic growth for the whole 
province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join the debate in regard to the proposed 
amendments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the fundamental things that this 
government has lost over the years is really the fundamental 
belief in how they should operate in a business climate. They 
were born in an era where the job that they had and the 
fundamental purpose that they saw themselves undertaking was 
to redistribute wealth, not to create it. And fundamentally that 
has permeated the thinking of this government over the years. 
 
And I really find that that is a strange thing because it isn’t only 
this government that has fallen into that mind-set trap. It’s all 
governments in general. We get wrapped up in the marble 
palaces here across this country, across North America, and we 
actually start to believe that we are the people that are doing the 
positive things out in our jurisdictions. And that simply isn’t 
true. 
 
The best we can hope to do is to create  and I think I’m 
quoting from the mandate  is to create, encourage, and 
facilitate business opportunities in Saskatchewan. And that’s a 
very laudable and noble cause. The problem with it is, is we’re 
part of the problem generally; we’re not part of the solution. 
And what happens, we end up, well-intentioned as we may, to 
develop all kinds of things that ultimately become stumbling 
blocks to those very laudable objectives. And I think that that is 
something that is true generally, not just specific to this 
government. But I believe that this government is guilty of 
falling into the trap to a greater degree than what is necessary or 
they should. 
 
What we have to understand, that in our province, in our 
country, economic activity and opportunities are not created by 
governments  they are created by ordinary people who have 
the spirit of entrepreneurship; who have a belief and a dream in 
a product that they might have invented, a product that they 
might want to sell; a way of doing things better. They have 
some kind of an urge that is almost undefinable that allows 
them to want to create an opportunity. 
 
And that is what really is the underpinning of an economy, 
that’s an underpinning of a province. And what we have to do 
as legislators is look at what we’re doing over the years and get 
out of the road. 
 
And so very often you see comparisons between one part of this 
country and the other. And the comparisons are valid. I recall 
when I was first oriented to the new job of being an MLA, as 
part of the orientation they explained why this building is so  

magnificent. Why when it was built that architects and the 
dreamers of this were looking at Saskatchewan to become a 
province that was going to be unheralded and the major, 
dominant province in the Prairies. And that was the reason, it 
was explained to us, that this building was going to be so 
magnificent, because the role of Saskatchewan was going to be 
beyond what was imagined for Manitoba or Alberta. 
 
(1515) 
 
And what’s happened? I mean we’ve ended up virtually 
stagnant. Over the 75 years our population has really not grown 
at all appreciably. Yet our neighbour to the west has what  
tripled or quadrupled in size? What’s happened? Where is the 
difference? What’s happened to make that kind of a dream 75 
years ago no longer valid? 
 
And I guess what it is, is a number of things that we’ve fallen 
into and I’d like to just briefly touch on a few of them. We’ve 
fallen into the trap of thinking that the best way to deal with 
problems is not deal with the expenditure side of the ledger, but 
to deal with the income side. And so we’ve allowed ourselves 
increased taxes, increased fees and rates on almost every level 
that has sort of insidiously crept into things. So now when 
we’re looking at things globally, we are no longer competitive 
and we have an oppressive tax structure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t something any longer that we have 
to worry about just vis-a-vis ourselves and Alberta. We have to 
worry about that right across the global economy because 
entrepreneurs are no longer just the ma and pop operation that 
our parents may have been with their corner store. They are 
multinational, multidimensional entrepreneurs who have 
absolutely no loyalty to anything except competitive advantage. 
And so when they look at our province and they see the 
oppressive tax and fee structures they say, why do I want to go 
to Saskatchewan? That’s a negative mark on our report card and 
this government has to address the fact that they’re responsible 
for it. 
 
We look at our utility rates and the situations that have crept 
into our family of Crown corporations. It might have been a 
good idea to have Crown corporations when they could be 
monopolies . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. The Speaker’s having a difficult 
time hearing the member from Melfort-Tisdale and I don’t 
know that . . . now, now, I’ll ask for the cooperation of the 
members and — order — and I know that the members will all 
want to pay a little closer attention to the remarks of the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 
just getting on a roll and I think they were worried that I’d go 
on all afternoon. 
 
Should I start from the beginning again? Mr. Speaker, where I 
was at was saying that we have to live in this global economy, 
that the entrepreneurs that are going to look at Saskatchewan 
and mark their report card are looking at our comparison right 
across the whole spectrum. 



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

We have the family of Crown corporations, who in a time of 
monopoly, made some sense to be monopolies. But now we’ve 
got to compete globally, and those old rules no longer apply. 
And we can no longer just jack up utility rates in order to feed 
the dividends back into the public purse. Those old valid . . . 
those old considerations are no longer valid. 
 
And so the atmosphere of being able to just sock it to people in 
terms of rate increases are no longer valid. We went through a 
whole exercise of reviewing and evaluating the relationship of 
trade unions in this province. And while trade unions are 
important organizations and in a historical perspective had a 
very important role, I think, and I think a great many people of 
this province absolutely believe, that this government has given 
an absolutely unfair, undue amount of heed to the trade union 
movement in this province. 
 
It’s disproportionate to their activity in this province and it has 
to be changed. It has to be scaled back and it has to be brought 
into the realities of the current economic reality. And so that 
can’t continue. 
 
I talked to many small businesses who are absolutely baffled 
and dismayed by what has happened with the labour standards 
and all the kinds of things that are being imposed on them on a 
daily basis. A lot of these small entrepreneurs do not have the 
luxury of having a chartered accountant in store in order to do 
all these things and cross all the i’s and dot the t’s and all the 
rest of it. They can’t do that. And so they’re trying to grapple 
with this whole paper war that is imposed on them and it’s very, 
very difficult. 
 
Recently this winter and in January, we saw how insensitive the 
Workers’ Compensation Board was to the needs of the 
businesses of Saskatchewan. And the whole outcry that we 
raised with the businesses over this issue, finally we ended up 
with an Ontario fellow who had to come and tell us how we had 
gotten it all messed up. But the simple truth of what’s happened 
is, nothing is fixed. All that’s happened, it’s been delayed; it’s 
just been postponed. It’s sort of the way I housekeep; I sweep it 
under the rug and hope it’ll go away. But you know, Mr. 
Speaker, when you lift the corner of the rug it’s still all there. 
 
And that’s what we have gotten ourselves into with the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. The underlying issues that are 
driving the costs up and the expenses up are not being 
addressed. And so we don’t have this government taking 
control and looking at the overall picture and saying, this is 
what we’ve got to do and this is what we’ve got to change in 
order to get this climate right. 
 
We see proposed changes to the occupational health and safety. 
And the Minister of Labour was very kind to share with me a 
report by KPMG of addressing what the impact of this might 
be. And I’m very glad that at least that they’re looking at what 
the impact might be before these regulations are implemented. 
But there are $18 million of cost to business in the first year, 
according to this study, if all of these regulations are 
implemented. And, Mr. Speaker, business cannot afford those 
kinds of changes all at once. No one thinks that we need to have 
an unsafe work environment. That’s just simply not true.  

What we need to do is be able to do it in an effective and an 
efficient way. 
 
Recently we’ve been raising the whole issue of the costs 
incurred because of the Crown Construction Tendering 
Agreement. And the Saskatchewan Construction Association 
has indicated that they’re terribly concerned by the unfairness 
of the process and the fact that it’s going to cost us millions of 
dollars extra. No matter how you figure it, on what base 
number, once we put this kind of a practice in place, everything 
we do, every capital project in this province, is going to cost us 
as much as 30 per cent more. And that simply is not acceptable. 
 
You know one of the things that is always interesting to me in 
this House, is when the minister gets up and talks about job 
creation and he talks about some folks that Melfort is a suburb 
of, and they say that St. Brieux . . . or Melfort is a suburb of St. 
Brieux. And when you talk about the jobs that are happening in 
that community, it’s probably true. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, when you sit there and point that there’s 6 or 
700 jobs in St. Brieux, they’re not because of government; 
they’re not because of your programs; they’re not because of 
the climate you’ve created. They’re in spite of those programs; 
they’re in spite of that climate. They’re because the people of 
St. Brieux have the entrepreneurial spirit and drive and 
dedication and belief in themselves, that they’re doing it. And 
your government, or previous governments, have absolutely no 
right to take credit for what’s happening in St. Brieux. 
 
And what happens when you get a community that’s driven 
from a historical perspective, where Mr. Frank Bourgault had 
an idea; he had a dream; he had a concept of what he could do 
for a new way of developing cultivators. And out of that 
developed air seeders. And it was taken by his family and raised 
up and marketed and shared and developed, and markets were 
developed. 
 
Also what happened with that whole exercise in that community 
of St. Brieux, again not because of government but in spite of 
it, is all kinds of other businesses developed. I recall when 
Gerry Bourgault said, it’s costing us a lot of money to have 
some of the precision gas cutting things happening. They had to 
get it done in Saskatoon, or Regina, or Calgary. 
 
And so a little firm was formed right in St. Brieux, Precision 
Profiles Plus, which now does all of that specialized cutting and 
metalwork right in the community — again with a lot more 
jobs. 
 
They used to buy a lot of the sprayer tanks and the plastic 
shrouds and shields that they used for the sprayers from outside 
of the province. And lo and behold, some entrepreneurs built a 
shop, and now all of those products are done in St. Brieux. 
 
Because the community is thriving, and because you can’t rent 
or anything a house in that community  and that’s why it’s of 
such importance to communities like Melfort and Tisdale and 
Humboldt and Naicam and all around Kinistino, where people 
go to work at St. Brieux  there’s all kinds of other stores that 
are able to be built. And so we have things like a health food  



430  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

store, and these kind of things, that are being built in St. Brieux. 
 
We have a seed processing and seed cleaning plant, we have 
custom welding businesses, and we have other manufacturers 
that are in that little community. 
 
And so not because of government, but in spite of it, that 
community is now thriving. And in 1991 when I was 
campaigning, that was part of the old Melfort constituency, St. 
Brieux. And it was amazing to go into that area and door-knock 
in the countryside. And you could see that the prosperity of that 
community made an incredible difference. 
 
The buildings were painted; the yards were clean; equipment 
was well done. And it was an amazing thing to see that those 
communities were doing well in spite of government, not 
because of it. It was in ’91. It hasn’t changed a whole lot now. 
There aren’t a whole lot more people working. The yards are 
still clean. Everything is still as it was. And so when 
government takes credit for this, it’s just really unfair. 
 
I recall very personally with a great deal of pride the story of 
Schulte in Englefeld. John Schulte was my uncle. And when I 
went to university I learned to weld there. And I learned to see 
what it took. And I remember as a young child talking about 
Uncle Johnny. And he had a very small shop; it was like a 
garage. And what he did is he borrowed from friends the first 
money he needed to buy steel to build a snowplough. That’s 
how he started. And he had enough money that when he sold 
that first snowplough, he had money to buy materials for two. 
And then he done two. And on it went. And now they are a 
major manufacturing company. 
 
And that’s how these dreams start. They start from someone 
with a dream, someone with the drive, someone that believes 
that they can do something different and better. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s what’s important. And that’s what government 
has to get right in terms of saying, we have to create an 
environment where that entrepreneurial spirit can again flourish 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we can sit here and say we need $100 million more for 
another high-tech agri-park or whatever. And those are good 
things. But if we create the environment, the biotech and all of 
those things will come here because this is a naturally 
advantaged agricultural area. And so we don’t have to 
artificially find taxpayers’ money in order to do these things. 
We just have to create the climate. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I really believe that what the thrust has to 
be of economic development and projects of government is not 
to sit here and know best; not to sit here and say, we need to 
give you an agri-park, we need to have a vehicle that will give 
you this kind of financing. How much sense does it make? I 
think my colleague said there was 1,100 applications and only 
11 have gone through the system. What sense is that? We’ve 
got a bunch of bureaucrats, a bunch of people running around 
with busy work, creating new ideas to create new paperwork for 
these businesses that are now trying to survive on their own. 
 
It’s the wrong approach. We are heading 180 degrees in the  

wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. And I fully support the concept 
that the best thing that could be done for economic renewal in 
Saskatchewan is not more good ideas, not more imposed 
government programs, not more big brother approaches to 
things, but less. Let’s create a simple environment where that 
entrepreneurial spirit can again thrive and flourish and we will 
see Saskatchewan shine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, although 
this is a brief Bill, it contains some fairly serious implications. 
In general the main effect of this Bill is to extend SOCO’s 
powers to invest in and develop research and developments 
parks. If you pardon the pun, it’s an interesting development. 
 
When the Bill establishing SOCO was introduced in 1994, its 
primary focus was to draw distinctions between the new agency 
and SOCO. A number of areas were identified as problems with 
SEDCO that SOCO was presumably to fix  problems such as 
eliminating loans to retail operations. The government argued at 
the time that such investments did not further the cause of 
economic diversification and thus it was not the proper place 
for a government economic development agency. 
 
(1530) 
 
In a similar vein, the SOCO Bill made efforts to separate from 
any activities which could be seen as mundane business 
assistance which private sector sources could supply as well if 
not better. 
 
In particular, in Committee of the Whole on the SOCO on May 
19, 1994, the Economic Development minister said: 
 

The other thing that will likely change is (that) the property 
division within SEDCO, which had been built up over the 
(number of) years to have a whole array of property  
some buildings in Regina, Saskatoon, industrial parks in 
many of our smaller communities. Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation will not have a properties 
division. And that will be a significant, a significant 
change from where we were in the past. 

 
Well indeed that was a significant change, one that the most 
common recurrent criticism that was levelled against SEDCO 
was that it was using taxpayers’ dollars to compete with private 
developers throughout the province. What concerns us about 
the legislation is that it appears to be the thin edge of the wedge 
for SOCO to get back into the properties business now that the 
heat is off and the minister has accepted the praise of getting rid 
of it in the first place. 
 
The minister in his second reading speech where the Bill 
pointed to the success of Innovation Place development in 
Saskatoon. Indeed this was an extremely good project, and our 
caucus does not want to detract from its value in any way. 
However it is one thing to give the SOCO administration over 
Innovation Place, although even this, I must say, makes SOCO 
look an awful lot like the former SEDCO. It’s quite another 
thing to give the corporation a blank cheque to develop other  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

parks at will all across Saskatchewan. The fact that the 
government has one successful R&D (research and 
development) park does not mean that a dozen R&D parks 
across Saskatchewan would be as equally successful. 
 
The Bill has some provisions to limit this development by 
limiting its borrowing power. You’ll have to excuse me 
however if $100 million does not sound like too restrictive of a 
limit particularly when the limit can easily be amended and 
extended in the future, and also considering that this does not 
relate to any current indebtedness by the Innovation Place 
project. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, our caucus feels that it is extremely 
dangerous for the government to get back into the property 
development field especially after it made such a show to get 
out of it in the first place. 
 
I’m sure that the minister will argue that SOCO is doing no 
such thing since the amendment only applies to research and 
development parks. He would argue that there is a big 
difference between this and a common and garden industrial 
park or an industrial strip mall. True enough, Mr. Speaker, but 
one has to wonder just how strict the definition of research and 
development is going to be in the regulations. 
 
I’m sure that the minister has been to Innovation Place a few 
times but maybe he’s never got outside of the wine and cheese 
parties in the atrium on the main building. Just in case, I would 
remind him that there is more in the park than ag biotech and 
computer research firms. The park maintains a wide range of 
office space that is used from everything from a business 
consulting service to retail Internet services  hardly cutting 
edge R&D sorts of things. 
 
With these sorts of precedents acting as loopholes it would be 
quite easy to see SOCO setting up regional so-called R&D 
parks which once you scratch the surface turn out to be nothing 
more than glorified strip malls. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me reiterate that our caucus has 
grave concerns about this Bill. We expressed our feelings in 
1994 that SOCO would turn out to be nothing more than an 
expensive name change and window-dressing for SEDCO. To 
us this Bill appears to prove that point and we will therefore 
want to examine its implications quite intensely. 
 
Those are our main concerns and we’ll be raising further 
concerns when we reach the committee stage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
a great deal of pleasure to join in on the adjourned debate on 
this Bill to amend SOCO. I must say the reason that I am 
joining in on this debate is . . . it’s a twofold reason, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
First of all I happen to be the Chair of the government’s 
employment and economy committee, so I have a great deal of 
interest and concern in what we can do in terms of creating a 
positive climate for investment opportunities and for business 
development opportunities in this province so that we can have  

real and meaningful job creation, so that our children do not 
have to leave this province, do not have to crawl over the 
border to find jobs. They can actually be employed here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I am also, Mr. Speaker, the Chair of the Crown Corporations 
Committee. And as Chair of the Crown Corporations 
Committee, SOCO will be one of the annual reports that we 
will be examining. So obviously I have more than a passing 
interest and concern in this. 
 
I think though, Mr. Speaker, the main reason why I am pleased 
to be able to stand up and speak on this is because I am hearing 
a lot of innuendo and veiled insults against my home city, 
Saskatoon. 
 
For Heaven’s sake, we’ve been far too successful with 
Innovation Place and that seems to gall the members opposite. 
They can’t seem to understand that perhaps in this province it’s 
time we held our heads high and built on success rather than 
being embarrassed about it or running away from success. I say 
to them it’s time they stopped the doom and gloom, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s time they got on board with us in terms of creating 
a positive climate for solid, sound, sustainable economic 
development in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with only a slight bit of interest to the 
continuing carping from members opposite about job creation 
and their mantra which, for Heaven’s sake . . . I thought that the 
opposition was a Liberal Party. I didn’t realize that they were 
actually a Reform Party. They seem to have pole-vaulted right 
over when they changed their leaders instead of once again 
reaffirming their commitment to Liberal Party policies and 
procedures. Instead they seem to have pole-vaulted right into 
the Reform Party camp. 
 
I don’t know why they’re sitting in this House as Liberals and 
why the hon. member from Greystone is forced to sit as an 
independent. It does seem to me that they’ve got their principles 
just a tad wrong, Mr. Speaker. But I hear them saying with great 
gusto the government should get out of business. This is . . . 
and they’re repeating it like a mantra  get government out of 
business and then everything will be resolved. We’ll have 
nirvana on the plains of Saskatchewan if only government gets 
out of business. This mantra, as if they’ve somehow . . . they 
are the first people ever to discover this great thought and 
they’re repeating it ad nauseam like they’re in the wrong party, 
like Manning mannequins, for Heaven’s sake. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, if only they would stop and listen to 
what this government is saying, they would understand that we 
have a solid plan  a social democratic plan admittedly, but I 
don’t apologize for it being a social democratic plan. That’s 
after all why we’re here. We were elected by the majority 
people in this great province of Saskatchewan. Clearly this is a 
social democratic province and we have a solid plan for 
economic development that does not require government to be 
in business. 
 
It takes a good, solid look at the role of government; at the role 
that government can and properly ought to play in economic  



432  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

stimulation; and at the role that the private sector and the 
cooperative sector ought to play in economic stimulation and 
development. 
 
I find it a great paradox, Mr. Speaker, that the same Liberals 
who will stand up and carp on about how government has to get 
out of business, at the very same time will turn around like 
Tweedledee, Tweedledum and say, get government out of 
business but do something about job creation. Now you can’t 
have it both ways. You can’t insist the government get its filthy 
hands into direct job creation and at the same time tell 
government to get out of business. 
 
The members opposite clearly are floundering around, 
searching vaingloriously for some kind of a philosophical 
framework to justify their actions of last November when they 
dumped their leader. They don’t know whether they’re Liberals 
or Reformers. They haven’t decided yet. They’re kind of 
looking and seeing some attractive elements, perhaps in the 
Conservative Party, but clearly they haven’t got their act 
together in terms of what they mean by sustainable economic 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House know what 
we mean by sustainable economic development. We know that 
government can’t do it alone. We know that private business 
cannot do it alone. We know that what is required in the 1990s 
as we move towards the millennium is a true partnership, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have to have partnership, and we have to have all the 
engines of our economy pulling together in the same direction. 
We cannot have cries of get government involved in job 
creation, but don’t let government be involved in business. We 
cannot continue with these paradoxes. These are simply silly 
approaches that are not well-thought-out and do not actually 
deal with the exigencies of the moment and the very real 
concerns and problems that there are in terms of actual job 
creation. 
 
We have a plan, Mr. Speaker. Our plan we published recently in 
our Partnership for Growth. It’s a solid plan. It looks at several 
different sectors as key sectors in our economy. And it looks at 
several different vehicles for moving forward and obtaining that 
solid economic development strategy that I’m sure the members 
opposite really would like to see in this province. 
 
I invite them, as the Premier has done in the past, to join with 
us, to cut out this artificial nonsense of grandstanding and 
complaining simply for the sake of complaining, but instead to 
join with us in the true spirit of cooperation so that we can 
achieve real and sustainable economic development in this 
province. 
 
One of the vehicles that we are using for economic 
development in this province is SOCO, the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation. I listened to the Leader of the Third 
Party as he was speaking and I heard him raise some very 
legitimate and very heartfelt concerns. As I heard what he was 
saying, he said that he’s concerned that SOCO may simply turn  

into a reincarnation of SEDCO  son of SEDCO, if you will, 
Mr. Speaker, though I’m sure that that phrase would never cross 
your lips. 
 
He’s concerned that SOCO may become yet another SEDCO. 
He’s also concerned about the involvement that SOCO has and 
will have in properties, and most specifically, in terms of 
research and development. And I believe his third concern was 
for the limit in terms of the investment opportunities that SOCO 
is able to be involved in. 
 
Well I want to deal with all of those concerns because I think, 
quite frankly, they’re far more substantive and far more 
meaningful than the nonsense we’ve heard from the official 
opposition, simply trotting out the cant and dogma of the 
Reform Party. 
 
So rather than getting into a deep philosophical debate and 
trying to convince them perhaps they should do some basic 
economic reading, I will totally ignore the kinds of things that 
they have been saying and instead focus on the concerns that 
the Leader of the Opposition brought up. I will not be able to 
obviously answer them in as eloquent or as well-informed detail 
as the minister will, but I know that the minister will be able to 
answer all their questions and answer them quite satisfactorily. 
 
Suffice it to say though, that SOCO can and will be an 
important investment vehicle, an important opportunity for up 
and coming developing businesses to be able to secure the 
initial financial stability that they require as they are getting on 
with the very important job of creating jobs for the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s job creation by the private sector, not by 
government. But it is cooperation and assistance by the 
government to assist those companies to get going. 
 
(1545) 
 
SOCO is not, and hopefully with the kind of good management 
that we have seen so far in SOCO and that we expect to see 
carried on into the future regardless of the nature of the 
government administration, SOCO is not a sink-hole like 
SEDCO became. SOCO will not be in the position of having to 
write off hundreds of millions of dollars of bad debts, bad 
investments. 
 
SOCO will not become a vehicle like the former minister for 
Social Services . . . I’m not sure if I can say his name when he’s 
a former minister, can I? He’s no longer in the House. I mean 
above all else, Mr. Speaker, I would not want to break any rules 
in this House. I have a great deal of respect for the procedures 
in this House so I certainly wouldn’t want to break the rules and 
I don’t want to mention Grant Schmidt’s name unless it’s 
appropriate to mention it. Mr. Speaker, is it appropriate to 
mention Grant Schmidt’s name? 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Now the member has not 
raised a point of order and she’s well aware of the rules of 
debate. But it is inappropriate to involve the Speaker in the 
debate and that is definitely out of order. And I’ll ask her to just 
simply proceed with her debate and the Speaker will continue to 
follow with interest. 



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

Ms. Lorje:  See, Mr. Speaker, that’s why the majority of 
people voted for you to be Speaker because you’ve . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Well now, the member has followed the 
Speaker’s admonition with a repeat offence, although of 
another nature. And I’ll simply ask her to get back in her flow 
in the debate on the Bill which is before us. And I’ll remind her 
that the Bill before us is Bill No. 8, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act, and that she’ll 
want to direct her remarks in that regard. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am duly and properly 
admonished and I apologize for involving you, however 
obliquely, in the debate. 
 
The Speaker:  Now I have to remind the member that it’s 
inappropriate to comment on the Speaker’s ruling and I’ll ask 
you to simply proceed or I will go to another debater. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Thank you and thank you to all members of the 
House. And directing my remarks most specifically to the 
Leader of the Third Party, I would like to say that we have 
structured SOCO in a way that it can never become and will 
never become the kind of sink-hole that SEDCO became. It will 
never become a front company to hide a back company which 
was a company to hide several investments of dubious quality 
which never came before this legislature, never came before the 
Crown Corporations Committee, and never were subjected to 
any kind of adequate public scrutiny. 
 
I’m referring of course, Mr. Speaker  and I don’t think I’m 
involving you in that by referring to you, am I?  I’m referring 
to the Saskatchewan diversification company. That 
Saskatchewan diversification company was really only the icing 
on the cake that caused the business community in this 
province, the political community in this province, and most 
importantly, the government of the day, the 1991-1994 . . . 95 
Romanow administration, to decide . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Now the member must realize 
— of course she’s a veteran member — and knows very well 
that she’s not to use a proper member . . . proper names of 
members who are sitting in the House. I remind her that just 
moments ago she reflected on that and reminded the House of 
that regulation and now she’s violated it and I’ll ask her to 
proceed with her debate and do it in parliamentary, acceptable 
manner. 
 
Ms. Lorje:  Yes, Mr. Speaker. Of course I was referring to 
the 1991-1995 NDP administration, which quite properly 
decided to do away with SEDCO. However, having decided to 
do away with SEDCO we recognized that there was still an 
important role the government needed to play when the private 
banking institutions and the private credit unions were not able 
to provide adequate funding, bridging funding if you will, for 
new companies and indeed for companies that want to expand 
and do their proper role of job creation in this province. 
 
So we decided that we needed to create a different vehicle but a 
vehicle that was transparent; a vehicle that was accountable; a 
vehicle that was open; a vehicle that we could be proud of and  

that would be able to explain its goals and missions and 
objectives in a clear fashion to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Speaker, we set up SOCO. We set up SOCO 
with a borrowing limit, a limit in terms of the amount of money 
that they would be able to use for investment purposes. That 
limit, Mr. Speaker, was $100 million. And I would suggest, 
since we obviously do not have rampant inflation in this 
country right now, that that limit is an adequate limit for the 
specific purposes of the investment opportunities, which is one 
of the reasons for having SOCO. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we also recognized that we had to deal 
with the outstanding question of the properties that SEDCO had 
acquired. What we did, Mr. Speaker, was we, in a planned and 
businesslike fashion, disposed of various properties around the 
province. We got SEDCO basically out of the property 
development business. But we clearly recognized that there 
were some properties that it would be inappropriate and 
certainly not in the taxpayers’ long-term or even short-term best 
interests to dispose of. And I’m referring here specifically, Mr. 
Speaker, to Innovation Place in Saskatoon. 
 
Innovation Place in Saskatoon, for those of you who have never 
been there, haven’t had the opportunity to see probably the 
most beautiful city in the whole Dominion of Canada, 
Innovation Place is next to the university campus in the 
beautiful hub city of Saskatoon. And because of the unique 
nature of Innovation Place, because of the joint sponsorship 
with the university, and the government involvement that there 
had been in the past and also the great interest by the business 
community in Saskatoon, it was decided that Innovation Place 
had to remain as a total entity that the government, through 
some vehicle, would maintain an active involvement in. 
 
So we looked at it and searched our hearts long and hard. Do 
we create another Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker? Do we 
create an Innovation Place Crown corporation? 
 
Well that probably could have been an adequate and good 
response to the question of maintaining intact and in a 
sustainable fashion the whole question of the whole property 
part of Innovation Place. However if we had done that, we 
know that we would have had the official opposition from ’91 
to ’95, the Conservative opposition, screaming foul, screaming 
that somehow this social democratic government was running 
amok and creating more Crowns, and so forth. 
 
And we knew that they would likely try to create smoke and 
mirrors about this and create the political movement to totally 
have the government divest itself of Innovation Place. Which 
we did not want to do; which the business community did not 
want us to do, because they recognize that there is a great value 
in maintaining Innovation Place as the prime, the top ag biotech 
research and development facility in all of Canada. 
 
So having ascertained that it would be not appropriate given 
political climate and political game playing, quite frankly, to 
create Innovation Place as a separate, standalone Crown, we 
then had to look at what would be the better vehicle. And 
obviously SOCO, Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation,  



434  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

came to mind. And we looked at it carefully, examined terms of 
reference, examined capabilities within that corporation, and 
decided that that would be the better vehicle for maintaining 
Innovation Place intact as a strong research and development 
park. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, what we then had to look at was 
the problem that we had created, which was a problem of 
success. Innovation Place is too successful by half; Innovation 
Place has scientists and researchers from all over the world 
flocking to their wonderful facilities to engage in agricultural 
biotechnology research. 
 
Innovation Place is extremely successful and what we have seen 
is that we have companies like Limagrain, for instance, a 
French company, probably the major seed producer in all of the 
world, asking for increased facilities. So we’ve had to build 
extra facilities. That kind of capital construction, Mr. Speaker, 
quite frankly requires money. Now we know we get a payback 
from that capital construction, but somebody has to be involved 
in the initial, upfront capital. 
 
And who other than SOCO, at this instance. So therefore that is 
the reason for expanding the borrowing limit for SOCO. It is 
clearly, and it is quite clearly stated in the amendment, that this 
money will be used for research and development parks. It is 
not to create a son of SEDCO, if you will. 
 
The third and final point that I believe the Leader of the Third 
Party was making was his concern that we might be setting up 
R&D parks willy-nilly all across the province, and R&D parks 
that will function as competition, if you will, will drain off 
resources from Innovation Place in Saskatoon. 
 
Nothing, Mr. Speaker, could be further from the truth. 
Innovation Place and the ag biotech research that occurs in 
Saskatoon is a gem on the Prairies. We want to support, 
promote, and enhance that gem. We do not want to do anything 
that will detract from it. 
 
We do, though, see that it is a successful model that can 
perhaps be used in other sectors, in other economic 
development opportunities. And people need only think of the 
latest technological advances to think of what kinds of other 
development opportunities there may be. And for heaven sakes, 
there may be other cities . . . even the hallowed city of Regina 
may want to see some other economic development 
opportunities. 
 
So we thought, while we are splitting off and making clear 
these two funding mechanisms within SOCO  one for the 
R&D park and one for the investment opportunities for small 
businesses  why don’t we write into the legislation an ability 
to create, under very strictly controlled, stringent conditions, the 
possibility for allowing people from other parts of this province 
to also participate in the long-term, sustainable economic 
development that we want to see as a result of our Partnership 
for Growth. 
 
So that, Mr. Speaker, is why the amendments to SOCO are 
before you. That, I think, adequately explains the amendments  

for SOCO. If the members opposite would only take the time to 
read it, get out and consult with some of the people in the 
business sector in this province, they would understand these 
are very reasonable amendments that have a great deal of 
common sense and I ask you to support them. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I believe it was the understanding 
that we would have an adjournment of this motion. We have 
some more speakers that would like to speak to it. And I just 
. . . The understanding we had was to have adjournment. And 
so I would move to adjourn unless one of the other members 
would care to adjourn? I move to adjourn debate on this 
motion. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(1600) 

Bill No. 22 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Anguish that Bill No. 22  An Act to 
amend The Radiation Health and Safety Act, 1985 and to 
make related amendments to The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act, 1993 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
were very interested in the remarks of the minister in 
introducing this Bill. And I think it will go a long way to 
dispelling some of the concerns that the industry has. In fact we 
very much are supportive of the progress that’s being made in 
terms of improving the safety of the whole nuclear industry. We 
think that it’s a thing that’s important, that radiation and the 
technology surrounding it are very important. 
 
We acknowledge that the college of physicians and surgeons 
are very supportive of it, and that they have been working with 
the ministry over some time to make sure that this was done 
proper. We’ve also talked to the Saskatchewan association of 
radiologists and they too are very much in concurrence and 
appreciate the consultation that was done between your 
department, sir, in developing this Bill. 
 
So having said that, we see no reason at all at this point to limit 
any further debate, and to move it forward to committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 12  An Act to 
amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to 
enact consequential amendments be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to speak on this very important Bill.  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

I want to commend the government on making this issue a top 
priority, because of course the children of our province should 
be our top priority at all times. 
 
Of course we’re in favour of a Bill that tries to get the children 
of broken homes the money that is coming to them; the money 
that is needed and necessary to take care of their welfare. Too 
often money that is awarded to support the children of broken 
homes unfortunately goes unpaid. And it is the innocent young 
people who are made to suffer for their warring parents. This is 
not right and something clearly has to be done. 
 
I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that I support the general 
thrust of this Bill. Its intentions are clearly honourable. Yet 
there are some concerns, more from the justice side, that I’d 
like to address briefly here today. 
 
My colleague from Humboldt will address other aspects of the 
Bill as well, as will other members of our caucus. I expect that 
to happen. Let’s be clear however, that in any case of a divorce 
involving children, it is the children who are hurt and is the 
children who we must protect. This Bill tries to do that but I’m 
just somewhat concerned that there are portions that just might 
not serve the purpose they were supposed to or intended to. 
They are well-intentioned, no question about that, but I have a 
couple of concerns that I would just like to raise here today. 
 
First off, the portion of the Bill that sees drivers’ licences 
suspended. I’m a little bit concerned that in some cases 
suspending people’s drivers’ licences will hurt their ability to 
pay. For many people a car is a necessity to get to work and my 
major concern here is that it again will backfire on the children 
involved. If mom or dad can’t get to work, how can they get 
some money to pay what they owe? I think that’s a question we 
should follow up. 
 
Once again I don’t want to appear to be easy on the deadbeat 
moms or dads. To turn your back on your children is about the 
lowest thing you can do. You can be assured that we will do 
everything in our power to collect the money for our children. 
Again however, we want to ensure that this new Bill does 
exactly that. 
 
Are there in fact, studies showing that suspending one’s 
driver’s licence works? I’m aware that it is being done in other 
provinces of Canada but I’d like some information on the actual 
outcome of this kind of a practice. Because if it’s simply a 
superficial clause in this Bill that makes it simply appear that 
this government is getting tough on deadbeat parents when it 
either does nothing or in fact harms perhaps the interests of any 
child, that’s shameful. We want to see proof that this is indeed 
the best way to clamp down on these people. 
 
Perhaps when we get to committee, the minister can fill us in a 
little better on this aspect of that particular portion of the Bill, 
and I’m sure he will. 
 
Another concern I have over this provision is that a government 
official decides when to follow this particular route. I 
understand it’s used only as a last resort after notice, after 
notice, after notice is ignored by the negligent parent. But I  

wonder if it should be a government appointed official who 
should be making this final determination. 
 
As we all know, Mr. Speaker, we all have our little biases, We 
all have our bad days. And I’m wondering if it’s wise to have 
the person making this determination, initially at least, come 
from outside of the court system. Will these people be qualified 
to say whether or not this is the best route to go? I’m wondering 
if it might not be best for a judge to make that decision. 
 
Once again, that may be the wiser way to go. In our justice 
system our judges are supposed to be above the fray. They are 
supposed to be fair to everyone in the case  both to parents 
and the children. There should be no bias whatsoever when 
dealing with these kind of situations. 
 
Of course I’m not saying that the person who would be 
involved is not qualified. Please do not interpret that as my 
comments with respect to someone outside of the judicial 
system. They may be perfectly qualified to do the job. But it is 
another concern I have with this Bill and a concern that I hope 
that the minister will be able to address perhaps once again in 
committee. 
 
I do fully support several aspects of this Bill. The fact there is 
no limit on the period of enforcement is a good one, I believe. If 
you break the law, you should be punished. No exceptions. It 
shouldn’t matter how much time has passed. As I said in 
question period, criminals must pay for their crimes. And the 
parent who fails to follow a court order to support his or her 
own children must be dealt with appropriately. Our justice 
system must punish those who break the law and it shouldn’t 
matter in the least how much time has passed. If you’ve broken 
the law, you’ve broken the law  you’ve broken the law. No 
if’s, and’s, or but’s about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must ensure that the law is fair to both sides in 
a case of divorce, any case when a family is broken, and there 
are children involved. That extends from the laws passed by this 
legislature and it applies to how the courts enforce these laws. 
If both sides in a divorce case are not treated fairly, that’s a 
situation we simply cannot tolerate. 
 
In any divorce, or choices of people going their own separate 
ways, there are usually two sides. In our society, as in any case 
of justice, we must do everything to ensure that both sides are 
treated fairly at all times. An entrenched bias against one side or 
the other, which sometimes is perceived to occur, just simply 
cannot go on. 
 
I want to tell the House that I’ve received several letters in my 
office telling me of some cases. There does seem to be a 
willingness to believe one side over the other, more often than 
is probably realistic, I’m sure. 
 
Thankfully I’ve never gone through a divorce and I don’t plan 
to go through a divorce, and I know this Bill doesn’t directly 
deal with this issue. However I do think everyone in this House 
would agree that if parties in these matters aren’t all treated 
fairly at all times, there is a problem. Certainly it’s not a 
problem limited to Saskatchewan so I’m not looking to point 
any fingers, but I think it is a point of concern because, Mr.  



436  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

Speaker, once again if both sides aren’t always treated fairly, it 
again unfortunately falls unto the children that must bear the 
brunt. 
 
Those are just a few concerns I wanted to bring to the attention 
of the House. Once again the general thrust of the Bill is good, 
in my humble determination. But there are questions we have 
and some concerns that have been raised with us. Anything that 
makes the fortunes of the children of broken homes better is 
good. Let’s just make sure we’re doing as much as we possibly 
can to make sure that it is good. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the chance to follow up on 
what our leader has already said about this Bill. I take this issue 
so very seriously because it involves the children of our 
province  children who are so often trapped in bitter adult 
battles and used as pawns in vicious adult games. It saddens me 
and it sickens me to think that so often the biggest losers in any 
maintenance struggle are the children. 
 
I can’t begin to tell you how many stories I have heard where 
maintenance battles have had serious implications on a child. I 
have worked with some of these children; they are living in my 
constituency and in every constituency throughout this 
province. 
 
How many times do we read in the news that one parent 
kidnaps a child to keep the other parent from seeing the child? 
How many times do we hear about families forced to use food 
banks because the maintenance cheque didn’t get there on time? 
How many times do we see children losing out? 
 
In one case, a lady I met talked about how she is raising three 
children as a single parent on the $20,000 per year she makes as 
a secretary. The middle child, a 7-year-old daughter, is mentally 
challenged and needs special care and attention. The father is 
supposed to send an $800 cheque to his children once a month. 
It has been eight months since she received a cent. This woman 
has turned to legal aid but their case-loads are huge and the 
amounts of documentation required for the case to even begin is 
daunting. 
 
So while she waits for money her children pay the price. Her 
oldest son had signed up for guitar lessons. Well she couldn’t 
make the payment and he was forced to drop out. Her youngest 
son can’t play hockey or soccer or baseball. It’s too expensive 
and she needs to use the money she has for food and housing. 
 
And this isn’t even a worse-case scenario. She at least has a job 
and can afford to feed her family. Others are not so fortunate, 
and I’m not just talking about women. Men also run up against 
a brick wall in the present system. The problems with the 
system affect everyone, male and female, rich and poor. That is 
why this Act must be closely examined and any decisions that 
are made should be carefully orchestrated. 

One concern I should bring up right now was brought to my 
attention by a Regina man. He says that he agrees that 
maintenance enforcement is necessary. However, in his opinion 
maintenance and child support payments are very often awarded 
at an unaffordable level. He also has concerns that child support 
payments are not being used to support the children. He would 
like to see some system of accountability for these payments. 
 
I can understand his frustration. I believe him when he says he 
is a caring father who wants to see the best for his children. He 
feels his hands are tied though. Even though he makes regular 
payments on schedule, there is no guarantee that his ex-wife 
will let him see his daughter. 
 
(1615) 
 
In his view, he would like to see some reciprocity for custodial 
parents who balk at court orders. I would like to quote from a 
letter he wrote to me. 
 

Apparently, to the court system, money is the only 
important issue. Well I feel it is time the scales get 
balanced and the non-custodial parent, who is usually the 
father, has some rights other than just being a bank roll. 

 
He further goes on to say: 
 

Likely if the non-custodial parent had some rights and fair 
payments, default on support payments would decline. 

 
Now I know the proposed amendment is trying to deal with 
both sides of the issue. The changes are designed to make 
people who default payments more accountable and I think that 
is a positive thing. I can’t with any comprehensive, solid 
knowledge say whether the new changes are the right answers 
to this problem. 
 
It’s possible that attaching pension entitlements and suspending 
driver’s licence will be enough of a deterrent to prevent some 
default payments. However, I’m not sure this Bill encompasses 
enough points from both sides of the issue. As I have already 
explained, two people, both with very valid arguments, have 
offered a lot of food for thought on both sides of the issue. And 
these are just two people out of the thousands affected in the 
province. 
 
I can’t help but wonder if there are even more issues that need 
to be brought up before any changes are needed. I also would 
like to hear from lawyers on the issue because these changes 
can potentially affect so many other areas of people’s lives. And 
as I said earlier, these changes could seriously impact on the 
children of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before we offer a conclusive decision on this Bill, 
we would like to work on further consultations with the people 
involved in the issue, and therefore I ask that this debate be 
adjourned. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 25  An Act to amend The  
Legal Profession Act, 1990 

 
The Chair  I would ask the member to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to introduce Mr. Doug 
Moen, who’s the executive director of the public law and policy 
part of the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would wonder if 
the minister could just give us a bit of an overview  thank 
you  a bit of an overview as to why he wanted this Bill 
brought forward and some of the changes in this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d be happy to do that and if you don’t 
mind I’ll give you a short summary of the amendments. The 
amendments were designed to do the following things. First 
thing was to ensure that the law society has the ability to 
discipline both former members and lawyers from other 
provinces who are practising in Saskatchewan. 
 
Another amendment increases the number of public 
representatives on the governing body, the benchers, from two 
to four. Further amendment provides that claims against the 
special fund can be made just by clients and not by business 
partners of lawyers. 
 
The fourth amendment provides for unclaimed money from 
lawyers’ trust accounts to be paid to the Minister of Finance 
after the law society has held it for 10 years. 
 
The fifth amendment confirms a complainant’s right to appeal a 
decision by the chairperson of the competency and standards 
committee to take no action on the complaint. 
 
A sixth amendment allows disputes respecting lawyers’ 
accounts to be heard in their entirety in a small claims court. 
 
Seventh amendment confirms that discipline hearings are open 
to the public. 
 
An eighth . . . well a number of amendments make minor 
housekeeping changes in the Act. A further amendment makes 
minor changes to the provisions respecting lay benchers to deal 
with some issues around quorum at meetings. 
 
Another amendment amends section 10 of the Act to allow 
benchers to make rules respecting their procedures including 
quorum. 
 
A further amendment confirms that the report of the 
Competency and Standards Committee is not a finding of 
incompetence. And then a final amendment provides that the 
ability to enforce a discipline order as a judgement of the court 
applies to members as well as to former members. 

That’s a brief summary of the changes. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I should have 
started by welcoming your officials here this evening too, and 
give you a hand. So I will do that now. 
 
In fact, Mr. Minister, are you able to send over a copy of 
whatever you are reading the amendments from? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. Where we’ll start off, I think, is 
talking or getting your view as to why the disciplinary powers 
have been asked for. I’m not sure if it was the association, the 
legal association or profession I should say, have asked for this 
or was this initiated from the government side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, this was very much a request by the 
law society and the profession for some of these changes. 
There’s a couple of areas where there were suggestions, I think, 
from the government. And the main area is the increase of the 
lay members from two to four. But most of the other changes 
are ones that the law society requested. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, are there specific cases that 
were of concern to the law society, that in fact they couldn’t 
deal with within the existing Bill? Is this some of the reason? 
And if there are some of the cases that they’ve used as 
examples, do you have . . . can you cite them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think in a general way I can cite them. 
One of the things that’s happening within the legal profession 
in Canada is that you have members living in other parts of 
Canada and then coming to practise in Saskatchewan. Also you 
have people who resign so that they slip out of the discipline 
proceedings. 
 
What this legislation is intended to do  the first amendment 
especially  is to allow the law society to continue a discipline 
hearing even if somebody resigns and they’re no longer a 
lawyer. 
 
You know, it also relates to people who will move out of the 
jurisdiction, and it covers that particular issue. 
 
I’m not sure if there . . . Well another example of a specific 
instance, I think the whole thing about the small claims court. 
There was a fair bit of frustration by people when a lawyer 
would sue them in small claims court to have the account paid. 
And that person would show up in court and say well, that bill 
is too much, or I shouldn’t have paid anything for what I got. 
And the judge in small claims court would have to say, well I 
have no jurisdiction to hear your complaint about a legal bill 
because The Legal Profession Act says you’d have to deal with 
that in Queen’s Bench court. 
 
And so this specific change allows the whole matter of the bill 
to be dealt with in small claims court if a lawyers uses small 
claims court to sue a person to obtain payment of a bill. Those 
are a couple of examples. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Back to the disciplinary, Mr. Minister, 
back to the disciplinary powers of perhaps . . . And I’ll get right  



438  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

to a case of a former member of this House. If I recall right  
and you can correct me if I’m wrong  but the law society had 
some problems in having any disciplinary action or powers 
against a former member, and it was Eric Berntson. 
 
And I was wondering how this Bill would relate to what the law 
society’s problems on that particular case, how these 
amendments would relate to that. Would they give more powers 
or would they correct some of the problems that had come as 
Mr. Berntson. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Am I understanding you correctly to say 
that Mr. Berntson was a lawyer? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Yes, he was. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  No. What I’m asking is does this Bill give 
any more powers to the law society itself in any disciplinary 
action? Now there was legal firms involved but it had to do 
with the case of Mr. Eric Berntson. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I’m on very safe ground to say that 
this doesn’t affect the whole matter of Mr. Berntson and the law 
society discipline hearing that was held in the fall. The only 
effect of any kind would be, it confirms right in the legislation 
that the hearings would be open. And that decision was made 
after some fair argument that they would have an open hearing 
in the matter you’re referring to. All this would do to make sure 
if they had another one like that it would be an open discipline 
hearing. But it doesn’t add any more powers in any way. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, you’re adding, I guess from 
the government’s point, two more members to sit  if it’s 
going from two to four? I think I heard you say that earlier. Was 
this also asked by the law society? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I would be fair to say that they did 
not request this. But in discussion with them, they understood 
that it was a valuable thing for them to have lay benchers on 
their committee. We have had . . . I guess my officials and I 
have talked with some of the lay benchers as well. They, I think, 
appreciate the fact that there would be the power to have up to 
four members. And it's basically a question of assisting a 
self-regulating profession to have some lay people involved in 
the process. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Mr. Minister, now as far as I know, the 
government is going to have some consultation with the law 
society before making the appointments. Or is this a process 
where you put forward names and they will choose from the list 
of names that you provide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the process would be the same as 
was used before, when the first two people were chosen by the 
minister. And basically what happened there was there were 
advertisements in the paper and people applied for these 
positions. And then there was an interview process and then 
finally two people were chosen. And so I think that would be 
the same process we’d follow again. 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you. Mr. Minister, I’d like to also 
welcome your official here today, someone that I’ve met before. 
My question, just for clarification again, dealing with the 
benchers, once the process you’ve just described is gone 
through, are there any bottom line criteria? Are there any 
qualifications that are looked at for people that would be sitting 
on the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well I think practically it’s a situation 
where we’re looking for a person from urban Saskatchewan, a 
person from rural Saskatchewan, hopefully a person of 
aboriginal origin, and also hopefully a person who represents 
consumer interests. That’s kind of the idea. I mean, that may 
change as other issues arise, but the idea is to get a broad 
background of lay people who are capable and able to 
contribute to all of the difficult decisions, and very, I guess, 
important decisions that are made by the law society. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Lay people without 
any background in law, or qualifications to . . . this would seem 
to me to be something that would be of . . . could be some 
serious matters evolving out of these situations that might 
require people with backgrounds that should have some 
qualifications to deal with these issues. Are there anything 
specific or are they just people from the general society? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the answer to that would be that 
the present members . . . one of the people is a business person 
from Saskatoon, who was a president of the consumers 
association of Saskatchewan and is, I think, quite an astute 
business person. The other one is a farmer, a woman who 
represents the rural area. And both of them very capable people. 
And I think from my own personal perception, they understand 
the issues and they contribute to all of the difficult decisions 
that are made at that level of sort of a self-governing body. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have one more 
question on that vein. Who would make the final decision if 
you did in fact receive a number of applications for these 
positions? Where would the final decision rest and with whom? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The present system is that there is a joint 
panel that reports to me and then I bring the names to cabinet. 
And so I guess finally it would be the cabinet that appoints 
these people. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In dealing with the 
representation on this body, your representatives who are going 
from two to four, and I guess the concern I think the member 
from Melville raised, it was why is the expansion necessary? If 
I heard you right, you wanted a little more input. And a concern 
I also have in looking at the Bill, it talks about the fact that one 
of the representatives should come from outside of Regina or 
Saskatoon. And I’m concerned about that in the fact that before 
there was at least a 50-50 split  one urban, one rural  when 
you had two members. And I’m wondering if you’re going to 
continue that split. 
 
And I just didn’t catch your comments regarding where the two 
individuals were that were non-legal professional people. While 
the member from Melville may have a concern, I’m beginning  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

to think, Mr. Minister, that it’s certainly appropriate to start 
looking at putting people in places of responsibility that may 
not have any connection with the legal community to give at 
least an ability for people in the general public to feel that their 
concerns are being heard at some time. And maybe I’d like to 
know exactly what your reasons are for looking outside of the 
legal community  I think you mentioned a farm wife  and 
those are some of the questions I’d like to hear your comments 
on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think I can say quite safely that the lay 
members that are on the benchers now have been quite 
successful and very much appreciated by the members of the 
benchers of the law society. 
 
The plan is not any kind of plan with the appointment of up to 
four people, to only have one person outside of Saskatoon and 
Regina. But as I explained before, the goal would be to have an 
urban person, a rural person, an aboriginal person, and then 
somebody from consumers’ association. 
 
It is possible that it could be one person from urban areas and 
three from outside of Regina and Saskatoon. I mean, that’s a 
possibility. I think, you know, practically, the intent would be to 
get the right kinds of people who could engender the trust and 
respect of the kinds of communities that they might represent. 
 
But in the final analysis they all work together as a group and 
each contribute their own characteristics and skills in the 
difficult decision making that’s done. I hope I’ve answered all 
your questions there. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, I understand as well that the public 
representatives are appointed by the Lieutenant Governor 
through order in council. I’m wondering how the selections are 
made; what criteria are used in picking these appointees. And 
also I’ll throw another question in there. What kind of costs will 
be incurred through their duties through remunerations and the 
extra costs? Would these costs affect the taxpayers at all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’ll start with your last question first. 
These people are paid for by the lawyers and through the law 
society fees. There’s no cost to the taxpayers. The selection 
process  you may not have been here when the question was 
asked previously, but I explained it before  which includes, 
you know, general advertising throughout the province for 
people who might be interested in this. Then an interview 
process  these names going to sort of a joint panel with a 
recommendation to me which then I take to cabinet. And then 
cabinet finally making the decision on my recommendation. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So I would take it then the law society would 
have some input in the selection. They would make the 
recommendations and you would make the final judgement 
decision on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  When I refer to the joint committee, that’s 
people within my department and the people in the law society 
that would have some say on the appointees. 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, a question was raised a moment 
ago about reasons for this piece of legislation and for it to be 
brought forward, and I’m wondering if you could give us some 
types of examples that may have happened in the past that have 
spurred the reasoning behind bringing forward this piece of 
legislation and some examples . . . maybe it’s through the law 
society, some of the concerns they’ve had, and why we would 
specifically have this piece of legislation on the floor of the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Unfortunately you missed my previous 
three examples, so maybe I’ll try some more because we’ve 
gone through that. 
 
But there’s another situation which involves a court case where 
a business partner of a lawyer was able to be successful in court 
in having this special fund  that is, money contributed by 
lawyers to deal with particular problems. That fund was then 
used to pay a business partner of a lawyer. This legislation, on 
the request of the benchers of the law society, makes it 
absolutely clear that it’s clients that the money is meant to 
protect, not business partners of lawyers. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well I’m sorry I missed that part about the fact 
that it’s the clients and the reasoning for it. 
 
In section 12, I’m wondering if you could give a little more 
depth as to the amendments in section 12. The explanatory 
notes say that this is to clarify that special levies may be taken 
from members to reimburse clients wronged by members rather 
than, say, business partners. And maybe this comes to a 
comment you just made a moment ago that . . . am I taking from 
your comment just made that lawyers were beginning to use this 
to defend themselves, or business to defend themselves, rather 
than . . . or I suppose, if I understood you correctly, misusing 
what the intent of the levies was and how those funds were to 
be dispersed. Is that what you were saying earlier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, perhaps I can explain it. A situation 
would be where a lawyer in  I don’t know, what town should 
we use out in your area? — Whitewood, or somewhere that’s 
close or closer, or Moosomin has invested with a friend in this 
new restaurant business I hear about in Moosomin that’s really 
picked up because of the casino. And they decide . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Whitewood too, okay. So anyway he decides to 
go and see his local MLA and they decide to invest in a 
restaurant together and things go along. 
 
The MLA is a very astute businessman so he has his own 
lawyer in Regina to help him out in his deal. Something goes 
wrong in the business venture. Well what this amendment is set 
up to do is to prevent that MLA, who’s lost $200,000 through 
his good friend the lawyer, from suing that lawyer because he 
was a client of that lawyer and then having access to a special 
fund that all lawyers in Saskatchewan contribute to, to 
compensate clients. 
 
That is opposed to somebody who came into the lawyer’s office 
and sought advice on a mortgage on farm land and there was a 
mistake made and they were out the money. So it’s basically to 
make a very clear distinction between somebody who might be  



440  Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 1996 

a business partner of a lawyer versus a client of a lawyer. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Well, Mr. Minister, sometimes MLAs may need 
to be protected from some unscrupulous lawyers as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, sections relating to the disciplining of former 
members, the reach of these provisions is two years after they 
cease to be members. How was that figure arrived at? Is it 
arbitrary, or is there some rationale for that specific stretch of 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the two-year period is based on the 
experience of the law society of how long it takes for a 
complaint to show up against the lawyer who may have moved 
on. And so they basically, I think, have suggested that if a 
complaint hasn’t shown up within two years then you know 
there probably won’t be a complaint. So it’s a practical time 
that’s been suggested. 
 
Mr. Toth:  So basically, if I understand it correctly then, it’s 
just a time period to deal with maybe some of the frivolous 
complaints. If it’s really a serious type of complaint, there is an 
appropriate time for that complaint to come forward without 
just extending it indefinitely. And I take it that’s what you’re 
talking of in that circumstance. 
 
Several of the sections make changes to allow members who 
are not benchers to sit on committees such as the investigations 
committee. For the record of the House, could you just 
elaborate on the distinction between benchers and non-benchers 
and how this relates to these changes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Basically what’s happened there is that 
the benchers do this as a volunteer job and sometimes there’s a 
situation where there are more investigations going on than 
there are sufficient benchers. And so what this does is allows 
for the benchers to appoint another person, usually a lawyer, to 
sit on the investigation committee. 
 
It also covers that kind of a situation where you may have a 
conflict related to some of the benchers and there aren’t a 
sufficient number . . . and you know, some cases might have 
five or six different law firms involved in it. It’s an 
investigation of that case and you have four benchers from 
those six law firms. You might not have enough other benchers 
to handle the case. 
 
So it’s a practical thing to say it deals with conflicts; it also 
deals with the workload. 
 
(1645) 
 
Mr. Toth:  And one further question. The changes to section 
53(4) establish penalties that can be imposed on 
out-of-province lawyers. Among these is the power to “impose 
a fine in any amount that the committee may specify.” It seems 
to me, Mr. Minister, that seems to be pretty open-ended. We’re 
wondering why is it necessary for the committee to have such 
infinite powers to set fines, and could you foresee this power 
being abused in any way? 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I haven’t heard of any abuse of that power 
myself. I mean basically it sets out the powers that the group 
has to deal with matters, but I haven’t heard of any abuse of 
that. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, is there 
in these cases . . . in the event of a complaint by an individual, 
could you kind of walk us through the process as to how that 
complaint might be initiated and get into the investigation 
stage; how one might initiate a complaint and how it would be 
responded to through the board. Is it to the law society, is it to 
the chairman of the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I was fortunate never to have any personal 
experience in this area, so I’m having to get advice from my 
officials. But practically, what happens if there is a complaint, 
usually by a letter, it goes to the staff at the law society who 
review it on an initial basis and gather information at that stage. 
And sometimes they’re dealt with at that stage. 
 
If it’s not dealt with at that stage, it goes to, as an appeal, to the 
Chair of the discipline committee  I think that’s right  and 
then from there if it’s deemed to be a matter of great 
consequence or it’s a serious issue, it would then go on to an 
investigation committee. And the investigation committee 
includes these benchers, or with the amendment would maybe 
include a bencher and somebody else. 
 
Usually the investigation committee I think is one  is it one 
person usually?  three people in the investigation committee. 
They then end up making a report and it goes then to a hearing 
committee and that hearing committee makes a decision which 
in turn then goes to the benchers as a whole to confirm 
whatever the hearing committee decides. At all of those levels 
the complainant has all the rights they wish to have. They can 
actually have their own lawyer at every stage of this whole 
process if they wish. 
 
Now I think the statistics would probably show that many of the 
matters are dealt with at the first or second level. And many 
times it’s a communication problem so that once it goes into the 
staff, they get the proper response from the lawyer who’s 
complained about, it can be resolved at that stage. But there is a 
whole, very clear process. And after all that’s done, if there’s 
still a concern about the process the matter can go to the court 
and be dealt with through the court system as well. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. It has been said that if 
it wasn’t for lawyers, we wouldn’t need lawyers. I guess the 
reason I was asking the question about how the investigation 
was initiated  and I appreciate your response  would the 
benchers, again going back to the people that are initiating the 
investigation, do they have the option of obtaining the services 
of an experienced investigator? I’m thinking about someone 
that might have served as an investigating officer, either a 
private agency or even a law-enforcement agency. Would this 
be the time, as well, that they might be called in to assist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  The law society, at the present time, has a 
contract auditor  a CA (chartered accountant)  who, 
because many of the times the issues involved here involve  



March 21, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

money or the disappearance of money . . . and so they have a 
contract auditor. I think practically, if there were other issues 
that came up that involved investigation which required the use 
of a private investigator or somebody with a police 
investigation, that would be contracted for as well. It really 
depends on what the case is. But on staff they do have a 
contract auditor who is a CA, and he actually works with 
prevention things as well where he goes in and analyses trust 
account systems and things like that. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Yes, Mr. Minister, just as you are aware, 
northern Saskatchewan, the judges in the court, clerk, fly in 
from La Ronge, and they also travel in with their legal aid 
assistants and lawyers. Has there been any complaints in 
reference to the Act in terms of the amendments here when it 
comes to making sure that there’s fair process and fair time to 
spend with people that have broken the law and do seek help 
from the legal aid lawyers? And I don’t see anything in this Act 
in reference to that particular problem. Because flying into a 
northern community, they go there for court, do their stuff, and 
then they fly out again. That is a bit unfair and I was just 
wondering whether these amendments would address that 
particular problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I don’t think these amendments deal with 
that problem. I mean practically, if somebody felt that they were 
getting poor or no representation, as the case may be, in 
northern Saskatchewan because of the way the system is set up, 
you could use this complaint process to the law society, and you 
could use the present one or the new amendment one. There’s 
no restriction on that. So I think it is a possible remedy for what 
you’re talking about. 
 
But practically, we’re dealing with The Legal Profession Act 
and the procedures for complaints against lawyers. And that 
isn’t something that’s specifically included here. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Has there been any complaints in reference 
to some of the practices of northern Saskatchewan? And as 
well, has there been any consultation of anybody from the 
North that could possibly sit as a bencher? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  As far as I know, there haven’t been any 
complaints about that. But you may wish to contact the law 
society and ask them directly. I’m sure they’d be quite willing 
to talk about that. 
 
I think it is a good suggestion to look at somebody from 
northern Saskatchewan as a lay bencher. I don’t know if any of 
the lawyers from La Ronge, for example, have been benchers in 
recent years. But that’s another way that one of the lawyers 
from that area could be elected. But I think it’s a good 
suggestion and I will keep that in mind. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Mr. Minister, I understand that trust funds 
were paid to the Minister of Finance after 10 years if they’re 
unclaimed. I’m just reaffirming that the interest that’s on that 
money will also be going to the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  No, I think — well I’m not totally certain 
on this — I think it goes to the law foundation and it’s used for  

funding of public legal education, for law school, for other 
things, because it’s trust funds held by lawyers. If there’s not 
specific trust provisions, then the interest on the money would 
go to the law foundation fund. 
 
And that’s a whole . . . I mean I think there was a report that I 
tabled that sets out the money that’s held by the law foundation, 
how that’s all spent. If you have questions about that, I can ask. 
 
This particular provision is an interesting one and it’s, I think, 
in many ways a bookkeeping situation. When a trust fund . . . 
when money is given to a lawyer in trust and then the person 
who’s money it is disappears, or . . . Well I mean, that’s 
basically the only time, the person disappears. Eventually that 
money can be turned over to the law society by the law firm 
because they don’t know what to do with it; it’s not their 
money. 
 
And so then it’s been held there sort of for ever; they’ve 
decided that, you know, this would make more sense, that it 
would just be turned over to the province of Saskatchewan. I’m 
not certain if there’s any provision that if the person showed up 
in 30 years that they might be able to come back and say, well I 
left some money somewhere and then the amount would be 
returned to them, but I would assume that could be a possibility. 
But it’s a very rare case, a very kind of strange case, and this 
assists the law society in dealing with the money at some way 
rather than holding on to it for ever. 
 
Ms. Draude:  Do the records have to be kept on that for 
longer than 10 years though, in case something would happen 
to somebody and they would come back in 15 years from now 
and say, my grandfather died and I don’t know where my 
money is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson:  If you look on page 3 of the Bill here, it 
says, the subsection that would be added as subsection 14: 
 

“(7) . . . (A person could then establish) to the satisfaction 
of the Minister of Finance that he or she is entitled to 
money paid to the Minister of Finance, the minister shall 
pay an equivalent amount to that person out of the general 
revenue fund. 
 

So that covers a situation where they weren’t able to find 
somebody to get the money and then 25 years later they came 
back. They would get that sum, but probably not the interest. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 411 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 411 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 411 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 411 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 411 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 411 
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 411 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 411 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 411 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 411 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 412 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 412 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 412 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Flavel ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 412 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 412 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 412 
Koenker ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 412 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 412 
Renaud ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 412 
Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................. 420 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
International Day Against Racial Discrimination  

Kasperski .................................................................................................................................................................................... 413 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 413 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 413 

South East Regional Economic Development Authority Officially Opens 
Bradley ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 413 

Students Against Drinking and Driving 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 414 

Saskatchewan Heroes 
Johnson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 

Happy Birthday  
McLane ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 

Gas Price Increases  
Trew............................................................................................................................................................................................. 414 

ORAL QUESTIONS  
Health Administration  

Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 415 
Cline............................................................................................................................................................................................. 415 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 416 

Correctional Policies  
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 416 
Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 416 

Taxpayer Protection  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 417 
MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................. 417 

SaskPower Agency System 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 417 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 

Teacher Bargaining Process 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 
Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 418 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
Bill No. 42  An Act respecting the Protection of Saskatchewan Taxpayers 

Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 419 
Bill No. 43  An Act respecting the Development, Implementation and Operation of an Emergency 911 System and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts  
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 419 



Bill No. 44  An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1993 
Wiens ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 419 

Bill No. 45  An Act to amend The Tax Enforcement Act and to make a consequential amendment to The Provincial 
Mediation Board Act 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 419 

Bill No. 46  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
Teichrob ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 420 

Bill No. 47  An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act  
Upshall......................................................................................................................................................................................... 420 

Bill No. 48  A Bill to amend The Animal Identification Act 
Upshall......................................................................................................................................................................................... 420 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington ................................................................................................................................................................................... 420 
Speaker ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 420 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 35  An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act  
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 420 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 421 

Bill No. 37  An Act to amend The Water Corporation Act 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 421 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 421 

Bill No. 38  An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 422 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 422 

Bill No. 39  An Act to Promote, Develop and Sustain Irrigation 
Anguish ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 423 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 423 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 426 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 14  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Income Plan Act....................................................................................... 426 
Bill No. 8  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act 

Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 426 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 428 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 430 
Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 431 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 434 
 Bill No. 22  An Act to amend The Radiation Health and Safety Act, 1985 and to make Related Amendments to The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993 
  Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 434 
 Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act and to enact consequential amendments 
  Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 434 
  Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 436 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 Bill No. 25  An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990 
  Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 437 
  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 437 
  Osika .................................................................................................................................................................................... 438, 440 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 438 
  Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 441 
  Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 441 
 


