













































March 22, 1996 Hansard


   LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 443 

   March 22, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again on behalf 

of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

about the closure of the Plains Health Centre in Regina I 

present this petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the signatures are from Regina, from Craven, from 

Lumsden, from other small communities in southern 

Saskatchewan, and southern Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes, Mr. Minister, once again I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

from Regina, they’re all throughout Saskatchewan, and I would 

like to present this to the Assembly, please. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

rise to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

primarily from Manor; they’re also from Arcola and Alameda 

and Weyburn and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions of names from people throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed this petition are from Moose Jaw, from 

Regina, from Weyburn, from Assiniboia, all over southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to  

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are all 

from the city of Moose Jaw. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 

to present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Grayson, Melville, Regina, and throughout the province. I so 

present. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 

petitions from people throughout Saskatchewan and again of 

course from throughout western Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition mainly 

are from Fort Qu’Appelle, Regina, but there’s a number from 

Penticton and Vancouver, B.C. (British Columbia), people of 

course who appreciate the Plains Health Centre staying open, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Now the hon. member knows what I’m going 

to say before I say it, and I simply remind him that debate is not 

permitted when presenting a petition, and he’s starting to 

engage in that. 

 

An Hon. Member:  . . . him out. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Now the Speaker is not 

seeking advice here. 

 

Are there any further petitions? 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 



444  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Agriculture: why is the 

Agriculture department delaying the Thickwood Hills 

Feeder Cooperative Limited application to raise their 

borrowing limit to promote cattle production; what is the 

reason for this delay; why has the department suggested 

the co-op split into two separate co-ops in order to 

capitalize on the $3 million limit twice, rather than raise 

the limit? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

certainly my pleasure to introduce from Milestone School 36 

students in grades 3, 4, and 5, and also teachers Laurel Herman, 

MaryJo Steve, Bev Siebert and John Kodman. John taught my 

sister a number of years ago, so it’s great to see him here. 

 

Also welcome a number of the parents and chaperons, and I 

look forward to visiting with the students and teachers after the 

question period, and I would ask all members to join in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of myself and the 

Minister of Social Services, it’s a great pleasure for me to 

introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

Assembly, Dr. Craig Househam who’s sitting in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker, in the front row. 

 

And Dr. Househam is the deputy director general of the 

Department of Health and Welfare in South Africa’s Free State 

province. He’s visiting Saskatchewan, and he’s been here for a 

few weeks to see how we administer and deliver health and 

social services programs. In particular, he has a keen interest in 

the innovative changes that have been made to our health 

system and the discussions we’re currently having on social 

policy and programs. He’s also interested in our form of 

democratic government and the systems and processes that 

make it work. 

 

As members know, Dr. Househam is one of several officials 

who visited Saskatchewan as part of our commitment to help 

the Free State establish a reformed and democratic government. 

In the past two weeks Dr. Househam has met with officials 

from the departments of Health, Social Services, Executive 

Council, and other central agencies. He’s also had discussions 

with health service providers in Regina and Saskatoon and the 

Midwest Health District. 

 

Members will be interested to know that the Free State province 

is making some major changes to its health system. It has 

established six districts to deliver primary health services. It has 

shifted funding to put more emphasis on health centres and 

other community-based services to ensure quality health  

services are available to everyone. 

 

Dr. Househam joins a long list of international delegations who 

have come here to study our health renewal program. And I 

would like to ask all members to join me in welcoming Dr. 

Househam and also in wishing him and his province success 

when he returns home to South Africa. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would as 

well like to acknowledge the presence of John Kodman in this 

Legislative Assembly. John taught for a number of years in 

Moosomin at McNaughton High. And while Moosomin has lost 

an excellent teacher, I’m sure the Milestone students are 

appreciating his presence. Welcome, John. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also want to join 

my colleagues in welcoming the school group here from 

Milestone. Of course, Milestone being my home town, I’m very 

familiar with the students, the teachers, and the chaperons. So I 

really hope that all the members will be on their very best 

behaviour today because I’m sure I’ll hear comments on the 

weekend about it. 

 

I really do enjoy having my colleagues here also from the 

school in Milestone. And I’d just ask everyone to join me in a 

warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too today, through 

you and to the members of the Assembly, would like to 

welcome the group in from Milestone. Amongst that group is a 

niece and a nephew of mine and a couple of their kids I believe 

are there that go to the school, Chandra and Ryan, as well as 

Rhys. Stand up and give us a wave there, Tammy and Chuck 

Thomas. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Also, Mr. Speaker, in the gallery behind me 

there’s a couple of gentlemen I’d like to introduce as well, a 

constituent of mine, Mr. Clark Tweet, who is the secretary of 

the Concerned Rural School Trustees. Clark Tweet, would you 

stand up. 

 

And also Mr. Larry Caswell, who is the chairman of that same 

group. I ask the Assembly to give them a welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Opening of Maymont School 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The day before 

yesterday, during Education Week, I was proud to be with the 

Minister of Education in the village of Maymont in my  



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

constituency. We were both present to take part in the official 

ceremony opening the new K to 12 Maymont School. 

 

Last week I told the Assembly about the multi-use village 

complex just completed in Maymont. The school is a central 

part of this complex and, as I said last week, this is an exciting 

new development and partnership, a collaborative sharing. The 

library, for instance, is there for the 145 students and 9 teachers. 

But it is also there for the seniors whose complex is a short 

distance away. This is an intelligent sharing of a resource and a 

pleasant way for seniors and youth to see each other, something 

that doesn’t always happen in our communities. 

 

To codify this new multi-use idea, an agreement between the 

community and the school division has been signed. This is one 

of the first projects to be built under the Department of 

Education’s initiative towards joint use between schools and 

other partners and has resulted in a community centre second to 

none. 

 

It is a good and forward-looking initiative, Mr. Speaker, and I 

am pleased to see it begun in my constituency. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

World Water Day 

 

Ms. Draude:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

recognize this day’s designation as World Water Day. Water is 

one of our most valuable resources, extremely important, and 

should not be taken for granted. 

 

This week, Saskatchewan Conservation and Development 

Association met in Saskatoon. The association is made up of 

the C&D (conservation & development) boards and the 

watershed boards in this province. These board members spend 

countless hours of their own time to discuss the conservation 

and development of water resources in this province. They 

review the water concerns and problems arising mostly in rural 

areas. 

 

Because of their consultations and research, lots of 

Saskatchewan land that was once flooded is now arable. I 

would ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the conservation and development boards for 

their continued work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Estevan Legion Donations to Hospitals 

 

Mr. Ward:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Royal Canadian 

Legion, Estevan branch no. 60, since 1987 has donated more 

than $90,000 for specialized equipment in Regina hospitals. 

This is in recognition of the fact that Regina hospitals serve the 

people of southern Saskatchewan, not just the local citizens. 

 

This year I am proud to announce to the Assembly that the 

Estevan branch presented a cheque for 25,000 to the Hospitals 

of Regina Foundation, a donation towards the purchase of a 

hemodyalysis machine for Regina General. 

Mr. Speaker, 350 people in Saskatchewan use these machines. 

They are necessary and they are expensive. The people of 

Estevan are proud to make this contribution through the Legion. 

The money was raised primarily from the annual poppy sale. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the Legion contributed 10,000 to the local 

St. Joseph’s Hospital auxiliary in Estevan towards the purchase 

of an endoscopy machine  this in addition to a previous 

10,000 for the same purpose. 

 

These two donations for specialized equipment are an 

indication of the community spirit, the provincial community 

spirit, one finds in Estevan and all our towns. I am proud to 

represent them and I applaud the ongoing work of the Estevan 

Legion. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Choices and Consequences Youth Conference 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week the 

Regina Northwest Interagency Service Project sponsored a 

conference for grade 7 and 8 students. Over 800 students from 

eight public and separate schools attended the conference held 

over three days at the Northwest Leisure Centre in my 

constituency. I attended one day myself, Mr. Speaker, as part of 

my commitment to Education Week. 

 

The conference was called “Choices and Consequences”. And 

as the title suggests, students were confronted with a variety of 

speakers on a series of topics on the choices we all must make 

in our lives and the likely consequences of those choices. 

 

I suppose one of the phrases most used by those of us over 20 

is, if I had known then what I know now I would never have, or 

I would have . . . And we can all finish the sentence, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

With speakers like Alvin Law and the other capable 

participants, students were given some preparation so that the 

phrase might become a permanent part of their adult 

vocabulary. 

 

The Choices and Consequences conference was a good one. 

The students were enthusiastic, partly because they were 

released from school to attend, but mainly because this 

provided them with another kind of necessary learning 

experience. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

University of Regina Arts Festival 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that 

you would agree that only an oafish lout would destroy a work 

of art; however, eating one is an entirely different matter. And 

that’s what I and several other people will be doing tomorrow 

night. 



446  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

The sixth annual University of Regina fine arts festival begins 

tomorrow with an edible art event appropriately named “eat 

your heart out.” Thirty prominent and upcoming local artists 

are, as we speak, sculpting edible art pieces which will be 

displayed, then judged, and then consumed with gusto by those 

of us in attendance. 

 

I had debated making a tray of rats a roni in honour of the 

opposition third party there, but I didn’t have time, given duties 

in the House. More tickets are available, and the proceeds will 

be used to send senior visual arts students on a gallery tour of 

New York. 

 

There are other events throughout the week at the university and 

other venues: recitals, plays, exhibits. I have attended before; 

they’re always excellent. So fine arts week — I encourage all 

who can to attend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to Toronto Dominion Bank and Trust 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 

somewhat of a contrast to my friend from Thunder Creek, who 

on Wednesday continued his attack on the banks and business 

community of our province, to actually make a statement on 

how these organizations continue to support Regina’s 

continuing economic growth. 

 

On Wednesday I had the pleasure of representing the Premier 

and Minister of Economic Development at the opening of the 

Toronto Dominion Bank and Trust on Hamilton Street. The 

Toronto Dominion is making a major investment in the 

community of Regina, particularly in the area of expanding into 

trusts and estates. And this again highlights the importance of 

the financial services sector in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Toronto Dominion for 

their continued support of the Regina business community, and 

I want to congratulate the Minister of Economic Development 

for his work in building partnerships. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Now I’ll ask all the members to come to order 

and give their full attention to the hon. member for 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Provincial AA Hockey Champions 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to announce more good news for Weyburn. 

 

Today I want to congratulate the Weyburn PanCanadian Midget 

Beavers who have recently won the provincial AA 

championship, This is the second year in a row the Beavers 

have won the championship, and they won this year in grand 

style, defeating a good team from Martensville in double 

overtime 5 to 4. 

 

Now I’m not a sports expert, but I can figure out that if a league  

has an age limit  here, 16 and under  and if one team wins 

two years in a row, that means there is an abundance of talent at 

all ages and that there is some very good coaching taking place. 

 

That coaching is provided by Norm Cross and Darcy Pindus, 

and I congratulate them as well. Credit also goes to 

PanCanadian Petroleum of Weyburn who has sponsored midget 

hockey for 25 years. 

 

As the title of Ken Dryden’s book says, hockey is The Game of 

our Lives. It is played with skill and enthusiasm at all ages and 

provides exciting entertainment for we fans. 

 

Congratulations to the Weyburn PanCanadian Midget Beavers. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we travel through 

our lives, our lifetime, and bumpy roads from time to time, 

often  quite often as a matter of fact you meet people for 

whom you develop a mutual respect. And I’ve had the good 

fortune of, during my lifetime and different careers, meeting 

sincere, honest people that some of them who’ve become 

lifelong family friends. 

 

And I’d like to introduce one to you, Mr. Speaker. A gentleman 

that I had the pleasure of meeting while in charge of Fort 

Frances detachment in Ontario, Mr. Lyle Turgeon, who is now 

with Transport Canada and is from Winnipeg, is in the east 

gallery. And I would ask the Assembly to please welcome my 

good friend to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

SaskPower President’s Remuneration 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, as this House is well aware, 

SaskPower greeted the people of Saskatchewan with a massive 

rate increase to start the new year, an increase endorsed by the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government. This massive hike 

was necessary, said former NDP election campaign chairman 

Jack Messer, to get this Crown’s fiscal house in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when Jack Messer assumed his position as the 

head of SaskPower, he was awarded a pay and benefits package 

that totalled $177,000 a year. Today Jack Messer is receiving 

$183,000 in total pay and benefits. Will the Deputy Premier try 

and justify a $6,000 raise for Jack Messer while the rest of us 

are gouged with massive rate increases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  While I want to thank the hon. member 

for his question, I’d also want to point out that SaskPower has,  



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

as many of the Crowns, gone through a great deal of 

restructuring to meet the competition, to meet the challenging 

times of the future. These are not simple solutions. They are 

very complex solutions. And the management, the board, and 

the employees of SaskPower have worked together to make the 

corporation good for us today and good for us into the future. 

 

In issue of the salary, I point out to the hon. member that the 

actual salary, I don’t believe, has increased at all from the date 

that Mr. Messer was appointed. I believe the salary is $150,000. 

I think the member knows that. It’s a salary that would not be 

competitive with any utility of comparable size anywhere 

outside of Saskatchewan, and it’s certainly a fraction of what 

the former administration paid to George Hill. In fact it would 

likely be about five per cent of what George Hill’s 

compensation package on departure from the corporation would 

have been, which is in the ballpark of a million dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I would agree with the minister 

opposite that there’s been a few Hills in this province that have 

got compensated too much by this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of Jack Messer’s raise is made up of 

additional benefits, including another week of paid holidays  

now up to five weeks annually. Mr. Speaker, most people in 

this province, if they’re lucky enough to be working at all, wait 

years to get five weeks of paid vacation time. Jack Messer 

waited just three years. But if you’re willing to hike everyone’s 

power rates as Jack Messer has, you can pack your holiday bags 

for five weeks, I’m sure. 

 

Will the minister explain where the fairness is when people like 

Jack Messer get more perks while the rest of us receive higher 

power rates and fewer services from this NDP government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

confuses good management with a variety of other things in the 

question that he asks. And I think that he would want to try and 

focus a little more clearly on what the issues are. One is a 

compensation package for a very competent and experienced 

senior manager of the corporation. The other is a rate issue 

which brings into line with the challenges of the future. 

 

The member would know very well that there’s massive cross-

subsidization in the past at SaskPower between various rate 

categories. It’s a system that’s been in place under all 

administrations and we have to correct that because of the 

North American Free Trade Agreement which your Prime 

Minister said he’d tear up upon coming into office and never 

did. 

 

So we’re preparing for the future. We wish you would focus on 

the issues and make sure that those issues that you’re focusing 

on are for the benefit of Saskatchewan people in facing the 

challenges of the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, Jack Messer was recently 

quoted in the Regina Leader-Post as stating: 

 

If anything, utilities like SaskPower need to become more 

efficient and streamlined to make more money for 

taxpayers. 

 

What the people of Saskatchewan actually see is SaskPower 

firing the front-line worker so as to provide more money for 

NDP appointees like Jack Messer. 

 

Will the minister make a commitment in this House today to 

pull the plug on this shameful waste? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  There is no shameful waste to pull the 

plug on. I would say that SaskPower, the management and the 

employees, the front-line employees of the corporation, will 

stack up against any utility anywhere in North America for their 

efficiency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  I’d also, Mr. Speaker, want to point out 

to the member opposite that the changes at SaskPower did not 

start with the front-line employees of the corporation. The 

front-line employees of the corporation are the ones who 

deliver the very good service; it’s the managers who manage a 

very good service to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Under the previous administration there were somewhere 

around a dozen vice-presidents at SaskPower. Those 

vice-presidents were reduced in numbers. The senior 

management, the out-of-scope people, were the first to attain 

efficiencies within the corporation and the front-line employees 

that you talk about have a program that they have worked on, 

challenging the future . . . Taking Charge of the Future, I should 

say. And that was done in concert with employees, in scope and 

out of scope, and the management and the board of SaskPower. 

I think we should be proud of the corporation that can compete 

with any corporation in North America in terms of efficiencies 

and the member should focus on that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Vice-president’s Remuneration 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleague 

has just raised concerns about the former New Democrat Party 

boss, Jack Messer, and the pay and benefits package he now 

receives. I would like to point out that there’s also Carole 

Bryant, a former member of the NDP executive and current 

SaskPower vice-president, has also received a substantial raise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government chose to take advantage of 

Carole Bryant’s depth of experience in the power business, she 

began at a salary of $95,000 plus benefits. Mr. Speaker, her pay 

has now increased to almost $129,000, which brings her total 

pay and benefits package to $154,000. Will the Premier try to 

explain, or will the minister try to explain, how he can justify  



448  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

giving political appointees a raise while gouging SaskPower 

customers. And at this time I’d like to send across to all of the 

cabinet ministers the list of the pay and the benefits so you 

could follow along in question period today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that the 

member opposite has problems with women leaders. Carole 

Bryant is a leader in terms of management within the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and her salary is not out of 

line with a comparable job in Saskatchewan and it’s certainly 

very much under what a comparable job would be with utilities 

outside of Saskatchewan. And I think that the member opposite 

should encourage women to move into management positions 

and not hold the glass ceiling there that he seems to support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, a few 

moments ago the minister talked about the challenging times in 

this province but I think it’s clear that the challenging times 

aren’t hitting Jack Messer and Carole Bryant. Mr. Speaker, 

Carole Bryant was quoted recently as stating, and I quote: “We 

have to reduce our operating costs. That’s what last year was all 

about.” 

 

It would appear what last year was all about was giving Carole 

Bryant and Jack Messer shameful raises and then letting them 

raise our power rates to pay for it. Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

showed leadership by taking away the two Lexus vehicles that 

those two, Jack Messer and Carole Bryant, had leased when 

they first got those jobs; will he show the same kind of 

leadership now, do the honourable thing, and roll back these 

shameful wages and increases? 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish: . Well the member opposite talks about 

rolling back. This government has tried not to roll back 

anything in terms of what the Saskatchewan taxpayers have 

enjoyed as services within the province. What we’ve done is 

hold the line, created efficiencies, and we know that this 

member who asked the question today will likely be rolled back 

as quickly as his leader was rolled back by him after the 

provincial election. 

 

I state again to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, that these 

salaries are very, very close to the same as when they came into 

office in 1991; they have moved just a fraction of a per cent. 

He’s distorting the figures in terms of what he says are 

outlandish kinds of pay increases. That’s not factual 

information. And I think the member should focus on the 

future, and how we develop this province with utilities, with the 

private sector, and with the Legislative Assembly focusing on 

the important problems of the day, which would be job 

creation, growing our economy, and making sure that 

Saskatchewan people have the services they’ve come to 

appreciate from competent governments of the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and NDP over the 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 

the minister really and truly wanted New Democrat political 

hacks to have more money, perhaps he would look at the perogy 

king beside him and get a few donations from that angle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as part of SaskPower’s cost cutting, the rural 

underground distribution program that buried overhead cable to 

keep our farms safe was eliminated. SaskPower officials, and 

the minister, stated at the time they just couldn’t afford to 

maintain the program. Will the minister explain why his 

government feels it can afford shameful raises to Jack Messer 

and Carole Bryant but can’t afford to keep in place a program 

that has proven to save lives? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the program that the member 

refers to is a program that will be ongoing. It will be changed to 

have some efficiencies in line with all the other changes that are 

happening within the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. 

 

We want to make sure that the Crown corporations are there to 

serve the people of Saskatchewan for a long time in the future, 

just as they’ve been in the past. And just because something has 

served us well, like the party opposite would do  we’re 

opposite to them  when’s something’s working well we don’t 

throw it out; we keep it, try and improve it for the efficiencies it 

has, and use it into the future for the good qualities that they 

have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Relocations 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

questions this morning are for the Minister of Economic 

Development. Mr. Minister, we have learned that Ford Credit 

Canada is going to be closing its Regina branch office and 

relocating these services to Calgary and Edmonton effective 

June 1. 

 

Can you tell us how many jobs will be lost in Regina and what 

the reason is for this decision? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member opposite brings 

forward an important issue and that is relocation of jobs that is 

going on throughout Canada. You will know that CIBC 

(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce) has announced that 

they’re going to locate their call centre for western Canada, and 

as that relocation goes on there will likely be jobs lost in other 

centres in western Canada as they move to Regina. 

 

The same happened with Sears when they did their call centre 

in Regina. And as companies amalgamate, and change, there 

will be net levels of winners and losers. 

 

And I want to say that in the case of Regina, with the number of 

call centres and the number of people working in that industry 

in Regina, I’m proud to say that we are doing very, very well. 

And one of the reasons that we’re doing so well is because of  



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 449 

the competence in our Crown, SaskTel. We have an advantage 

with that Crown corporation and we’re doing, I believe, a very 

good job as an industry in attracting call centres. 

 

On the issues you refer to, I don’t have the details but I will get 

them for you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister, our office spoke with the representative of Ford 

Canada at their head office in Oakville, Ontario this morning. 

And he told us that 12 people who work in the office here in 

Regina . . . He also told us that one of the main reasons for the 

move was the difference in provincial taxes. 

 

Ford pays nearly $600,000 a year in capital tax here in 

Saskatchewan. In Alberta they will pay nothing. Yet your 

Finance minister says Alberta’s low tax regime is overrated. 

 

Mr. Minister, this is concrete proof that the high taxes in 

Saskatchewan are driving businesses and jobs out of this 

province and into Alberta. How many more jobs do we have to 

lose before you begin to address the problem, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Well I say again, it’s never 

pleasant, when people move from one jurisdiction to the other, 

to the area that they’re leaving. And the 12 that are leaving from 

the Ford call centre is important indeed. But what worries me 

more is when the federal government takes the position that for 

no good reason, even at great expense to the taxpayers, they 

look at moving people from Regina to Winnipeg. 

 

But on the positive side I want to say to the member opposite 

that if you look at the increase in the number of people working 

at CDSL and their call centre here, which has gone up quite 

considerably, the hundreds of people working at the Sears call 

centre that weren’t working here a few years ago, or the 4 or 

500 people that are going to be coming when CIBC offers their 

call centre in Regina, you will find that we have a net gain in 

people working in call centres that is very significant. 

 

Why are they coming here? Because of the competence of 

workers in Saskatchewan and the tax rate as it would apply to 

E&H (education and health) on long-distance calls. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Food Bank Use 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are to the 

Premier. Mr. Premier, when you were leader of the opposition 

you said you would, and I quote, “put an end to food banks.” I 

quote from Hansard, Mr. Premier. You even went a bit further 

and added that an NDP government was: 

 

. . . going to put as a priority, as an objective within the 

first term of our government, the elimination of the food 

banks in the province of Saskatchewan. Nothing else will 

do. 

Hansard, March 21, 1990. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, your first term has come and gone and food 

banks’ lines are longer than they’ve ever been. Last year, Mr. 

Premier, our caucus brought forward good Samaritan legislation 

to ease the burden on food banks and those who rely on them. 

What have you done, Mr. Premier, to promote the benefits of 

the good Samaritan Bill and eliminate the need for food banks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the member’s 

concern for the issue of food banks and the issue of poverty in 

our province. And it has been, as he well knows and as all 

members know, it has been a lead priority of our government 

since 1991 and continues to be a lead priority of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have put together in the most current 

circumstance, a package of proposals to redesign the delivery of 

social services. We believe that these proposals that we’re 

advancing will support the independence of those who seek to 

become independent of welfare and social assistance, and at the 

same time improve the lives of those who we will continue to 

support, as good neighbours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, again to the minister. Mr. Minister, 

while your government has done little to help food banks, 

private industry  those you used to criticize in opposition  

are taking tangible steps to help. Our office has been in contact 

with the Canadian Council of Grocery Distributors. They are 

putting together a package to distribute to grocery stores which 

will promote the benefits of good Samaritan legislation and 

outline efficient methods of how grocery stores can donate food 

to food banks. 

 

Mr. Minister, I commend private industry for taking these steps. 

What are you doing? What is your Department of Social 

Services doing to eliminate food banks, as you have promised? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

efforts of our communities and businesses within our 

communities who, like most of us in Saskatchewan, do share 

concern for our neighbour. 

 

I had the experience of working with business as I sat as a 

director of a food bank in Moose Jaw. This is not a new concept 

that business would work to support the food banks, Mr. 

Speaker. I repeat again that it has been and remains a high 

priority of this government to deal with many of these issues, 

and to the current circumstance, we are advancing some very 

significant proposals for change. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would remind that member and his caucus, 

and indeed all the members and all the people of our province, 

that life would be for all the people of Saskatchewan  and 

particularly for the poor  better, if today we were not dealing 

with the heap of debt that that group of people left on all of the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



450  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

Plains Health Centre Closure 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, a further question and this question 

is to the Minister of Health. Mr. Minister, I understand that one 

of your cabinet colleagues, the Minister of Energy and Mines, is 

going into hospital for surgery today, and our caucus would like 

to wish him all the best for a speedy recovery. We are, however, 

a little surprised to hear he’s having back surgery, as he’s 

always accused us of giving him a pain somewhere else. 

 

We also were interested to learn that his surgery is taking place 

in the Plains health care centre, a hospital your government will 

be closing in a couple of years. Mr. Minister, in light of the 

valuable service the Plains Health Centre is providing to so 

many people, including your minister, will you now reconsider 

your decision to close the Plains Health Centre? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. 

member for the concern he shows for my colleague in the 

cabinet, and I share that concern and I will pass your best 

wishes on to my cabinet colleague. 

 

I want to say to the member that the services that are provided 

to the people of Regina and southern Saskatchewan at the 

Plains Health Centre are going to be provided in exactly the 

same way at the Pasqua Hospital and the General Hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What these members are trying to do is convince people that 

somehow the services are going to be taken away, but those 

services are going to continue in the same way they always have 

except they’re going to be in better facilities. 

 

Now these members, Mr. Speaker, have this wrong about this 

issue. This issue was an issue that has been made by two boards 

of the Regina Health District. And I say to that member in the 

Conservative Party and I say to the Liberal Party, that if they are 

saying that the boards in the communities that make decisions 

on the basis of their elections and their appointments should not 

have the right to make local decisions, I think they should say 

so. But we’re going to support the people in the communities 

that have made these decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Funding 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

not sure that the members opposite understand how important 

our education system is. The NDP member from Regina South 

made some very disturbing comments in this Assembly a couple 

of weeks ago when discussing our education system. He said, 

and I quote: 

 

The system we have today is antiquated. It’s redundant and 

it’s unresponsive. It is permeated by massive overlaps in 

some areas and huge gaps in others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the NDP member from Regina South has  

our education system confused with the cabinet. Mr. Speaker, 

boards of education are forced to cover nearly 60 per cent of the 

costs to operate our education system. Government grants to 

school boards have declined at alarming rates and it appears 

that this trend will continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Education or the Minister of 

Finance assure boards that the proverbial budget knife has not 

been taken to grants to school boards for a fifth consecutive 

year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d love to be 

able to answer the member’s question today, but I’m afraid, 

according to the rules by which governments operate, he’s 

going to have to just be patient. He’s just going to have to be 

patient and wait until the Minister of Finance delivers the 

government’s budget next Thursday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have heard ministers blame the federal government for the past 

number of weeks. We have heard what the reduction in transfer 

payments are going to be for the next year. The reductions 

amount to a decrease of .01 per cent of this government’s total 

operating budget. I say again  .01 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is using Ottawa as a buffer so 

that they can break an election promise and slash the education 

system of this province. Al Klassen, president of the SSTA 

(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) said, and I quote: 

 

The consequences of the government’s actions if it stays 

this course are clear: fewer teachers working in 

Saskatchewan, fewer programs for students, more school 

closures, and higher property tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Education, without blaming 

someone else, stand up, take responsibility, and tell the 

concerned people of Saskatchewan why she refuses to preserve 

our education system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, there’s something over a 

million people who live in this province and I know of only 10 

who don’t understand the harm that the federal government has 

visited upon the finances of this province. And they’re all 

sitting over there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Now, Mr. Speaker, they should tune in 

and try and smell the coffee and figure out what’s going on 

here. 

 

Everybody knows the fact of the matter is that the federal 

government has reduced the CHST (Canada Health and Social 

Transfer) envelope by $106 million for the next fiscal year. And  



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

if the members opposite think that that’s easy to handle, then 

stick around and try and figure out how a government operates 

and how important $106 million is in the operation of a 

province like this. 

 

Not only do they do it this year, they’re going to do it again next 

year and they’re going to do it again the year after that. And if 

you don’t think that that impacts on the education and health 

and social policies of any government across this country, then, 

Mr. Speaker, they’re badly mistaken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Document Translation 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is directed to the Deputy Premier. 

 

A few weeks ago, students from my constituency, along with 

some French-speaking students from Quebec, came to visit the 

legislature. They were given a tour which they enjoyed very 

much. And at the end of the tour they were given a pin attached 

to this card  Saskatchewan’s flag. As I’m sure you know, the 

card is printed in English on one side and in French on the 

other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, imagine my horror and embarrassment when one 

of the Quebec students pointed out seven mistakes in grammar 

or spelling on the French side. I would like to send a copy of 

the card, corrected by the teacher and student, to the member 

opposite. Like many members in this House today, I do not 

speak French and I just assumed the translation was correct. 

 

Mr. Speaker, would the minister please explain to this 

Assembly what safeguards his government has in place for 

ensuring any translation of government documents are done 

properly. And will he be recalling the existing stock that is out 

for distribution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, the member raises a point 

with respect to a card to which a Saskatchewan flag pin was 

attached. And we would certainly take a look at that. Just 

looking at it quickly, Mr. Speaker, I can see . . . Ask the 

question, you’ve got to be quiet and listen to the answer, guys. 

 

Just a quick look at the card indicates that there are serious 

mistakes in the French translation and we will certainly take a 

look at that and have it corrected. I thank the member for 

bringing it to our attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the first 

reading of a Bill to amend The Natural Resources Act, 1993 be 

now introduced and read for the first time. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Members may want to consult 

on translations later, but I’m having difficulty hearing the Bill 

being introduced. I’ll ask members to come to order. 

 

Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendment 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Personal Property Security Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 51  An Act to amend 

The Film and Video Classification Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Film and Video Classification Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker:  Convert question no. 20 to motions for return 

(debatable). 

 

Question no. 21 converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 31  An Act to amend 

The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Municipal Hail Insurance Amendment Act, 

1996. 

 

The present Act provides the framework for the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Hail Insurance Association. This association of 

representatives from rural municipalities provides farmers 

throughout Saskatchewan with the opportunity to purchase a 

minimum level of insurance against hail damage to crops. 

 

This Act also allows for the establishment of a wholly owned 

subsidiary which is called Additional Municipal Hail Limited. 

This company is licensed and regulated under The 

Saskatchewan Insurance Act to sell hail insurance in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Currently the association is limited by statute with respect to the 

amount of money it can invest in the subsidiary that sells 



452  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

insurance. The present cap of $200,000 was established in 

1924. The Saskatchewan Municipal Hail Insurance Association 

has requested that the Act be amended to increase the maximum 

amount it can invest in its subsidiary from $200,000 to $2 

million. 

 

An increase in capital is necessary after two years of 

exceptional hail damage. The regulatory requirements of The 

Saskatchewan Insurance Act dictate that the amount of capital 

in the subsidiary be increased by $380,000 as a result of the 

claims paid out. As the association’s investment is already at 

the $200,000 limit, the regulatory requirements cannot be met 

without this amendment to the Act. 

 

Increasing the cap on investment is also consistent with the 

direction being undertaken by the Superintendent of Insurance 

to increase over time the level of invested capital for all hail 

insurers to $1 million. 

 

The proposed amendment will raise the association’s maximum 

investment level to $2 million, which will not only meet the 

regulatory requirement, but will also provide room for further 

capital injections in the future, should capital be required. 

 

To summarize, Mr. Speaker, these amendments respond to the 

request of the Saskatchewan municipal hail association. They 

permit the association to invest more money in its subsidiary, as 

required, and they allow for some additional room should more 

capital be required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 

Municipal Hail Insurance Act. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 

take a few minutes today to discuss the proposed amendments 

to The Municipal Hail Insurance Act. As there is only one 

amendment to this Act, I will not discuss it at great length and 

the details of the entire Act. But as we all know, the effects of 

hail on crops and property across our province every year are 

indeed excessive. 

 

The amendment to this Act simply changes the level of 

permitted investment of capital stock in a company from 

$200,000 to a maximum of $2 million, as the minister opposite 

indicated. The reason for this change is simple and 

straightforward. The present level of $200,000 was set all the 

way back in 1924 and I hope that we’ve progressed since that 

time, Mr. Minister, and would recognize the need for the 

change. 

 

As I understand it, this proposed increase in the maximum level 

of investment allowed has been requested due to more than one 

consecutive season of exceptional hail damage in our province, 

as you have already indicated. I would also indicate that being a 

rural resident and a farmer and having to endure many hail 

storms over the course of my farming career, Mr. Speaker, that I 

do relate the hail storm similar to some of the ravages of your 

government however in some of the things that they’ve done to 

rural Saskatchewan as well. 

 

I can relate to the health reform which really gutted the health  

system in rural Saskatchewan. I can only relate to the GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) fiasco which started back in 

1992 by a former cabinet minister and be carried on by the 

present Agriculture minister. The cuts to SaskPower, the 

underground program which we’re seeing deleted; proposed 

cuts to education; the list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. But I 

will not dwell on that today too much. 

 

All of us  rural and urban  are acutely aware of the amount 

of damage that hail storms have caused here in Saskatchewan in 

the past and almost certain to appear again. I’m not looking 

forward to that but it’s just a fact of life and what nature does to 

us. Not only do farmer’s crops suffer leaving the farmer with no 

crop or a dismal one to cultivate and all sorts of problems in 

looking after the land, preparing it for the following year and 

trying to adhere to some of the rules that Crop Insurance 

Corporation has put into place on farmers, causes many 

problems and time restraints. So there are millions and millions 

of dollars of costs involved in a hail storm that are not always 

covered by hail insurance and we have to recognize that. 

 

Not only are people in the rural areas affected but so are the 

people in the urban areas. I wouldn’t like to segregate against 

them as well, but the hail can cause damage to property of 

homes and cars and gardens and all those sorts of things as 

well. So we have to recognize that too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Due to the fact that the level of investment that is currently 

allowable was set over 70 years ago, the proposed new level of 

investment falls in line with today’s economy. An investment of 

$200,000 does not go nearly as far today as it did in the 1920s 

unfortunately, and we’re seeing greater hardships on the 

farmers of today. 

 

In light of all this, I see no reason, Mr. Speaker, to hold up the 

debate on this Bill any longer, and I would approve that The 

Municipal Hail Insurance Amendment Act, 1996, be passed on 

to the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 41  An Act to amend 

The Mental Health Services Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Mental Health 

Services Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Almost three years ago Saskatchewan took the lead in the area 

of mental health services by introducing The Mental Health 

Services Amendment Act, 1993. That Act was the first of its 

kind in Canada because it provided for community treatment 

orders. Prior to community treatment orders, a small group of 

people with long-term disabling mental disorders were often 

unable to function safely in our communities because they 

refused to follow prescribed treatment and they were destined 

to suffer needlessly, and sometimes they came into conflict with 

the law. This resulted in considerable grief for themselves, their 

families, and other care-givers. 



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

Mr. Speaker, the introduction of community treatment orders 

has made it possible for those in our community who are too ill 

to recognize their need for mental health treatment to get the 

attention they require. This is done on the order of a 

psychiatrist. It requires a person who meets strict criteria set out 

in the legislation to submit to compulsory medical treatment but 

to still be able to live in the community. It avoids their having 

to be placed in an institution, which of course would be a 

greater intrusion on their freedom. 

 

For the protection of the individual concerned, the order comes 

into force not on the word of the first psychiatrist, but a second 

psychiatrist who has also examined the person and written a 

certificate in support of the order, which certificate may be 

enforced for up to three months. 

 

There are about 35 people in Saskatchewan subject to 

community treatment orders at any given time. They are people 

with long-term disabling psychiatric conditions who need 

ongoing medical treatment and who need to be able to get that 

treatment so they can live in the community. 

 

Community treatment orders make it possible for them to be 

treated successfully in the community instead of in a hospital. A 

person who is subject to a community treatment order must 

submit to medical treatment which is prescribed for the mental 

disorder and they must attend follow-up appointments. 

 

There are important measures set out in the Act, Mr. Speaker, to 

protect the individuals who are made subject to these orders, 

including the right of appeal to an independent review panel. 

Mr. Speaker, the Act to which I am giving second reading 

today, that is The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 

1996, will refine and improve certain administrative 

requirements with respect to community treatment orders. 

 

Essentially, there are five such refinements. First, the Act 

proposes to change the definition of attending physician. When 

the original psychiatrist is not available to supervise the 

person’s compliance with the community treatment order, this 

Act proposes that a psychiatrist other than the one who issued 

the order may be allowed to provide this supervision. 

 

(1100) 

 

Second, when a person who is named in a community treatment 

order refuses an examination by a second physician, a new 

provision would make it possible to compel that person to 

attend to such an examination. 

 

Third, in rural parts of the province where psychiatrists are not 

available, a new provision would make it possible for some 

other physicians to conduct the second examinations and issue 

the appropriate certificates to bring the community treatment 

order into force. This, however, would only be valid for 21 days 

during which a second psychiatrist would have to confirm the 

order’s ongoing validity. 

 

Fourth, current legislation requires that a person’s nearest 

relative be notified when the person is detained in hospital for 

treatment, involuntarily transferred from one hospital to  

another, or placed under a community treatment order. This 

amendment proposes that under compelling circumstances 

when notification of the nearest relative could jeopardize the 

safety or health of a person, the attending physician should be 

allowed to exercise discretion and not release the information to 

the nearest relative. Examples would include cases where there 

had been abuse of the individual by the relative, or for some 

other reason it would not be in the best medical interests of the 

person to notify the nearest relative. 

 

Finally, a new provision requires that 21 days should elapse 

between appeals. At the present time, a person under an order 

can make multiple and even daily appeals. This makes it 

necessary to assemble review panels to conduct hearings and 

render decisions repeatedly. This was not the original intention 

of the legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to arrive at these amendments, we have 

consulted with the providers of mental health services in all 

service areas of the province. As well, we have consulted with 

the Mental Health Advisory Council and the Schizophrenia 

Society of Saskatchewan, that is the association of family 

members and friends of people with schizophrenia, which 

represents most of the people who may be affected by this 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these refinements improve the legislation our 

government introduced in 1993 by increasing administrative 

flexibility while respecting and protecting the rights of 

individuals. They do not involve any policy shift. Accordingly, 

they are applauded by psychiatrists and mental health program 

managers. There is complete consensus on most provisions and 

in any event, there is an acceptance of the provisions as a 

reasonable compromise and an acceptable balance of interest. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I hereby move second reading of 

The Mental Health Services Amendment Act, 1996. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, typically 

when we talk about health in our society, we are talking about 

physical health. When we picture hospitals, we generally think 

of them of places for healing physical injuries, but the overall 

health of any individual must include mental well-being. 

 

I’m not surprised that most of us avoid talking about mental 

illness. Unfortunately in our society, there is still a stigma 

which weighs heavily on mental disorders. People make jokes 

about crazy people even though they may know perfectly well 

that mental disorders are not a reflection of an individual’s 

character. No one plans to act oddly. No one chooses to live 

their life plagued with bouts of depression or schizophrenia, or 

any other type of mental illness. These people and their families 

deserve compassion and understanding. 

 

People may have no idea how far-reaching mental illness is in 

our society. Estimates show that although only 3 per cent of the 

population suffers from long-term incurable mental illness, well 

over 30 per cent will suffer from a mental illness that seriously 

affects their lives. Trauma, periods of stress, or other factors  



454  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

may prompt a mental illness from appearing, even if a person 

has no history of problems. So when we talk about reforming 

The Mental Health Services Act, we are making decisions that 

could very well deeply affect our own lives at some point in 

time. 

 

Finding the appropriate changes can be tough. Proper mental 

health care is a delicate balance between protecting society 

from harm and protecting an individual from harming himself. 

So many factors come into play, and they can all have a 

significant outcome on how people can get through life. 

 

The proposed amendments to The Mental Health Services Act 

that I have picked out seem dedicated to protecting the rights of 

an individual living with mental illness. One of the main 

concerns with families, individuals, and other professionals in 

the mental health field is making sure the individual is given the 

rights given to other people in society. 

 

Community treatment orders have consistently been a bone of 

contention. For years, mental health patients have been 

concerned that they can be detained in an institution or ordered 

to seek medical treatment on the orders of one psychiatrist. This 

Act would make it mandatory that two psychiatrists would be 

required to sign an order before an individual could be legally 

detained for a maximum of three months. I agree with that 

stipulation if that’s the way it is. 

 

In the proposed amendment, in communities where two 

psychiatrists are not available, a general practitioner could sign 

the community treatment order. We must not punish an 

individual or a society because only one psychiatrist is 

accessible in a community. Of course, we do have trouble 

securing doctors in our province because of faulty government 

policy, but that debate is for another day. 

 

The other major change I agree with is in the appeal process. 

Currently one of the biggest complaints in the mental health 

system is that patients detained by a community treatment order 

can conceivably make an appeal daily. This costs time and 

money, and we are already financially strapped in this province 

if this government is to be believed. I am not advocating that 

time and money are more important than the rights of an 

individual, but the legislation as it stands right now can be 

counter-productive. 

 

As I understand it, the third big change to the existing law has 

to do with informing the closest relative if a patient is 

institutionalized. Currently it is mandatory to inform a relative 

in this case. If this Act is changed, it would allow for a greater 

degree of leeway when it comes to institutionalized patients. In 

some forms of mental illness, the patient’s reality is very 

different from the accepted reality of society. These people can 

be paranoid, and often they turn their thoughts and fears 

towards the people they are closest to. In the worst case 

scenario, these people could become more agitated, and their 

rehabilitation could be slowed if a relative is told about the 

institutionalization. 

 

As far as I’m concerned, proper health care is about treating 

everybody as an individual. Lumping people into a standard  

model will rarely produce the same results as treating everyone 

for their unique problems. 

 

Therefore I have no problem with this plan. I have done some 

consultation with people that this amendment could affect and 

overall I am fairly satisfied with the proposed changes. I 

recommend this Bill be passed to the Committee of the Whole, 

and our caucus will bring up any further concerns at that time. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 25  An Act to amend 

The Legal Profession Act, 1990 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 

officials please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Yes, I’m pleased to introduce again, Doug 

Moen who’s the executive director of public law and policy in 

the Department of Justice. I also have with me today, Darcy 

McGovern who is the Crown solicitor with legislative services, 

and Brent Prenevost, who is the Crown solicitor with legislative 

services. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chairman, with leave, to introduce 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, it’s really my pleasure this 

morning to be able to introduce a small group who have just 

joined us in the Speaker’s gallery. This group of adults are here 

touring. They’re from the Moose Jaw Mental Health Clinic and 

they’re touring the legislature this morning. They’re going to 

spend about 15 minutes with us in the House, I expect, and I’ll 

look forward to having a short visit with them at about 11:30. 

 

Mr. Chair, they’re accompanied today by Fairlie Godin. I would 

ask all members present to welcome these visitors from Moose 

Jaw. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 25 

(continued) 

Clause 1 

 

Ms. Draude:  Welcome to your staff. 



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

I just had a further question on the interest that was going to be 

paid on the money, that once it was transferred . . . if it’s 

transferred over to the government, to the Department of 

Finance after 10 years, you said that the interest wouldn’t be 

transferred. 

 

And also I was wondering if after a number of years, somebody 

comes back and the government does . . . after a number of 

years if somebody would come back, would there be interest 

paid to that person if the government had used their money or 

was using their money for 20 years. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Thank you for that question. I think, 

practically, it’s in the discretion of the Minister of Finance. I 

would suspect that it could be paid at that point, and I don’t see 

why it wouldn’t be if the government had actually been using 

that money in the General Revenue Fund for all those years. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 26  An Act to amend the Statute Law 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his new 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’ve introduced Mr. Brent Prenevost 

already, but he is going to help me on this Bill. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wonder if we could 

just ask a few things about this particular Bill of the minister 

and his officials. First, if I may ask, I would like the minister to 

kind of give us an overview in general terms what in fact this 

particular statute covered and what was its purpose  the 

statute law itself  if you would, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  This particular piece of legislation is sort 

of a housekeeping Bill, and it deals with very minor 

amendments to quite a number of statutes, dealing with 

inaccurate references, numbering errors, typographical errors, 

and other minor mistakes. 

 

It also corrects errors that were made in previous consequential 

amendments and makes consequential amendments that were 

previously missed. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And this . . . over the 

last short period of time, have any of these errors, to your 

knowledge, have any of these errors caused any problems in 

dealings and any problems that may have arisen as a result of 

any of these particular Acts or statutes that you’re now cleaning 

up or correcting, as a result of misspelled words or 

inappropriate verbiage in any portion of the sections? 

 

(1115) 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  There are none, to my knowledge, that 

have had any consequence at all. They are basically just 

corrections. And if there were some, we would identify them, 

and we would end up dealing with them in a different type of 

amendment, not in this amendment. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you again, Mr. Minister. I expect that this 

was a long and arduous process, that various departments . . . or 

was there one particular department or number of people that 

were assigned specifically to review all these statutes in order 

that we now arrive at this stage? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think the best way to say is that 

somewhere somebody has a file, and every time they see too 

many A’s in a word, something else, they make a little note on 

it and it goes into the file. And then eventually all of these 

things are gathered together into this particular Act to correct 

everything that some of the people have found over the last year 

or two or three. 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t have any other 

concerns. Thank you very much. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 30  An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would 

just like some clarification, and it’s more around the area of the 

hotelier’s right to have the person leave after a first disturbance. 

Do you see the possibility that there could be some abuse there 

by a hotelier if indeed someone is slightly out of order, slightly 

out of order, and they decide, the hotelier decides, that to ensure 

that there is no further disturbance he immediately asks that 

person to leave? If he does not, if he refuses to leave, is he 

automatically creating a disturbance and then therefore is 

immediately going to be receiving a $250 fine? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I appreciate that question. I think what we 

have to remember is that this is a . . . the hotelier is a business 

person and they will be using some of their . . . also their 

commercial sense of what’s appropriate in how they deal with 

this. 

 

But I think that it’s . . . if the hotelier names or requests 

somebody to stop making noise, or whatever the problem is, 

that you’re not immediately into the provisions of this 

legislation, because there is also the sort of continuation of that, 

and that practically the remedies here would usually be quite a 

ways down the road, last resort, and that most disturbances 

would be dealt with completely outside of this kind of a 

legislative remedy. 

 

And I think that’s true of all of the kinds of statutes that we 

have that create penalties  that it’s there to give the hotelier  



456  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

the ultimate power. And also, I suppose in this case, the 

hoteliers have agreed that they are also subject to the fact that if 

they don’t keep a quiet hotel, or a hotel that’s at least a 

reasonable haven away from disturbances, then a guest could 

complain that the place is a rowdy place. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Yes, well I concur. I mean we’ve all stayed at 

hotels and we’ve been privy to many a party, I’m sure, on a 

particular floor . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? I 

have never been booted out, no. 

 

Who is the final person that determines whether or not there is 

the disturbance? Is it the hotelier, because I am the client, or is 

it a police officer? Like, who decides that there is a 

disturbance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Well practically, a police officer would 

have to lay the charge, but finally it would be a judge in a court 

that would make the decision. So it’d be like, I suppose, even a 

speeding offence. You’re charged. If you don’t agree with that 

charge, you have the right to go and tell your story and then a 

judge would make the ultimate decision. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Good, and thank you very much, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

I think all hoteliers will use discretion. I mean I wonder about 

the particular situation where if I am to be . . . if there is a slight 

disturbance, and it’s not a full-scale situation where I am on the 

verge of having a police officer called to have me evicted, I 

worry about the situation where the hotelier then says, because 

there is the fear that I will get a $250 fine if we proceed through 

the laying of the charge, and the hotelier then says, well you 

have the option; you can leave. Do you see that that could be a 

problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I think, once again, it’s a matter that will 

be dealt with in a reasonable fashion by a person who is a 

business person, making a decision about what kind of guests 

they want to keep there. I mean if they want a place that 

encourages parties and things like that, then probably they 

would set it up in a way that encourages people like the staid 

members of this place to come there. So I think, practically, it 

would be dealt with in a commercial basis. 

 

Maybe the net effect of this change that we’re making in this 

piece of legislation is that it will just change that little placard 

that’s usually in each room, and it’s from $25 to $250. So 

you’ll know that it’s a little more serious to create a party than it 

had been before. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you very much. And I agree  I mean 

we’re looking at 1965 numbers. And I know that in terms of 

$250 versus $25, I think we’re just catching up to the real costs. 

Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  I’d like to thank my officials for their 

assistance in this matter and I’d also like to thank the members 

opposite for their thoughtful questions. 

 

(1130) 

 

Bill No. 16An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

 

The Chair:  I would ask the Minister of Highways to 

introduce his officials, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to introduce Dave Abbey, manager of the legislation 

and safety branch of the Department of Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was wondering if 

the minister could just give us a brief overview of the Bill 

before we start. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thanks to the member for his question. 

Generally it’s a clean-up. There’s a few new sections that we 

have introduced that have been requested by the Department of 

Justice. In one case there was a fatality involved so we’re 

changing the regulations . . . or the Act a bit to cover that 

concern. But the majority of it just a clean-up of The Highway 

Traffic Act. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Yes, you got through that. Clause 1 

went a little too quickly. I would ask permission to revert back 

to clause 1. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have 

a few questions for you on this particular Act, Mr. Minister. 

And before I reach that point though, I would like to welcome 

your assistant with you, your officials, Mr. Abbey. We had the 

opportunity to tour the province and inspect a number of the 

highways last year, and while we found those in northern 

Saskatchewan to be relatively in good shape, those that we had 

to travel through southern Saskatchewan were perhaps . . . we 

could be less complimentary about them. 

 

And I would certainly encourage the minister to take the 

opportunity to drive those highways along the very southern 

edge of our province, perhaps Highway 13 from either east to 

west or west to east and learn to appreciate the countryside of 

Saskatchewan, because you will spend more time dodging the 

potholes than you will simply driving down the road. 

 

But that doesn’t deal directly with the issues within this Bill, 

Mr. Minister, and I wonder if you could please tell us what the 

remunerations for the Highway Traffic Board members were 

prior to this legislation, since you’re changing the method in 

which they were paid. How were they paid previously, and what 

was that remuneration? 



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thanks for the member for that 

question. There’s no change in the remuneration. But what 

we’re doing at the request of Justice is putting it into the Act. 

It’s going to parallel other boards and commissions, so there’s 

no change. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

want to welcome you and your officials here to talk about this 

Act that you’re proposing to put into law today. Just from your 

preamble, I noted that you said you’re trying to clean up some 

things, and we’re sort of wondering just how far that clean-up is 

going and if it’s going to cover some of the things that are of 

concern to our constituents. 

 

I note that in the Bill, you are dealing specifically with the term, 

agricultural implement, and that piqued my curiosity because 

we have had some concerns in our constituency from farmers 

who have been moving equipment on roads. And it appears, I 

guess, when you get into an accident on a road, there doesn’t 

seem to be a definitive law in our system to determine who is at 

fault or who is guilty of a crime or who isn’t guilty of a crime or 

who isn’t at fault. There really isn’t anything definitive on the 

whole issue of moving these implements on the secondary 

highways and on the municipal roads. 

 

So we’re wondering if somehow you have addressed this 

problem in this Act, seeing as how it’s supposed to clear up 

some of these problems as you’ve alluded to. 

 

And just to get your mind onto the subject a little more, we 

have a specific case on a road south of Tompkins, 

Saskatchewan where a young farmer is moving a tractor with a 

cultivator. He comes into a low spot on the road. A vehicle 

approaches him from the other direction over a hill very 

quickly, has very little time to slow down but in fact does get 

pretty well slowed down. The young farmer, of course, is also 

trying to stop as quickly as he can and get off to the side as 

much as he can, but the result is that the truck hits the side of 

the cultivator, and there’s a bit of a wreck  nothing too 

serious, fortunately. 

 

But it does raise some questions because the RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police) called to the scene made the 

determination to tell the young farmer that he could be charged 

and that he might in fact be charged. After the fact, he wasn’t 

charged of course, but now we wonder. 

 

How does this process work, and is this kind of a problem dealt 

with in this legislation? Or have you simply left it go into 

regulations, as I think is alluded to further on in the Bill? In 

which case nothing is solved and we still don’t have a definitive 

answer. So I’ll let you comment, Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I thank the member for the question. 

This does not limit the size of the vehicle on the road. That’s 

dealt with in other areas. And I guess what I want to tell the 

member, that the person can in fact get additional insurance, but 

the owner is always responsible, you know, in a case like that. 

And I mean it doesn’t really matter, the size of the vehicle, 

whether it’s a very small one or a very large one. 

What we’re doing here is . . . because of ag diversification in 

the province of Saskatchewan, we have a lot of small 

companies, in fact farmers, building farm implements. And they 

are concerned that in some cases these vehicles are not used for 

a road vehicle but in fact used in the farm operation. And I can 

send you some pictures of some of the situations that are out 

there. And so what we want to do is allow what’s a farm 

vehicle or a farm-used implement to be considered that way. 

 

On the other hand, if it’s used primarily for on the road, that 

it’d have to be registered. And those will be dealt with in 

regulations. And those regulations, there will be a lot of 

consultation over the next few months. Hopefully they would 

be brought into this session if the session is still sitting. If not, 

certainly they would be done at another time. But there will be a 

lot of consultation as to what should be a farm implement and 

what should not. And this is what we’re trying to address, is the 

small manufacturers, the farmers that are in fact inventing a 

new farm implement. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, Minister, 

what has happened here is that you’ve managed to give me 

about 10 different questions to ask, and I still don’t understand 

that I’ve gotten an answer because you really haven’t resolved 

the problem at all, I think is what you’re saying, and that you’re 

going to work on it. 

 

And of course we want you to work on that; we do want that 

resolved. But the question that rises in my mind immediately is 

that if you’re going to do it in regulations and through 

consultation, who are you planning on consulting with? Who 

are you planning on talking about this with? Who’s going to 

know what these regulations are going to be? And how are we 

going to have public input or public knowledge about it if it’s 

not done here on the floor of this Assembly in some form of 

process that includes those of us who are elected to represent 

our people? 

 

My constituent came to me with that problem and said, how do 

we address this problem of liability? Buy more insurance  

well, that’s easy for you to say. Who’s going to insure them? 

Who will give you liability insurance? How much is that going 

to cost? Those are things that come up immediately. 

 

What if this young farmer happens to be a 15-year-old boy who 

doesn’t have a driver’s licence? Is he covered under any part of 

the law with liability insurance? He doesn’t have a licence; his 

vehicle doesn’t have to be licensed. How is that farmer then 

protected? 

 

Or can we go back to the American scenario, where in fact 

we’re going to find our farmers ending up in court and being 

sued for the cost of their farms because there is no law that 

really protects them or tells them definitively what their 

responsibilities are or are not. 

 

And right now, we don’t have that. And what we need is a 

definitive law, not through regulation, but put into an Act and 

discussed in this legislature and then passed and have people 

know exactly where they stand. Because we found a loophole in 

our system that really amounts to every individual farmer  



458  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

having to wait and depend on the court system to decide for 

them after an accident whether or not they’re going to lose their 

farms. And that’s not fair to farmers and it’s certainly not fair to 

the travelling public that happens to meet those farmers on the 

road. So it is a negative factor for everyone. 

 

Minister, I want you to think about that and address that 

question on the licensing, on the liability, and how we can solve 

this problem and incorporate perhaps an amendment into this 

Bill in order to achieve the results that we require, and that is to 

bring some peace of mind to the community. 

 

Can you suppose that you’re a farmer now out in Saskatchewan 

having to move your equipment. I would guess, just off the top 

of my head, that probably 95 per cent of farm equipment is 

more than eight feet wide these days. And I would guess that 

probably 75 per cent of farmers have to travel on roads in order 

to farm land that is not adjacent to one quarter to the other. 

Absolutely impossible then for any farmer to have any peace of 

mind in Saskatchewan if they have to move on a road. Because 

they now know that there isn’t a law that protects them, and 

without a law to protect them, every time they go out on that 

road they may in fact be jeopardizing their farm operation. 

 

So how does that affect the farmer who has a hired man? Is now 

the farmer at risk of losing his farm because the hired man goes 

out on the road with the cultivator and happens to run into 

another truck or a car; or perhaps a person from the city that’s 

out joyriding or visiting the area and all of sudden you end up 

in a wreck and you’ve got a lawsuit on your hands? 

 

How can farmers live with any peace and contentment in their 

lives knowing that this kind of risk potential is out there and 

you aren’t prepared to deal with it when you say that you are 

going to bring in an Act to clean up the problems that are in The 

Highway Traffic Act. I mean if you’re going to clean up the 

problems, the ones that have been presented to you ought to be 

the ones that you start to work on. 

 

And this is one of those areas where now we find ourselves 

wondering, what about implement dealers? They’re called upon 

to deliver equipment. How are they responsible now if they 

hook onto a cultivator behind their truck and start transporting 

it out to the country? I’d like you to address that issue as well, 

as you go into this. 

 

Where do they stand? Are they liable and responsible then to 

lose their dealerships if they happen to have an accident on the 

road with a piece of equipment that’s over width. 

 

Now we know that you can get permits for the highway. I don’t 

know of any permits that are required for municipal travelling 

in municipal roads and that sort of thing. So where do they 

stand in this whole scheme of things? 

 

I’ll allow you the opportunity to answer, Mr. Minister. 

 

The Chair:  Order, order. Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank 

the member from Maple Creek and the Minister of Highways 

for this courtesy. 

 

It’s a great pleasure for me to introduce this morning to you and 

through you to my colleagues in the legislature, a group of 22 

students from Glendive School in Montana, United States of 

America. They are with the International Club and they are here 

as part of a tour of Canada, stopping to visit in the capital city 

of Saskatchewan, Regina, to watch and see how our Legislative 

Assembly works. 

 

So I am pleased to introduce them and to introduce their 

teachers, Bruce Peterson and Roseanne Bos. And I will ask all 

members to extend to them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 16 

(continued) 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Thank you very much. Farm vehicles, 

farm machinery do not need a permit on Saskatchewan roads 

between certain times of the day  sunrise and sunset  and 

this Act, the changes to the Act will not change that. Certainly 

if someone hits someone, they’re responsible, they’re liable. 

And people have to know that. 

 

And in regards to the question of a 15-year-old, I would hope 

that farmers know that shouldn’t be recommended. Because if 

your 15-year-old son or relative or friend is driving your vehicle 

and is in a collision on the highway, certainly there is no 

insurance at all. So I would urge that that’s a major concern and 

they should not do that. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  So, Minister, you’re saying that my 

15-year-old son now in Saskatchewan can’t drive a tractor on 

the road? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That’s correct. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  That’s news to me. You know, realistically, 

I’ve thought for a long time that anybody that was responsible 

and capable of driving and could drive a tractor was allowed to 

do so and you didn’t have to a driver’s licence or any other kind 

of permit to drive. And if you don’t have to have a licence and 

there’s no restriction under that process of our law, what part of 

the law then would restrict a person from being able to drive if 

they were at any age? You know, I think maybe you’d better 

think about that answer a little more carefully. 



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

Before the students from the States leave, Mr. Chairman, I’m 

going to just welcome them here from the side of the opposition 

benches and the Conservative Party, and we’re glad to have you 

in Saskatchewan. We hope that you’d have a good time and 

don’t run into that blizzard that’s out there. 

 

Minister, to get back to work here. I think I’m going to make a 

suggestion to you, because in all fairness, it’s easy to criticize 

what you’re doing here because you really have left out an 

awful lot of what needs to be done in cleaning up The Highway 

Traffic Act. And I think really you could have done a better job 

on this. But rather than just stand here and criticize, I’m going 

to make a suggestion to you. 

 

I think you can put an amendment into this Bill very quickly 

and very easily that would simply say that farm vehicles have 

the right of way on our Saskatchewan secondary road systems, 

and that they would have that right of way at all times and 

under all conditions, with perhaps some regulations that would 

say that they have to have a slow moving vehicle sign, perhaps 

a flashing light. Other than that, be totally alleviated from all 

liability and responsibility, providing that the machine and the 

equipment is operated under safe and normal and reasonable 

conditions. 

 

And I think there’s nothing wrong with having a definitive 

answer to the law that simply says that  that you’re not going 

to be responsible or liable as long as you’re moving under 

normal, reasonable conditions, and aren’t drunk, or doing some 

other law infraction; or wandering helter-skelter, you know, 

because you’re under the influence of drugs. And obviously we 

have laws that cover that. 

 

So I think the law can be very definitive and can be very 

exacting and say specifically what we want, and that’s that 

farmers have no responsibility or liability that will cost them 

their farms in the event of an accident on a rural road providing 

that these things are covered. 

 

And I think we can extend that even to the highway system for 

our machinery dealers and people that have to come off of the 

highway systems onto the rural roads. And I don’t think that the 

general public would argue with that, Minister. So I wonder if 

you’ll consider that and answer my previous question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I think what the people of 

Saskatchewan want, to the member opposite, is that people 

follow the rules of the road. And that’s exactly what we’re 

saying. The changes to the Act here are not dealing with that 

specific issue. 

 

I want to clarify the issue of the 15-year-old. Certainly you do 

not need a driver’s licence to drive a farm vehicle. However, 

you have to be . . . you cannot be younger than 16 years old. So 

you have to be very careful with that one. And I would urge that 

you tell all your farmer friends that if in fact the person is under 

16 years old, that there certainly are some liability concerns 

there. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Minister, and we certainly 

will pass that on. Because I think there are an awful lot of  

farmers that really don’t believe that they’re breaking the law or 

have any extra liability if they allow a young son to move a 

tractor on the road. 

 

Now the definition of a vehicle comes to mind. And it seems to 

me that you’re going to have some problems here with people 

looking at different kinds of vehicles and saying, well now I got 

this truck type vehicle that sort of maybe has the cab already 

ripped off and a few things, but it’s got a big water tank on it to 

haul water for spray, and is that a farm vehicle? I can think of 

maybe a bale wagon type of farm equipment that might come 

into some dispute as to whether it is now a truck or is it a farm 

vehicle. We’ve got the self-propelled types. 

 

So how in this Act or in the process of your definitions, how do 

you define what a motor vehicle is and which ones are and 

which ones aren’t? And I know I’ve had a constituent ask that 

specific question about the bale wagon type of vehicle. It was a 

home-made thing that was built onto an old truck chassis. And 

because it hadn’t been made by a manufacturer, there was a 

dispute as to whether it was a farm vehicle or whether it was in 

fact a motor vehicle and had to be licensed and insured. So 

could you tell us how you make that differentiation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well to the member opposite, this is 

exactly why we’re changing the Act, so that we can address 

these issues through regulations. And I will send these pictures 

over if I can, and I would like them back. 

 

It just will demonstrate the problem that’s out there. Because 

we’ve got vehicles right now that are hauling bales for instance, 

but from one quarter section to one quarter section It looks like 

a truck but because of maybe wheel size or because of speed 

limitations, really is not a truck. It’s a vehicle that the farmer 

invented to help on his farm. 

 

We had the case in Prince Albert last year where the fellow 

collects manure, liquefies it, and then spreads it in fields for the 

farmers in the area. He has large wheels on his vehicle so that 

he can only travel at a very slow miles per hour, like 25 miles 

per hour. And it’s really . . . but it looks like a truck, but it really 

is not a truck any longer. It has the cultivator and the spreader 

on the back in fixed positions. 

 

So this is some of the problems that we have to address for our 

farm community out there. Does he need to register those 

vehicles or does he not? Is it a farm vehicle or is it not? And 

there’s a lot of these situations out there. And over the next few 

months we will be consulting with different groups, farm 

organizations, to get some idea of what kind of standards can 

we use for farm implements; what kind of regulations should be 

in place to determine whether it’s a farm vehicle or a farm 

implement rather than a vehicle. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Minister. And I appreciate 

your having sent the pictures over so that we can see that we are 

actually talking about more or less the same kind of vehicles. 

And I guess we could probably come up with some pictures of 

some that aren’t quite so pretty maybe as these ones  they’ve 

even got paint on them. But the reality is that the principle is the 

same. 



460  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

So then I want to get back, Minister, and you say this is why 

you’re bringing the Bill in and you’re going to have these 

regulations and you’re going to come up with answers to all 

these problems, and we want you to get these problems 

answered all right. But again you didn’t answer my question 

then, who are you going to consult with? 

 

Now in your pictures you show bale handling equipment to a 

large extent, I see. Who would you consult with that would 

represent them? Surely you can’t expect to go and talk with 

every farmer in the province. Or maybe you will. If that’s the 

case, fine. Maybe you’re going to have another commission or 

another road tour like we went on with the safe driving 

committee. Maybe Mr. Abbey and my colleague here could join 

with you and we’ll go around the province and talk to each and 

every farmer and find out exactly what everybody’s problem is. 

Realistically though, I suppose you’re not considering that. But 

if you are, let us know and we’ll certainly cooperate and 

participate. 

 

But on the other hand, if you’re choosing not to do that route 

and go and talk to each and every individual, then who do you 

talk to that represents each of these different groups? Are you 

going to talk to SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities), SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association), the National Farmers Union? Who represents 

these people in your negotiations? And if they have input that 

they want to get to you, how are they going to go about that 

process? Do they all write you a letter or do they expect that 

there’ll be a meeting some place that they can talk to you about 

these regulations? How is it going to be done? Where is the 

process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well certainly the process has not been 

determined yet but certainly we will want to talk with SARM 

and SUMA, the different farm organizations, certainly dealers, 

certainly the farm community, and certainly the opposition. I 

mean, if you have any ideas at all or . . . and I’m sure you have 

one or two good ideas that you could probably send them over. 

So we’re going to be listening. 

 

As you might appreciate, this is a very, very difficult area. 

There’s a lot of new inventions by the farmers. We have very 

innovative farmers out there, and so we’re certainly going to . . . 

it’s a concern that we have to address, but it’s a very difficult 

area. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well thank you, Minister. I appreciate the 

fact that you are now going to consult with people and that you 

have specifically spelled out for the record those that might be 

included. I think you might want to expand your list actually 

though, and make sure that you catch everybody. 

 

I have a little problem understanding the section 23(5), and in 

there it refers to a resident who is temporarily driving for 

non-commercial purposes, a vehicle for which a permit has 

been issued by another jurisdiction. Could you explain to us, is 

that going to allow the permit from another jurisdiction to apply 

in Saskatchewan? Or how is that going to work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you to the member opposite.  

A very interesting question, one I asked my department people 

several times. Right now if my brother, for an example, who 

lives in Alberta, Pincher Creek, comes to visit me and I want to 

run over for groceries and I jump in his vehicle and run over for 

groceries, it’s not legal. 

 

And we don’t think that’s fair. In fact we believe that it’s 

probably against the Constitution. So this is why I mentioned 

that this Bill is trying to clean up some of these areas. This is 

one area that we’re trying to clean up. 

 

So in fact I can take my brother’s car over to get the loaf of 

bread at the confectionery store when he comes to visit me. 

That’s what it does. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister, that makes sense. And 

I’m glad you’re doing that, and I’m glad that I asked the 

question, so it’ll clear that up. 

 

I would ask you once more, because I don’t think you really 

answered my question, whether or not you would entertain 

some kind of amendments that would allow you to specifically 

spell out some of the things. And I gave you the one suggestion 

where definitively farm vehicles could be on the road. 

 

Would you consider that, or would we be wasting our time to 

go to the work of delaying this and preparing the amendment? 

If we’re going to be wasting our time, you may as well tell us 

today, and then we’ll carry on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well certainly if you have some 

amendments that we can look at, we’ll certainly be interested in 

at least taking a look at them. I would hope that the 

amendments wouldn’t be something right off the wall or 

anything like that. I’m sure they wouldn’t be, so send them 

over, and we’d certainly take a look at them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. I appreciate that, and 

I’ve got my colleague working on the legal process that we’ll 

have to go through. And he’ll figure out how we get this 

through the legal department here in the legislature in order to 

get that amendment drawn up. And if we can’t get it introduced 

today, maybe we’ll introduce it as a private members’ Bill later 

or something like that so that we can bring it in. 

 

I don’t know if we’re going to hold the Bill up or how we’re 

going to handle this. But as he gets his research, we will know 

in a couple of minutes. 

 

In the meantime, I would ask you if you could explain more 

carefully section 7. And I suppose I could go clause by clause, 

but I’m not sure we want to let you get that far into it, so I’ll go 

to these specific questions. Could you explain what your 

intention is in clause 7? It will save me reading it and save a lot 

of time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I thank the member for the question. 

What this amendment does is make it a law that large trucks, for 

an example, that are stopped for some mechanical problem on a 

road outside of a city or town would have to use both flares and 

hazard lights. And it says that the flares have to be 30  



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

metres from the vehicle. So there’s some distance requirement 

there. 

 

This stems from a fatality that happened back  was it last 

year?  a couple years ago, in fact, where there was a vehicle 

of a certain size that was stopped at a municipal road. There 

was a collision, it was at night, there was no flares. So we want 

to address that situation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Well, Minister, now getting back to this point 

about farm machinery. If this happens to be a cultivator with a 

flat tire, is this farm equipment exempt or not exempt because it 

is farm equipment, or does he now have to start carrying flares 

in the tractor? 

 

(1200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It’s not required on that type of a farm 

implement. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Minister. We’re going to be 

working on trying to draft up some assistance for your Bill, to 

try to make it more workable for the province. We think you’ve 

done a reasonably good job in most of the areas, by the look of 

it, but I think you’ve missed the target on a couple of points. So 

we’ll try and put that together in the next couple days. 

 

And my colleague here has some questions, so I’m going to 

turn it over to him. And thank you for your direct responses and 

thank your official for his help in the past, as well as here today. 

We’ve met with him and we very much appreciate that open 

approach that he has to discussing the issues that we have with 

our constituents. And we very much appreciate that. Thank you, 

Minister. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Minister, I have a couple questions for you under section 6, 

clause 6 of the Bill, where it applies to exceptions to the rules. 

 

I wonder if you could clarify what you mean by the highway 

traffic devices and how you are interpreting this piece of the 

legislation to actually be implemented and work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well this is another section of the Bill 

that’s here for clean-up purposes in a sense, though it’s a new 

section. What happens now is that by law, you have to stop at a 

stop sign. And by law, you have to stop or yield at a yield sign. 

But by law, for example, a driver, where there’s a sign, no left 

turn, for an example, can make a no left turn and really not be 

against the law or offending the law. So we’re cleaning that up 

so that in fact if there is a no left turn sign, that in fact it is 

against the law then to make a left turn. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. We can 

certainly understand why you would want to make it against the 

law for anyone to go to the left. We perfectly agree with you on 

that; I think you should encourage that. 

 

But my concern, Mr. Minister, deals with traffic control 

devices, and I wonder if you could expand what you mean by 

that. Do you mean electronic devices such as signal lights on  

highways? Now those can malfunction. So when you say you 

have to obey whatever those signs are telling you without any 

recourse, as this piece of legislation would outline, you could 

run into some very serious problems here where somebody is 

disobeying the rules of the road simply because the highway 

traffic device is failing in some manner. And I think that leaves 

this piece of legislation open to some very serious concerns. 

 

I have one other concern though that deals with your assistant, 

Mr. Minister, that you can consider while you’re thinking of the 

answer to this. I’m surprised to see your official in here without 

his gown on today, because the last time he was here, he was 

wearing a gown as the Clerks do, which seemed appropriate at 

the time, and he has failed to do so. So you can contemplate 

that. 

 

But I’d like you to consider the highway traffic control devices 

and expand it a little more from simply a fixed sign to those 

electronic instruments that are out there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I think what the member is asking . . . 

I’m not sure, but probably to do with traffic lights and in fact if 

the traffic lights are not working. If the traffic lights are not 

working, you revert to the rules of the road So people on the 

right, for instance, have the right of way, etc. 

 

And certainly in the earlier question about no left turns on a no 

left turn sign, we’re going to do that on right turns as well. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, Mr. Minister, it’s possible though 

for a highway traffic signals . . . say that both of them are green 

at the same time because one of them has failed to switch and 

the other has switched. And so as far as the traffic coming from 

either direction is concerned, they’re both in the right. But one 

of the signals has failed. And so if you see a vehicle 

approaching from the opposite direction or from the side and 

you say, I’ve got the green light and I’m going to go through 

that even if I end up to be dead right, I think there’s a problem 

there, Mr. Minister. And so when you say exceptions for . . .that 

you . . . if I can read the clause: 

 

Every person operating a motor vehicle shall obey the 

instructions of any traffic control device. 

 

I think you need some sort of appeal in there or some sort of 

clarifications that when they’re operating properly. 

 

The Chair:  I want to just, for the clarification of the 

committee, to advise the member that officials helping the 

minister do not have to wear cloaks in the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’m not sure if that’s ever 

happened, the scenario that the member opposite mentions. But 

if it is a problem, certainly it’s something that we would look at. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you  not so fast, Mr. Speaker  

thank you. I know it is Friday. I have a number of questions, 

and some of them have been hit on a little bit, but I’d like to go 

back if I could, Mr. Minister, when we were talking about the 

definition of agricultural implement. And maybe it would be  



462  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

appropriate if you could tell us right now what the current 

definition of agriculture implement is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, under section 2(1)(b) of the 

existing Act: 

 

“agricultural implement” means a vehicle designed and 

adapted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural or 

livestock raising operations. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I guess we’ve heard you say that 

you’re going to be consulting over the next while with the 

people that are involved  the farmers, the people in rural 

Saskatchewan  and I would take it from that you’re going to 

be redefining agriculture implement then. Is that right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Correct. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess the question I would have then would 

be, Mr. Minister, is why is it not possible to have that definition 

right in the Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well the reason I guess, to the member 

opposite, is that ag diversification is changing so rapidly that 

what we might cover in a Bill today might not be good for 

tomorrow. So I think regulations is the right place to determine 

that because regulations can be changed quicker than an Act 

can be changed. And so in the fast-changing agricultural scene, 

I think it’s best that those be placed in regulations. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I think, Mr. Minister, that some of the 

problems that we’re seeing with many of the Bills . . . is that 

very thing. The problem with doing things in regulations is that 

they are done . . . us as elected people do not have a chance to 

talk about those. They’re done behind closed doors, and they go 

out and things are changed. We do not see that. That’s a 

problem I raised a couple of days ago with any of the legislation 

that we’re going to be looking at . . . is the problem with 

regulations. The Bill is wide in scope, and yet in the regulation 

is where all of the problems are arising from. 

 

So I don’t see a problem with going back and revisiting 

legislation to change those terms. And I would ask you that you 

would try and initiate some of these changes and get some of 

the things out of regulations and get them into the Bill so that 

we have a chance to debate it and look at it. And so that the 

people that you’re consulting with, along with whether it’s the 

opposition here or who it is . . . that we know what’s going to 

be changed, what’s coming down the road. 

 

I guess the problem I would have with it, if we . . . the term 

agriculture implement here is really what this is about to start 

with. So if you’re going to go out, consult, come back, and 

through the regulations put in the definition, and we don’t 

happen to agree with that, we really don’t have the opportunity 

to talk about it and discuss whether that is appropriate or not. 

So I ask you once again if you would consider putting some of 

things right into the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well thank you for the question. I want 

to tell the member opposite, this government has always been  

very open and honest, and we will continue to do that. We 

certainly will table regulations if they’re ready before the House 

adjourns. If not, I’m certainly willing to send you over the 

regulations so you can take a look at them. But what might even 

be more useful to us is that if the Liberal Party could come up 

with their idea of a definition and send them over to us, we 

certainly will take that into account. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I appreciate that offer. Once again my 

concern would be that as you’re consulting with the people out 

there . . . and it was raised earlier whether it was going to be a 

farm group or who’s going to be representing those people, 

whether it’s all the farmers in the province, which I’m not sure 

you have the time to do or the resources to do that . . . it is 

indeed what the farmers of the province want to see in that 

definition. So I appreciate your offer, and we’ll be taking you 

up on that as well. 

 

I guess, just in conclusion on that point, Mr. Minister, have you 

done any consulting to that, and can you give us some ideas 

what you might be looking for in change in terms of that 

definition  agriculture implement? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly that’s one of the reasons we 

want to consult. Some of the ideas that have come forth so far is 

perhaps speed be part of the equation, perhaps the size of the 

tires, and how that would limit speed  some of the few ideas 

that have come forth so far. 

 

But certainly we will be wanting to listen to the farm 

organizations, to dealers, to farmers, your ideas, as well as the 

Conservatives’ ideas, before those regulations are developed. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I’d just be a little careful if I were you, Mr. 

Minister, in listening to the third party’s ideas. I heard the 

member earlier talk about how good the roads are in northern 

Saskatchewan. I spent a considerable amount of time up in the 

North this fall as I do every fall, and I’m not sure where he was, 

but I didn’t find that the roads were very acceptable up there 

either. So I’d be a little careful on accepting his advice. 

 

I guess if we can then . . . Now you talk about official signage 

again, and I guess there again the definition of official sign. Is 

there a definition of that term right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Right now, for instance, the Highway 

Traffic Board might set a speed limit, and then we would have 

the authority then to put up the official sign. And that’s what 

my officials say, that the official sign portion of this Act does, 

is pursuant to the power authority governed by this particular 

Act. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I’m not sure I understand. I’m not sure I 

understand your response, Mr. Minister. Maybe you could try 

once more on that, could you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  What this change does is . . . if there is a 

sign erected pursuant to this Act, it becomes an official sign. 

And that’s part of the clean-up that I was talking about earlier. 

 

(1215) 



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

Mr. McLane:  So official sign in the context of this means a 

road sign; it doesn’t mean the sign on a vehicle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, it does. 

 

Mr. McLane:  The next question would obviously be then. 

The official signage for a slow-moving vehicle, which would be 

an agriculture implement, is that going to be addressed in this 

legislation, or is that addressed otherwhere, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No, not in this Act but it is in the 

regulations. So if there is some concern or some suggestions 

with that regulation, certainly we could take a look at that. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I’ll point out to you right now, the concern 

that there is, is that  I don’t recall the timing of it; it’s years 

ago  that the triangle florescent sign was designated as the 

official slow-moving sign. I’m just wondering if that’s being 

reviewed, if we’re looking at that, that’s going to be maintained 

as official signage, or in how it’s been enforced. Many of the 

farmers use different types of signage. So I’m wondering if 

we’re looking at changing that as well  an example of another 

problem with the regulations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The regulations on the slow-moving sign 

is dealt with under The Vehicle Administration Act, which is a 

different Act. But certainly if you have some suggestions in 

regards to some concern or some changes that you’re 

requesting, if you would send them over to the minister in 

charge of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), he 

certainly would take a look at your suggestions. 

 

Mr. McLane:  My next question, Mr. Minister, is on the 

Traffic Board, and I’m just wondering if you could tell us how 

many members comprise that board. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  There are six board members. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Could you tell us who those individuals are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The members of the board are Bob 

Long, who is chairman; Allan Oliver; Jim Mills; Louis 

Wolkowski; Zenny Burton; and Christine Schmitt; and Barry 

Weafer is the secretary of the board. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Of those members, Mr. Minister, is there a 

northern rep on that board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Christine Schmitt is from the Arborfield 

area so . . . I don’t what you mean by north I guess. North of 

where? 

 

Mr. McLane:  I think the minister knows what I’m getting 

at. We’re talking about northern Saskatchewan . We’ve talking 

about Ile-a-la-Crosse. Use that as a parallel. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  There’s none at this time. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Would that be something that might be 

addressed in this legislation or is that something that’s going to 

be decided in regulations again? 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  This is done by orders in council. And 

it’s been the position of this government that we would like to 

keep boards and commissions to a minimum. But certainly if 

there is at some time where there is a board member that 

resigns, maybe it could be looked at at that time. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Could you tell us how long the present 

members, the six of them, how long have they been there on 

reserve appointments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, I’m going to 

try and give the years, but I’m not sure how accurate they are. 

And I’m wondering if I could send that information at some 

point in time to you? 

 

My belief is that Mr. Long began serving on the board in 1993, 

Mr. Oliver and Mr. Mills in ’94, Mr. Wolkowski and Christine 

Schmitt in ’91, Burton in ’94. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d appreciate it if 

you would send that across at some point. 

 

Can you tell us possibly then how long the appointments are for 

and when would then expire? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The appointments are two years. And so 

there’s some that will come up . . . I can’t recall just offhand 

when, but it’s a two-year term. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Is it opened ended? How many 

reappointments can there be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Right now it’s open ended. But like I 

said earlier, the government wants to keep boards and 

commissions to a minimum. 

 

Mr. McLane:  You mentioned that they’re appointed by an 

order in council. Are there are qualifications that a member 

must have in order to be appointed or to sit on the board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Certainly this government believes that 

the qualifications and requirements are just to be a good citizen. 

And I think we’ll continue to do that because that gives us 

points of view from many different walks of life, and I think it 

certainly gives good input to a board like the Highway Traffic 

Board. 

 

Mr. McLane:  On the board, to ensure it  and I suspect 

there’s possibly some differences on the board when it comes to 

applying regulations  is there anything in place, a check and 

balance system in order to facilitate a problem of that nature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The Highway Traffic Board, as the 

member will know, is a quasi-judicial board, so they can in fact 

review their particular decision, you know, a process to them, 

and/or I would suspect then it would maybe be the courts. But 

they are a quasi-judicial board. 

 

Mr. McLane:  A simple question  how often does the 

board meet? Is it required to meet at certain times or a number 

of times throughout the year? 



464  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Under mode of carrier issues, the 

Highway Traffic Board meets between  and it varies 

depending on the requests and the issues  about 18 times a 

year. The driver’s licence, which is two members of the board 

on a committee, about 30 times a year. There’s about another 15 

days a year involved in public hearings. But it certainly depends 

on the workload that comes before the board. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Is that all the committees of the whole . . . 

that you mentioned? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, there’s the two committees: the 

motor carrier committee and the driver’s licence committee. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess this question I wasn’t thinking about 

asking, but it comes to mind when you talk about the driver’s 

licence thing. We’ve got another Bill coming up very shortly 

under review as well. And I’m just wondering how the powers 

of the Traffic Board are going to be affected in relationship to 

that Bill. How are we going to address that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That question probably should be put to 

the minister in charge of SGI when the next Bill comes. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. Can you tell us what the 

remuneration for the board members are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The Highway Traffic Board members’ 

honorarium rates are $120 for a member, $175 for the 

chairman. And government rates are $24.61 per day for meals 

and $28.38 per kilometre. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Per kilometre? Can I drive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Cents. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you. I almost got excited there. Go 

back to the Board of Internal Economy and raise that one. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Minister. You’ve answered my questions 

regarding the per diems. I assume that they apply as well to the 

committees. Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It is. 

 

Mr. McLane:  And the cost for the travel and sustenance, 

you’ve already answered. I guess in the proposed legislation, 

you are suggesting a change. Again I assume that’s being done 

through regulations. Can you tell us what you’re looking at? 

Are you going to be offering a decrease to these board 

members? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  This amendment here makes no change 

at all. The amendment adds that provisional members of the 

Highway Traffic Board to receive the remuneration and at the 

rates approved for government employees. It’s always been 

done in the past but just was never in the Act. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So you are not suggesting that there be an 

increase in remunerations this time. 

Do you think, Mr. Minister, in your opinion, that there would 

be an appropriate . . . since I’ve heard your Premier and your 

government talking about being open and moving into the 21st 

century  that we would have an all-party committee review on 

the appointments of the Highway Traffic Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, I think if you 

look at the people who are on the Highway Traffic Board, 

they’re beyond question. They’re excellent people; they do a 

good job. I have no intentions of removing them from the board 

and they will continue to do their work. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Moving on then, 

with respect to the amendment that provides a resident who is 

temporarily driving, for non-commercial purposes, a vehicle 

from another jurisdiction, that they need not get a Saskatchewan 

certificate vehicle registration. Can you tell us a little bit about 

the current process that’s in place now and what you’re looking 

at here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well probably what happens now is  

and I’ll use the example I guess I used earlier  is if my 

brother comes from Alberta and he comes to my house, I 

currently can’t jump in his car and drive it to the store, for an 

example. It happens now. I’m sure I’d jump into my brother’s 

car and drive it, not knowingly breaking the law. So I think 

we’re just trying to clarify that, so in fact that would be legal. 

 

Mr. McLane:  When your brother comes across the border 

and hits Saskatchewan, is the first item in discussion at your 

house, when you’re going to spend some money and time on 

the highways in the province? I ask a facetious question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No, actually what we discuss is health 

care premiums. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  That is something, Mr. Minister, that you’d 

be an authority on, given the health . . . or the drug plan that 

we’ve got and the ambulance rates and those types of things. So 

I’m happy to hear that he’s concerned about those as well. 

 

Just another question then on the insurance side of this. What 

would happen, for example, and if you are driving that car and 

are involved in some sort of a mishap. Is there insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I don’t know. I suspect that the RCMP 

could charge me. What the fine would be or what would 

happen, I just don’t have that answer today. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. McLane:  Could you get you get that and send it as 

well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Yes, I will. We’re going to look and see 

if we can find it now. If not, we will certainly make you aware 

of it. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Also you might want to consider, while 



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

you’re researching that, is how this would . . . the no-fault 

would apply in that sort of a circumstance as well. 

 

And another question, Mr. Minister, would be  and this just 

flows from it  that if your brother is driving your vehicle, 

what happens if there’s any problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I’ll start from the last question and move 

forward. My brother in fact could drive my vehicle if he’s here, 

if he has a valid driver’s licence. 

 

No-fault insurance, that would be a question you would have to 

direct to the minister in charge of SGI, and I know that he 

would know that for sure. 

 

The fine apparently is, in total, $60 if I was charged with 

driving my brother’s car when he came to visit me. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess when you talk about the amendment, 

exactly what are you proposing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  What we’re going to be doing is 

legitimize what’s happening now. Like I mentioned earlier, I 

probably do jump in my brother’s car and drive down to the 

store. Well right now I’m illegal and could be fined and 

charged. What we’re going to do is allow that to happen so in 

fact when I do jump into my brother’s car and drive to the store, 

it’s okay. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Would there be a problem, Mr. Minister, in 

doing that? I think it begs the question is . . . I guess we’re 

assuming that the vehicle you’re going to be jumping into is 

roadworthy under the eyes of this province. Is that incumbent 

upon you to ensure that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  That’s probably another question that 

should be put to the minister in charge of SGI. But I would 

suspect that if the vehicle is here that  and it’s roadworthy in 

Alberta  it’s likely roadworthy here. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I don’t think the question would be whether 

the vehicle is roadworthy or not and whether it’s the same in 

Alberta or Saskatchewan, not saying that your brother wouldn’t 

be in keeping with the law, but many times vehicles are, for 

whatever reason, are driven and are not caught. I guess the 

question I would be asking would be, is it incumbent on you to 

ensure that the vehicle is roadworthy under Saskatchewan laws? 

Who would . . . I guess what I’m asking, who would be charged 

if the vehicle is stopped and it’s not roadworthy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well certainly I may get a ticket if I 

jump into my brother’s car and the headlight is not working or 

tail-light or whatever the case might be; certainly I have that 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. McLane:  With respect to loaded vehicles, and I guess, 

could you define for us what the definition of a safely loaded or 

unsafely loaded vehicle would be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Is there a specific vehicle or a specific 

concern that you might have; it might help us answer the 

question. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Well I guess we’re talking about farm 

implements here, and so I guess that’s what . . . Is the intent of 

this Bill solely to look at those or is it to look at vehicles in 

general? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  To the member opposite, certainly farm 

implements have been covered, I believe, under regulations 

since 1993 in regards to tie-downs and those kinds of 

precautions. In regards to other vehicles, if — under the new 

amendments — if a car was transporting a dangerous good, for 

an example, they would be liable under this Act to make sure 

that that dangerous good was not leaking, if it was a liquid, for 

example, or in fact was not done in appropriate situation or 

protected in an appropriate situation so that that would not 

occur. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So will this apply to vehicles other than 

agriculture implements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, could you give us some 

clarification on that question again, please? Is it the driver that 

you’re concerned about? 

 

Mr. McLane:  I’m trying to get at what vehicles we’re 

talking about. Are we talking about all vehicles or are we 

talking about agriculture implements? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  We’re talking about all vehicles 

including agriculture vehicles or implements. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Back to safe loads then. I assume then the 

definition of a safe load will be defined in the regulations. Is 

that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, the department informs me that 

regulations to securing a load is under 70(3) of the regulations 

 now that was passed in 1993  which will tell you exactly 

how you are to secure a load in regards to a commercial vehicle. 

 

But an implement that’s driving down the road is not covered 

under that. It’s a very complicated issue, and I can send you 

more information. But it’s my understanding that implements, 

because they’re not presumed to be carrying a dangerous good, 

is not covered by the regulations under that subsection. 

 

And we do have information in booklet form that we can 

certainly make available to you. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Guess this just points again, Mr. Minister, 

you know, the importance of having some of these regulations 

in the legislation as opposed . . . as to the regulations. 

 

You talk about commercial vehicle. Now how does that apply 

then to a farm grain truck or a farm wagon, a grain cart? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay, farm trucks or wagons, if they in 

fact have to be registered and if they have to be registered by 

weight, are under the regulations. If they are a vehicle that is  



466  Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 1996 

registered by wheel base only, they are not. 

 

Mr. McLane:  In the regulations then, is there anything that 

would discriminate between a cart being towed by a licensed 

vehicle, such as a truck, or one being towed by a tractor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It appears to us that if it was a tractor 

pulling a wagon it would be not under the current regulations. 

And if it was in fact a half-ton pulling a cart, it wouldn’t be 

covered by those regulations as well. It would be based on 

weight, 5,000 kilograms. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So are you looking at changing any of those? 

 

(1245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The security of loads regulations are 

presently being looked at Canada-wide so that we could have 

similar regulations across Canada. And that process is 

happening now. 

 

Mr. McLane:  So will we have those then, Mr. Minister, 

before  if there are changes made to debate in here  before 

this legislation is through? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I don’t know that. It doesn’t pertain to 

the Act that’s before us. And whether it would be set at the 

same time other regulations are ready to go into the Act, I don’t 

know. 

 

But it brings up the point I tried to make earlier about the 

importance of maybe putting some of these into regulations, so 

that as needs change the regulations can change, rather than 

having to go back to the Act each time. 

 

Mr. McLane:  The problem again though, Mr. Minister, is 

that when that happens then we don’t have this forum to discuss 

it and talk about it or debate it. And that’s what we’re trying to 

get changed. 

 

The definition of dangerous goods then, is that defined in the 

same area under the regulations, or is that going to be changed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Dangerous goods, under the definition 

of the Act, means any product, substance, or organism included 

by its nature or by the regulations in any of the prescribed 

classes of dangerous goods. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Dangerous goods, as it relates to safe loads 

then, if you’re talking about grain, for example, blowing off . . . 

gravel might be a better one, stones off a load of gravel. Are 

those part of it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Okay in regards to gravel or grain, I 

guess would be covered. If you look at subsection 70(1) and (2) 

that are being repealed: 

 

No person shall cause or allow a vehicle to be loaded or 

drive a vehicle so that when the vehicle is driven on a 

highway the whole or any part of the load drops or is liable 

to drop onto the highway. 

Certainly an offence but it’s not a dangerous good. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Are those regulations being looked at in light 

of this Bill as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Could the member repeat the question, 

please. 

 

Mr. McLane:  This question was just simply, are you 

looking at changing those regulations in light of this Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  No. 

 

Mr. McLane:  On a safe load then, do the regulations apply, 

will they apply, then to an overloaded grain truck, whether it’s a 

commercial vehicle or a farm vehicle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The statute applies to everyone. And I’m 

not sure if you’re talking about the statute or the regulations. 

 

Mr. McLane:  When you were talking about safe loads  

and I guess you could argue the point that being overweight is 

an unsafe load  how does that apply under this legislation, or 

in the regulations, whether they would need to be changed to 

look after that, or if you’re contemplating that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Overweights are not included in this 

Act. They are covered under The Highway Traffic Act. Or 

Highways and Transportation Act, pardon me. 

 

Mr. McLane:  I guess under the law then, what would . . . 

Just for example, Mr. Minister, and just as we’re winding down 

here. On a farm implement going down the road and a hydraulic 

line breaks, is there any possibility of some legal consequences 

under that, through no fault of the farmer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I’m sorry, but I’d have to ask for the 

question again. 

 

Mr. McLane:  You’re talking about safe loads. And you’re 

talking about farm implements, agriculture implements. In the 

event of an unforeseen mishap in terms of a broken hydraulic 

line or a piece of equipment, machinery, part of the machinery 

breaking, is there any . . . I guess I’m asking, what would the 

owner of the equipment that’s using it be liable to under the 

safe loads legislation or the regulations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Under the safe loads regulation, there 

would be nothing, but under the Act, if charges were laid, 

certainly he would be responsible there, and depending on the 

insurance end and what his responsibility is under liability. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25  An Act to amend 

The Legal Profession Act, 1990 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 25, 

An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990 be now read a  



March 22, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 26  An Act to amend the Statute Law 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 26, 

An Act to amend the Statute Law be now read a third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 30  An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Mr. Speaker, I move that item no. 12, 

Bill No. 30, An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:57 p.m. 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................443 

  Belanger .....................................................................................................................................................................................443 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................443 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................443 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................443 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................443 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................443 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................443 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................444 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................444 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................444 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................444 

  Bradley .......................................................................................................................................................................................444 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................444 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................446 

  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................454 

  Murray .......................................................................................................................................................................................458 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Opening of Maymont School 

  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................444 

 World Water Day 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................445 

 Estevan Legion Donations to Hospitals 

  Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................445 

 Choices and Consequences Youth Conference 

  Murray .......................................................................................................................................................................................445 

 University of Regina Arts Festival 

  Crofford .....................................................................................................................................................................................445 

 Congratulations to Toronto Dominion Bank and Trust 

  Thomson ....................................................................................................................................................................................446 

 Provincial AA Hockey Champions 

  Bradley .......................................................................................................................................................................................446 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 SaskPower President’s Remuneration 

  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................446 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................446 

 SaskPower Vice-president’s Remuneration 

  McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................447 

  Anguish ......................................................................................................................................................................................448 

 Job Relocations 

  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................448 

  Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................448 

 Food Bank Use 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................449 

  Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................449 

  Plains Health Centre Closure 

  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................450 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................450 

 Education Funding 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................450 

  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................450 

 Government Document Translation 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................451 

  Mitchell ......................................................................................................................................................................................451 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 49  An Act to amend The Natural Resources Act 



 

  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................451 

 Bill No. 50  An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act, 1993 and to make a consequential amendment 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................451 

 Bill No. 51  An Act to amend The Film and Video Classification Act 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................451 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................451 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 31  An Act to amend The Municipal Hail Insurance Act 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................451 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................452 

 Bill No. 41  An Act to amend The Mental Health Services Act 

  Cline ...........................................................................................................................................................................................452 

  Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................453 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 Bill No. 25  An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................454 

  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................454 

 Bill No. 26  An Act to amend the Statute Law 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................455 

  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................455 

 Bill No. 30  An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 

  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................455 

  Nilson .........................................................................................................................................................................................455 

 Bill No. 16An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

  Renaud .......................................................................................................................................................................................456 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................456 

  D’Autremont .....................................................................................................................................................................456, 461 

  Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................457 

  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................461 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 25  An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, 1990 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................466 

 Bill No. 26  An Act to amend the Statute Law 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................467 

 Bill No. 30  An Act to amend The Hotel Keepers Act 

  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................467 

 


