













































March 29, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 585 

 March 29, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again on 

behalf of gravely concerned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan concerning the closure of the Plains Health 

Centre in Regina. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The names that are on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina and Mortlach, Caronport, and other small communities 

in southern Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people have signed from numerous places in southern 

Saskatchewan, including Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 

Regina. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 

behalf of the people concerned about the future of the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

People that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 

names of people from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the  

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed this petition are from Regina, from 

Moose Jaw, from Mossbank, all over southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 

present petitions as well, names from people throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the concerned citizens 

of Regina. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 

follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And the people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Earl Grey, Silton, Nokomis, and many from Regina. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  The following petitions for private Bills are hereby 

presented and laid on the Table. 

 

By Mr. Pringle: 

 

Of the St. Paul’s Hospital, Grey Nuns of Saskatoon in the 

province of Saskatchewan; 

 

By Mr. Pringle: 

 

Of Sisters of Charity, Grey Nuns in the province of 

Saskatchewan; 

 

By Mr. Whitmore: 

 

Of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

in the province of Saskatchewan; and 

 

By Ms. Hamilton: 

 

Of Luther College, Regina, in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

According to order, a petition regarding an increase in 

security deposits on rental properties presented on March 

28, 1996 has been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) is 

found to be irregular and therefore cannot be read and 

received; and 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed and found to be regular and therefore are hereby 

read and received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Notice of question. I give notice that I shall 

on . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order. I’d gone past that. You have notice of 

question? 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Yes. 

 

The Speaker:  If the hon. member would like to request 

leave to revert to notices for motions and questions. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  I ask leave to revert to notice of question. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you. Notice of question. I give notice 

that I shall on Tuesday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Education, regarding the 

funding of the province’s K to 12 system: what will be the 

total cost to school boards if Saskatchewan teachers 

receive a 2 per cent increase in salary as a result of the 

current contract negotiations; and (2) does the minister 

intend to honour her commitment to cover all increased 

costs to school divisions including hikes to salaries and 

benefits for all teachers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that all 

members of the House will respect and appreciate the 

importance of hard-working constituency assistants. And I’m 

very pleased, on behalf of our caucus, to introduce those who 

assist us in our duties when we’re required to be absent from 

our offices. 

 

First of all I’d like to introduce Tarra Rathgeber and her 

husband Louis from my home constituency of Melville; Laurie 

Audette, sitting in your Speaker’s gallery — Laurie Audette 

from Melfort-Tisdale, Loretta Ritchie from Saltcoats, Jeff 

Hryhoriw from Canora-Pelly, Cheryl Turanich, Arm River; 

Linda Griffith from Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated 

in the west gallery, a very fine group of young people. And it is  

my pleasure to introduce them to you and through you to my 

colleagues in the legislature on behalf of two of my colleagues, 

the member from Regina Coronation Park and the member from 

Regina Sherwood, since many of these students live in all three 

constituencies. 

 

This is the grade 12 class of Riffel High School. There are 100 

of them. And they are accompanied by their teachers Bill Allen, 

Gary Dionne, and Dave Stouse. 

 

Now I know they have already had a tour of the building, and I 

know that they are going to be very interested in what happens 

in the House in the next hour or so. And after that the three of 

us hope to have some time to spend with them to answer their 

questions and to have some refreshments with them. 

 

So I would ask all members to join me in giving them a warm 

welcome, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Sintaluta Train Derailment 

 

Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

congratulate the residents of Sintaluta, Indian Head, and 

Wolseley for the community effort that was fundamental in 

ensuring the safety and well-being of all Sintaluta residents 

yesterday. 

 

As you are no doubt aware, Mr. Speaker, there was a serious 

train derailment in Sintaluta which resulted in a number of cars 

leaving the tracks inside the town limits. One flat-deck car left 

the tracks and slammed into a nearby house causing extensive 

damage to the home of the Banks family. Another car carrying 

dangerous goods also left the tracks and immediately caught 

fire. 

 

Fortunately no was seriously hurt, and because of the quick 

response of the community’s volunteer fire department, Indian 

Head RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), CP (Canadian 

Pacific) rail’s emergency response team, Environment and 

Resource Management spill control unit, municipal 

governments, EMO (Emergency Measures Organization), 

Department of Health, and the local government headed by 

mayor Dave Damm, the safety of the residents was ensured. 

 

I would also like to thank the communities of Indian Head and 

Wolseley for their support in providing a haven for the people 

that had to be evacuated. 

 

Citizens of Saskatchewan have always proved themselves by 

joining together to provide support and assistance whenever 

needed. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Sport Athlete of the Year Awards 

 

Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, last night I, along with my  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

 

colleagues from Kelvington-Wadena, and from Canora-Pelly, 

had the opportunity to attend the Saskatchewan Sport Athlete of 

the Year awards banquet at Queensbury Downs in Regina. Mr. 

Speaker, I was deeply impressed with all the athletes I met at 

the dinner. Their dedication to their sport is astounding, as is 

their ability. 

 

Among other things, Saskatchewan produces some of the finest 

athletes in the country and the world. The number of 

championships and national and world records held by the 

athletes honoured is certainly proof of that. 

 

On behalf of my colleagues in the official opposition, I want to 

take this opportunity to congratulate all the award winners and 

nominees honoured at this banquet. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Z99’s Ninth Radio-thon 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Between train wrecks 

and budgets and other events, we might have missed the 

beginning of another regular yet significant Regina event and 

I’m happy to correct that oversight this morning. 

 

C.C. and Lori Lindsay from station Z99 here in Regina are at it 

again. They are hosting the ninth annual radio-thon from the 

Cornwall Centre. The purpose, Mr. Speaker, of this year’s 

radio-thon is to raise funds for a new pediatric playroom for the 

Allan Blair clinic, cancer clinic. It’s a more than worthy cause, 

as have been the previous eight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, C.C. and Lori started yesterday morning at 6 a.m. 

and they’re carrying on until 5 p.m. this afternoon. For the 

numerically challenged in the Assembly  and I point no 

fingers  that’s 35 straight hours of broadcasting without a 

nap. Mr. Speaker, there are three ways we can support Z99’s 

radio-thon. We can call 522-5437 and make a pledge; we can 

fax a pledge to 352-1996; or we can pledge in person at the 

radio-thon headquarters at the Cornwall Centre, as I plan to 

later this day. 

 

If Z99’s C.C. and Lori Lindsay can stay up for 35 hours for a 

worthy cause, the least the rest of us can do is help them out 

and I know we all will. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

High School Basketball Championships 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to offer 

congratulations to some young athletes in my constituency. Last 

weekend, the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association 

held its annual basketball championships. Attending the final 

for the fourth year in a row from Thunder Creek were the 

Caronport Cougars boys’ basketball team. Led by coach Gib 

Hinz, these dedicated young athletes gave it their best, with 

Nelson Duerkson netting 15 points in the final against 

Humboldt. 

 

For their efforts, Caronport returned home with the silver  

medal. While they came up with the silver rather than the gold, 

they can add it to the bronze that they got in 1995 and the golds 

in both 1993 and ’94. 

 

Mr. Speaker, coming from the Moose Jaw district, I would also 

like to congratulate the Central Collegiate girls’ basketball team 

who took home the 3A title. The member from Regina 

Sherwood is undoubtedly proud of his former high school. Mr. 

Speaker, I am also certain that you are also pleased with the 

achievements of your constituents. 

 

In closing, I’m sure that other members of the House will join 

me in congratulating these young people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Procrastination Week 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

noticed the other day in the Toronto Globe and Mail something 

that caught my eye, and I just want to quote. It said, on March 

10 the mayors of Athens and Sparta signed a peace declaration 

formally ending the Peloponnesian War. It was exactly 2,400 

years after Athens surrendered. 

 

This reminded me, Mr. Speaker, that last year I got up to make a 

statement on National Procrastination Week, and I said I was 

going to do a statement last week, and I started to but I didn’t 

finish it. I just didn’t get around to it. Then the Premier called 

the election, Mr. Speaker, and I forgot all about it. And I have 

vowed to make up for last year’s statement by giving a 

bell-ringer of a statement this year  at the first opportunity, of 

course. And I vowed I would intend to keep my promise 

because you know we always keep our promises. But I’ve been 

busy, and on Monday is already April. And come to think of it, 

I don’t even remember National Procrastination Week being 

declared this year. So actually it hasn’t been declared yet 

anyway, so I think maybe I’ll just wait for awhile and see what 

happens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Male Athlete of the Year 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to take a moment as well to acknowledge the hard work of 

SaskSport, the SaskSport committee, and the dinner they 

presented last night and the awards that were also handed out. 

 

In particular I want to congratulate a young gentleman from the 

Kipling area, lived in Kipling for awhile. Jim Wingert was 

honoured as the male athlete of the year for his 

accomplishments in weight lifting at the Special Olympics, and 

so I’d like to say congratulations, Jim, best wishes in your 

future endeavours. And certainly all the other athletes deserve 

praise  those who won, those who were recognized. 

 

And I think not just the winners last night but all athletes across 

this province who give of their time and efforts to entertain us, 

whether it’s through the winter months, whether it’s through 

hockey or swimming or whatever avenue, I want to just extend  



588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

my congratulations to all those involved in sport in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Shell Lake Volunteers 

 

Mr. Johnson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Volunteerism is a 

vital part of life in rural Saskatchewan. Entertainment that 

residents of large centres take for granted would not be possible 

in many centres in my constituency without the efforts of a 

great many volunteers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize today the efforts of the 

volunteers in the community of Shell Lake. Yesterday evening 

to this evening and tomorrow, the Shell Lake Patchwork Players 

will be presenting the play The Curious Savage by John Patrick 

in the Shell Lake Lions hall. These dinner theatre performances 

are sponsored by the Shell Lake tourism committee, and all of 

the proceeds are turned back into encouraging tourism in the 

area. There are 11 actors in the play, every one of them a 

volunteer. So are the people who built the set and made the 

costumes and are serving the meal. It is a very active spirit in 

Shell Lake, Mr. Speaker, that makes this place a great place to 

live. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

School Conservation Program 

 

Mr. Whitmore:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe there’s 

an old folk song with a line that goes, if I ever get in my hand a 

dollar again, I’m going to squeeze it till the eagle grins. 

 

Fourteen schools in the Saskatoon West School Division have 

just squeezed an extra $36,000 out of their energy consumption 

budgets. The three-year program they have undertaken will 

result ultimately in a reduction of energy use of up to 40 per 

cent. In a time when all governments and all institutions need to 

put every available penny towards delivery of services, this is a 

substantial contribution. And I want to publicly acknowledge 

the students, the teachers, and the custodial staff of the school 

division for their efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these savings have been achieved step by step, bit 

by bit; no grand gestures, just small, common sense ones  and 

all have taken part. For example, teachers formed clubs in 

which students conducted energy audits which led to savings, 

which led to further energy efficiency measures, such as the 

purchase of state-of-the art equipment, and so on. 

 

This program is under the umbrella of the Saskatchewan 

Environmental Society’s destination conservation program, a 

program designed to save money and to protect the 

environment. 

 

I congratulate the Saskatoon West School Division for doing 

both. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Tax Relief 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister presented 

a budget yesterday that featured no new taxes; however, what 

she failed to mention was the fact that her government will 

collect $100 million more in tax revenue this year than last. Of 

this figure, about $62 million will come from the individual 

income tax, directly out of the pockets of Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Will the Minister of Finance explain why she made no 

commitment whatsoever to tax relief for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, first of all, thank you 

very much for that question. 

 

I’d like to clarify the facts here. In fact we did make provision 

in this budget for tax relief for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Last year we reduced income taxes so that when people fill out 

their 1995 income tax form they’re going to find a $75 

reduction in the debt reduction surtax  a tax cut for every 

taxpayer in Saskatchewan. In 1996 when they get their income 

tax form, that number will go up to $150 for every individual 

taxpayer in Saskatchewan  $300 per family. 

 

So I think the first thing is to establish the facts. We did reduce 

income taxes for people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, the budget document clearly 

states that, and I quote: “One of the best ways to create 

consumer confidence is to ease the tax burden.” 

 

Yet at no point during the minister’s budget address did I hear 

the mention of any meaningful tax reductions for the average 

Saskatchewan resident. The only commitment made is to review 

the provincial tax system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan residents want a firm commitment 

for more meaningful tax relief, not another study. Will the 

minister explain why there is no firm tax reduction plan so the 

people of this province will know the stifling taxation of her 

government will be lifted at some point in the future? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. I think what this government wants to 

do, it wants to be responsible and credible when it promises tax 

cuts. 

 

We said, as we can afford them, we will. We have introduced 

income tax cuts. But we’re not going to be like the Liberals. 

We’re not going to go around in an election campaign and say 

look, we can reduce your sales tax four points. We can spend  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

 

money here, and you know what we can do? We can do it 

because all you have to do is assume the economy is going to 

grow by 8 per cent. 

 

So if you have a wonderful imagination that works for you. But 

we’re going to govern responsibly and credibly and we’re going 

to prepare this province for the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I know the Finance minister 

had made a great deal out of the fact that one measure was in 

the government’s budget which would put $150 into the 

pockets of 6,000 low income people. But I doubt very seriously 

that these people consider 12.50 more per month as the answer 

to their problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what they need is a government that will provide 

tax relief because, as the budget document so aptly put it, one 

of the best ways to create consumer confidence is to ease the 

tax burden. 

 

Instead of insulting low income people, will the minister make 

a commitment to meaningful tax relief to help create an 

environment for business to flourish and meaningful job 

opportunities for low income people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin by 

thanking the member for the question, but also pointing out the 

member doesn’t understand the budget. That tax cut is not a tax 

cut for low income people alone; 6,000 low income people will 

no longer pay income taxes at all. But every taxpayer in the 

province will get a tax cut. 

 

Now again, when we promise tax cuts, we deliver. We don’t go 

round like your counterparts in Ottawa and say, elect us, we’ll 

eliminate the GST (goods and services tax) and then spend the 

next three years figuring out how you’re going to persuade the 

same electors that taking the GST, spreading it further, is 

eliminating it. Even their own MPs (Member of Parliament) 

don’t believe that story. John Nunziata says it’s not eliminating 

the GST to harmonize it. I say to the members opposite, we’re 

going to govern credibly, and we’re going to mean what we say. 

When we say there’s an income tax cut, there is an income tax 

cut, and it is in the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Municipal Government Amalgamation 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 

there was any doubt about this government’s plans to force 

municipal governments into amalgamation, they were put to 

rest yesterday when the Finance minister delivered her budget 

speech. This NDP (New Democratic Party) government 

announced that revenue-sharing grants will be reduced by $20 

million or 25 per cent in two year’s time. 

 

Will the minister in charge of Municipal Government confirm  

that this reduction is meant as a means of tightening the purse-

strings of local government so tight they are left with no option 

except amalgamation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I find it a little 

interesting that the members opposite don’t mind standing up in 

this House and reading us all the Liberal budgets in other 

provinces. The one they may want to read today is the Liberal 

budget in New Brunswick, where they take $19 million out of 

municipalities. So I guess it’s okay for a Liberal government in 

New Brunswick to say, we’re taking $19 million out of 

municipal government, but it’s not okay for us to say: sorry, to 

protect health, education, and social programs, we’re going to 

have to reduce funding elsewhere. 

 

This government is committed to protecting our high quality of 

life, our health, our education, our social programs, and we 

stand by our record in that sphere, and we will remind people of 

your record in that sphere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  I believe, Mr. Speaker, we’re probably the 

only province that has already taken about 40 per cent of grants 

away from municipalities and then turn around and dump 

another $20 million on top of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Let’s not forget the minister promised that 

10 per cent of VLT (video lottery terminal) revenues or $10 

million would also be returned to local communities. This 

money of course is not coming to our towns and villages 

because the minister and her government broke another 

promise. 

 

The minister also stood in this House on a number of occasions 

and proclaimed that there is no top-down plan by the NDP 

government to force amalgamation onto municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in both cases I took the minister at her word, as 

did local leaders across this province. Obviously this 

government’s version of amalgamation will mean the creation 

of a whole new bureaucracy similar to what we have in Health. 

 

Will the minister explain if the end result of her government’s 

amalgamation plan is the elimination of RM (rural 

municipality) and town councils? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, no matter how many 

times the members opposite say we have some secret plan to 

amalgamate won’t make it true. We have no secret plan to 

amalgamate. 

 

But you know, the mayors made a good point. The federation of 

Canadian mayors knew exactly where their problem was 

coming from. Recently they said: 

 

The mayors of Canada’s major cities have joined forces to  



590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

warn about the impact of impending federal funding cuts. 

Members of the Federation of Canadian Municipalities say 

cuts will have a devastating effect on social programs, 

leaving municipalities to take up the slack. 

 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when the municipalities phone my 

office and this government, I’m stepping aside and saying, it’s 

Mr. Martin who you need to be talking to. That’s the source of 

your difficulty. And I think when push comes to shove, they 

understand that. 

 

I’ll make only one other point. We believe that there have to be 

changes in the organization of municipal governments. We’re 

willing to work with them. But we have to change to meet the 

new demands of the new century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Local Government Funding Cuts 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, my questions are for the Minister of 

Finance as well. Madam Minister, for months and months 

we’ve heard your government condemning Ottawa for 

offloading its financial problems onto the provinces. And again 

you do it again this morning here. 

 

So how do you address the problem? By doing exactly the same 

thing to municipalities. Municipalities and local ratepayers are 

going to take a $20 million hit next year. And that’s on top of 

the $10 million VLT hit that you’ve provided them with. 

 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 

president Murray Westby said, our members understand all too 

well the Finance minister’s concern about fiscal downloading. 

And even the federal government has not dreamt about cutting 

transfer payments by more than 30 per cent in a single year. 

 

Madam Minister, how do you justify this massive offloading on 

municipalities and local taxpayers after the way that you’ve 

criticized the federal government for doing exactly the same 

thing to you? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  I welcome the question, Mr. 

Speaker. Our criticism of the federal government was very 

pointed and it was this: it was that 73 per cent, three-quarters, 

of all of the cuts in the recent federal budget were to health, 

education, social programs. We have said consistently the issue 

is priorities; that these are the wrong priorities for this 

government and for the people of this province. 

 

And this is a defining moment in this province because while 

Liberals are willing to have massive cuts, hack and slash at 

health, education, and social programs, while Tories in Ontario 

and in Alberta are willing to hack and slash at health, education, 

and social programs, this government will defend health, 

education, and social programs. We believe it’s essential to our 

quality of life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you. Madam Minister, yesterday’s budget 

promised no new taxes. But because of the massive offloading 

on local ratepayers, that simply isn’t going to be the case and 

you know it, and everyone else knows it. In fact SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) president 

Sinclair Harrison is already predicting a drastic mill rate 

increase next year as a result of the offloading from you. 

 

So the federal government dumps on you, you in turn dump on 

the municipalities, and the municipalities have no choice but to 

raise taxes for local taxpayers who always get it in the end. 

 

Madam Minister, your budget is going to result in huge 

property tax increases next year. How can you say that there are 

no new taxes to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, when we found out 

that we were going to receive $250 million in one transfer cut 

alone, never mind the other offloading, we could have taken an 

easy way out too. We could have said . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . that’s right, what we’re going to do is we’re 

going to just have to raise taxes. 

 

What we did instead was, we made some very difficult 

decisions about our own government. We cut administrative 

costs. We ended duplication. We looked at ways to deliver 

services better. And tragically, some people had to lose jobs. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we’re saying to municipal governments 

is that we cut ourselves first. We cut ourselves hardest. The 

biggest cut in this budget is a cut to our own government  

$50 million. And we expect them to do . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I’ll ask all members of 

the Assembly to come to order and to allow the Minister of 

Finance to respond to the question that’s been put to her. Order. 

All members of the Assembly . . . Order. When I ask for order 

from all members, I mean all members. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What 

we’re saying to our partners at the municipal level is that we 

were told when we went around this province that there are 

savings to be achieved at the municipal level as well. And we’re 

willing to work with them to do that. 

 

But I’ll tell you, we can’t bury our head in the sand and say the 

municipal structure should stay exactly as it is. We have to 

change to prepare for the new century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Education Funding Cuts 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is also for the minister responsible for hidden tax 

increases. Madam Minister, you are offloading . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Now when putting a question to 

ministers in the Assembly, it is important that in addressing it, it  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

 

be addressed to the minister in the context of their responsibility 

in the House, and I’ll ask the member to rephrase to whom he’s 

directing his question, please. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 

Minister of Finance, who has hidden some taxes. Madam 

Minister, you are offloading education costs onto the property 

tax base as well. You are planning a $7 million cut to K to 12 

education in the ‘98-99; at the same time, you’re negotiating 

salary increases with the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation). That’s going to mean fewer teachers and it’s going 

to mean larger classrooms, and it’s going to mean another hit on 

the property taxpayer. 

 

Madam Minister, you have criticized the federal Liberals for 

offloading education tax onto the provinces. Why are you now 

doing exactly the same thing  offloading education costs for 

the 21st century onto local taxpayers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 

thanks to the member opposite. Education is another area, the K 

to 12 system, in which we believe we have to ensure that there’s 

a quality system. But we also believe  and we were told as we 

went around the province  that there are administrative 

savings that need to be achieved. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m getting a little tired of the 

members opposite, the Tories: taxes, taxes, taxes. You’d think 

they never raised a tax in their life. Let me read you a quick list 

of the taxes that they raised in this province in the 1980s. They 

introduced the flat tax on income, raised income taxes; they 

raised the corporate income tax; they raised the corporate 

capital tax; they raised the gas tax; they raised cigarette taxes 

five times; and they raised the sales tax, all in the interests of 

adding about a billion dollars a year to the deficit. So I don’t 

think the members opposite should be talking about tax cuts. 

They have a record of raising taxes and raising deficits. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

the Premier himself admitted this offloading is going to lead to 

fewer teachers and larger classrooms. How does this square 

with your commitment to guarantee that our children continue 

to receive quality education in the classroom? 

 

Madam Minister, those numbers don’t add up. You’re 

negotiating a salary increase on behalf of local school boards; at 

the same time, you’re cutting their funding. At the same time, 

the school has been hit with other major cost increases such as 

your 12 per cent SaskPower rate hike. Doesn’t make any sense. 

And the people you are going to have pay for it are the local 

taxpayers and the children in the classroom. 

 

Madam Minister, why are you offloading education costs onto 

the school boards, and how much damage is this going to do to 

our educating children in the province now and into the 21st 

century? 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, if the members 

opposite are as concerned about education as they seem to be 

today, we’d like to ask them why they were not willing to 

participate with us when we said, we want to publicly express 

our concern about a federal budget in which 73 per cent of all 

the cuts are cuts to health, education, and social programs  73 

per cent. 

 

All members of this legislature should have stood together and 

said, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, we do not 

support a budget in which the majority of the cuts are to the 

priorities that these people place highest. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have done the best job we can to find 

savings in other parts of government to protect the core 

programs of this province  health, education, social programs 

 because we believe this is one of the reasons why 

Saskatchewan is the best place in the best country in which to 

live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Finance minister noted during her budget address yesterday that 

government departments and Crown corporations will invest 

over $630 million this year in capital projects. This figure 

substantiates what the Saskatchewan Construction Association 

has been telling us. However, it also creates a great deal of 

concern because we all know that the union-preference policies 

of this NDP government inflate project costs greatly. 

 

Will the Minister of Labour explain how he and his government 

can justify continue using union-preference policies which 

inflate costs, at the same time they claim not to have money for 

essential services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member 

should understand that the philosophy behind the so-called 

union-preference policy, the CCTA (Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement) policy, is a philosophy which has been 

in existence in the United States of America, I think since about 

1947, with the United States federal government  in that 

bastion of socialism, in that bastion of supporting of trade 

union movements — in the United States. It’s been a policy of 

the federal government, I think since 1979 or 8 in some form or 

other. 

 

And what it attempts to do is to make sure there’s a level 

playing-field with respect to the bidding of certain contracts 

with respect to certain Crown tendering operations. That’s all 

there is to it. 

 

Now these people can get out there and bash all the union 

people that they want all the time, because that’s all they do. 

They can say, like the Tories, that they want to make 

Saskatchewan, Alabama North. They can say that the working 

men and women of this province don’t contribute to the  



592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

economy and the well-being of our community. 

 

That may be their position and it may be the Tory position. I tell 

you, it isn’t the right position and it isn’t the Saskatchewan and 

it isn’t our position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has it 

mistaken, because what we are representing are the taxpayers of 

this province and not any special group. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have shown in this House, using two specific 

cases as examples, how the unfair union-preference policies of 

the NDP government inflate costs by an average of 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, union preference could cost the taxpayers of this 

province as much as $150 million in additional costs if it’s 

applied to all the capital projects planned by government 

departments. 

 

In the interest of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, will the 

minister make a commitment in this House today that all such 

projects will be based on fair, open tendering and not union 

preference? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, all morning we’ve 

witnessed the opposition parties, with respect to this budget, 

using figures and figuring how to use their figures like this  

pulling it out of the air. Pull them like that, out of the air. 

 

They remind me sometimes of my very dear and close friends in 

the press gallery, just pulling up the figures out like that  

$150 million the member says with respect to union tendering, 

when the statistics show that of the percentage of tendering that 

has taken place, as the Minister of Labour indicated yesterday, 

amounts to approximately $15 million. 

 

Now there’s no use me saying what the figures are because the 

hon. member will get up, I guarantee you, and you know what 

he’ll do with the next figure?  like that. He’ll pull it out of the 

air, just like that. 

 

Do you run your business that way? I can’t believe that he runs 

his business that way. I’m sure he’s a successful business 

operator. Please try to bring that kind of an approach to the 

management of public affairs, and base it on facts. It’d be 

helpful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today with a heavy heart, 

saddened for the business people in Saskatchewan. In 

yesterday’s budget there was no evidence whatsoever that the 

Minister of Economic Development and his colleague, the 

Minister of Finance, are even singing from the same song sheet 

when we talk about sustainable economic growth for the  

province into the next century. 

 

The Minister of Economic Development at least paid lip-service 

to job creation in his Partnership for Growth The Premier even 

announced in his infomercial that jobs were the number one 

priority. And at the same time, the Minister of Finance was 

preparing a budget that totally ignored both of them. It’s an 

indication to me that the left hand doesn’t know what the right 

hand is doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister acknowledge that the province 

needs relief from stifling taxation, oppressive labour legislation, 

and over-regulation right now, if we’re really going to help 

private business create jobs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

the question. Unfortunately, when you get a question from the 

Liberals, you’ve got to start first of all at correcting the facts. 

 

We have a report here done on our budget by Nesbitt Burns  

Nesbitt Burns  outsiders; got no vested interest in what the 

facts are, as the members opposite do. What do they say about 

our economy in 1996? They say 1996, economic growth 

forecast for Saskatchewan is 2.6 per cent. This will be well 

above the Canadian average. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  By the way, their comment on the 

budget was thumbs up, thumbs up. So what I would say to the 

member opposite is . . . I’d say a number a things. I would say 

we have unlike our counterparts in Ottawa whose economic 

development plan is about the way the Premier said it was, 

some here, some there  we have a plan. We have a long-term 

plan for jobs in this province and in every budget we implement 

part of the plan. We implemented part of the plan in this budget 

and we will continue in subsequent budgets so there are more 

jobs for people in the 21st century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to the Minister of 

Economic Development on many occasions about my concerns 

about what the government is doing to destroy rural 

Saskatchewan. His department had one small program that was 

of some benefit to the small-business people in rural 

Saskatchewan. And yesterday he sat back and cheered as the 

Minister of Finance cut and slashed with her budget knife. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the small business loans association program 

provided capital for the development of small business in 

Saskatchewan through a loan, not a grant. Yesterday this 

program, along with many of the other funds for rural 

Saskatchewan, was slashed by 50 per cent. Mr. Speaker, will 

the minister explain why he’s so determined to neglect the 

potential for small business in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon:  Mr. Speaker, once again with these 

Liberal questions, you’ve got to start by correcting the facts. 

The small business loan program is intact. It’s still there. I don’t 

know which budget they were watching yesterday. It might 

have been some other budget. 

 

But I will say this. In each and every budget since 1991 we have 

had targeted tax reductions to create jobs: ’91 reduced the tax 

rate for small business; ’92 reduced taxes on 1-800 numbers, a 

factor in getting three call centres into the province; ’93, 4, 5, 

cuts in manufacturing and processing taxes, 3,000 new jobs; oil 

royalties restructured in ’94, hundreds of new jobs. And there 

are other tax reduction measures in this budget: aviation fuel 

and a truckers’ tax change. So we do have a plan. The plan is 

being implemented and it is working. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 62  An Act to amend 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

(Ordering Implementation Negated by Crown/“OINC”) 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move a 

Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

Act (Ordering Implementation Negated by Crown/“OINC”) be 

now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker:  Before orders of the day, I’d like to bring a 

ruling to the House. 

 

Yesterday the Opposition House Leader raised a point of order 

concerning the language the Minister of Health used while 

responding to a question from the member for Humboldt during 

Wednesday’s oral question period. The Government House 

Leader then requested a decision on the member for Arm 

River’s member’s statement. At the time, I reserved my ruling 

so that I could review the Hansard and consider the points 

raised by the members. I am now prepared to rule on these 

matters. 

 

Over recent days, there has been a development that is giving 

me considerable concern. Members from all caucuses have 

characterized their colleagues in demeaning terms, which is 

entirely unworthy of this Assembly. Humour, when in good 

taste, is appropriate. But when it becomes personal and 

offensive, it is unacceptable. Recently the tone, manner, and 

intention of certain remarks have caused disorder. All members, 

I am sure, could cite examples of personally offensive remarks 

from the last weeks. 

 

With regard to the point of order, I find the language used by 

the Minister of Health and the intent of the language used by  

the member for Arm River to be unparliamentary. These are but 

the latest examples of how this unfortunate state of affairs has 

escalated and become increasingly personal. Other members 

must also bear responsibility for similar comments, and I have 

full confidence in the ability of members to engage in forceful 

and spirited debate without having to resort to such avenues. I 

ask all members to show due respect to their colleagues and 

their institution. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I have the answer to question no. 27. 

If I could have the assistance of a page, I will table it. 

 

The Speaker:  Question 27 is answered. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

government introduced its blaming budget and there’s no new 

day dawning for anyone in this province — no new job creation 

measures, no new ideas and more of the same cold, gloomy 

weather that we see outside today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin talking once again about jobs, 

and as I said before, this was sadly lacking in the budget. We 

see here that the government is laying off hundreds of 

employees. We were told earlier this year that they planned on 

laying off some 214 Crop Insurance personnel. Now we hear 

that they will be completely closing the Ag Credit 

Saskatchewan office in Swift Current, costing some 63 jobs in 

that city. That’s a severe blow to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

In the city of Swift Current alone it will cost some $5 million a 

year in additional payroll. That city was already hard hit by 

Crop Insurance restructuring and now this. It struggles daily 

with the PST-free (provincial sales tax) Medicine Hat for its 

retail customers. The government has now wrenched at the 

heart of its economic well-being and is failing to offer any 

hope. What hope was there in this budget for a place like Swift 

Current to create jobs. The government can go ahead and create 

another REDA (regional economic development authorities) 

and promote some tourism, but these things won’t really have 

their positive effect until this government quits stifling this 

province with high taxes. 

 

On the issue of job losses in Swift Current, I think 

congratulations are deserved for the member from Swift 

Current for such an effective job of lobbying for your 

colleagues. I’m sure the member will enjoy his visit home to his  



594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

seat this weekend. Given the reception that he’s going to get, I 

might suggest he go over to the Liberal office and grab a stack 

of memberships. He might have at least some luck convincing 

people to buy something because I’m sure they won’t be buying 

this budget. 

 

Another problem, Mr. Speaker, with the idea of cutting jobs in 

rural areas is that rural areas tend to have more discouraged 

workers. Discouraged workers are people who don’t get 

counted among the officially employed in this province. They 

don’t get counted because they’re not looking for work because 

they don’t actually believe there’s any work to be found. In 

small towns where a person always knows all the employers, 

there are often many of these types of people. By making lay-

offs like they did to essential rural services, this government is 

not only creating more jobless people but more discouraged 

workers in our rural areas. Sadly, they are not dealing with the 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in so far as jobs are concerned, we see here in the 

budget the government’s rosy projections again. We see them 

tell us, we’ll have all this job growth. The funny thing is that 

they’re saying there are now 460,000 jobs, when in reality there 

are only 446,000. If they plan on getting to the 481,000 by the 

end of the century, the members opposite have a big hole to dig 

themselves out of. 

 

I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that they are undaunted by this challenge 

because they don’t plan on making any of these targets anyhow. 

They don’t plan on any new day dawning. They just plan on 

getting through to the next century or preparing for the next 

century as they care to call it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the blaming budget brought down yesterday could 

also be called the budget of threats. Not only did this 

government engage in months of fearmongering, they are now 

going to make thinly veiled threats to municipalities in this 

province. This government is going to maintain municipal 

revenue-sharing grants for only one year. After that, the 

government will be making a substantial cut to municipal 

revenue sharing. 

 

The whole point behind this all seems to be not completely 

open but somewhat tricky. The government comes out and tells 

municipalities that they are introducing an Act to help them 

cooperate and then the Premier says that if they don’t cooperate, 

he’ll have to consider amalgamation. Now they’ve raised the 

stakes, and they’ve said that they will be slashing revenue-

sharing grants. Is the idea here that this government is being fair 

to the many municipalities of this province in giving them 

warning, or is it something else? 

 

One could easily argue, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

intends to use this threat of a $20 million cut only to put more 

pressure on these municipal governments to voluntarily 

amalgamate so this government can get its way without looking 

like the bad guy. I look forward to the day when I hear the 

members opposite finally admit that this was their plan after all. 

 

If that was their plan all along, then I would say it’s a plan that 

fits well into this blaming theme of the budget. Use money as a  

threat to get municipalities to amalgamate, and then this 

government will be able to blame the RMs and the villages for 

amalgamating if they ever complain about it. It’s all about 

blaming, and the more we read through, the more tricks the 

members opposite seem to be able to pull out of the blame bag. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this blaming budget made a significant hit on rural 

Saskatchewan. The greatest losses of jobs to the public service 

was made to the Department of Highways. We have here 97 

in-scope positions gone, 43 out-of-scope eliminated, and no 

vacancies. All told there are some 140 positions gone in the 

department. 

 

I don’t think the minister travels on these highways. Not only 

are they a mess but all too often they are unsafe. The Minister 

of Finance probably wouldn’t know because you don’t notice 

this up in the Executive Air Cheyenne aircraft. This province is 

a bad enough place to drive any time, but this is made far worse 

when the highways are not maintained. Just this week we had 

over 50 car crashes around the city of Regina, thanks to the icy 

weather. Last weekend you could hardly drive more than 60 

kilometres an hour on large parts of the No. 2 Highway out in 

my constituency, because of ice. 

 

Throughout the winter there have been many occasions like 

this, where the ice packs on the highways and the highway 

crews have such few resources to manage this that the 

dangerous conditions and accidents are the result. Basically, 

there’s a threat to public safety here that the minister is making 

worse. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m deeply concerned about these cuts. 

We’ve been getting calls about . . . people worried about 

whether their depot will be lost. I see here the government is 

closing 26 equipment storage facilities in what it calls 

“streamlining”. Well the people who drive these icy roads will 

probably not be very amused when they see that this 

government has termed their decision to threaten public safety 

as nothing more than “streamlining”. 

 

When you look at the budget when it comes to highways, all I 

can say is that it’s a real shame that this government forgot 

about the new day dawning and simply skipped right to 

preparing for the next century. It’s cold comfort for the many 

people in rural areas who depend upon these highways. It’s cold 

comfort because with fewer people working on our highways, 

we really have to count on a new day dawning with lots of hot 

sun to get rid of that ice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  That’s our highways maintenance system 

after this budget. It’s also interesting, Mr. Speaker, because it 

reminds me of the Premier’s comments in the House today. He 

keeps telling the Leader of the Third Party he doesn’t want 

Saskatchewan to be the Alabama of the North. Well I agree 

with the Premier, but I would remind the Premier that down 

South in places like Alabama, when they get snow they just 

wait for the new day to dawn and melt it all down. And I say to 

the Premier, keep to your word; we don’t want to be the 

Alabama of the North. We don’t want their snow removal  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

 

system. 

 

Maybe, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite aren’t really trying 

to make us the Alabama of the North when it comes to the 

highway maintenance. Maybe if they lower everyone’s 

expectations to believing that our highways won’t get 

maintained like they should, they once again can deflect the 

blame elsewhere. Maybe their goal is to get everyone to simply 

blame the weather. You know, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to 

pick a scapegoat, it’s probably best to pick a scapegoat that the 

members opposite could pick on, because everybody does talk 

about the weather. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while cuts to the highways are a major attack on 

rural Saskatchewan, this government’s attack doesn’t end there. 

I see the cuts to ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) offices which takes effect in the near future will 

affect my constituents with a closure of an office in Moose Jaw. 

I see, however, that the minister shows some sense of fairness 

when he decided to cut his own office in Watrous, the 

constituency of Watrous. I am concerned, however, that we 

have all of these jobs gone, including another four rural service 

centres. 

 

What plans are there to replace these jobs? Often these jobs 

provide valued off-farm income. When it’s gone, problems are 

created for farm families, and the minister appears to be 

oblivious to this. I would suggest that the Minister of 

Agriculture should try and remember that just because things 

start looking up in the farm sector for a year or two, it doesn’t 

mean that it’ll remain this way forever. 

 

(1100) 

 

The members opposite can say what they like about the federal 

level of government, but in so far as things like the Crow were 

concerned, I am sure that they are all well aware of the 

arguments that assert the transportation subsidies discourage 

local processing and value added production. The members 

opposite just have to remember that high taxes and too many 

regulations also discourage local processing. 

 

While the members opposite complain about Mr. Goodale, I’m 

sure they’re also thankful that he had had a herd that had a cow 

with the mad cow disease culled as early as he did when he 

assumed his ministership as Agriculture minister. The court is 

out, however, on how the history will judge our own minister 

for how he handled ILT (Infectious Laryngotracheitis). 

 

Nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, in so far as ACS is concerned, I’m 

anxious to hear how the government intends to resolve or wind 

up those loans that are outstanding. How do they expect to 

handle these loans? And we’re here in the opposition 

wondering for more details to convey to our constituents who 

have these very grave concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this blaming budget there’s a vast number of 

concerns for Saskatchewan people. While reviewing this 

budget, I became quite alarmed about how this government uses 

numbers. I said yesterday that I’d hoped this government would 

be more concerned about people than numbers. It’s sad  

to say, but they appear to be more concerned about wasting 

their time blaming and fiddling with figures than they are with 

the plight of the people in this province. 

 

I was quite shocked to discover that while this government goes 

around using all sorts of figures about how terrible transfer cuts 

are, they can’t get their numbers straight. When you look to 

page 9 of the budget speech, it says that federal cuts to transfers 

are $114 million. The $114 million was the number of the 

week. 

 

Last week it was a 73 per cent cut. And before that I heard $106 

million. Before that, I’ve even heard some say $200 million. 

Pick your number. But it’s simply just good old-fashioned 

blaming and it’s really all just a waste of time. 

 

Unfortunately while it says the total cut is $114 million on page 

9 of the budget, on page 74 it goes on to say something 

different. If the members opposite would look to that page  

go ahead  and you’d soon notice that it points out that the 

total reduction in federal transfers is only $43 million. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite are going to persist 

in blaming, they should get the facts straight. At least use the 

same number. In one part of this book, they fiddle with the 

numbers and exclude equalization, even though it’s worth 

millions. And later on, they do use the right number. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, if they insist on blaming, 

should make a completely convincing performance. And I think 

it’s a major oversight on their part and it’s just cost them a few 

votes with the academy. They just might have to return the 

Oscars. 

 

In particular, Mr. Speaker, we look forward to the comments 

from the member from Regina Coronation Park who is so 

meticulous with numbers. When he prepares for his remarks in 

this House, I hope he will make sure to straighten this all out. 

Better yet, provide us with an explanation of why he and his 

colleagues made this slip-up in what was otherwise a flawless 

performance of blaming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while this is a flaw in an otherwise flawless 

performance of blaming, this budget has a real, deep flaw when 

it comes to taxes. If the members opposite looked to the same 

page that I referred to  and that was page 74, for the benefit 

of the member from Regina South  the government is going 

to receive another $100 million in tax revenue this year over 

last. That works out to a 3.3 per cent increase. And this follows 

last year, a year in which their revenues were 130 million more 

than expected from taxes. That windfall comes on the heels of a 

five-year period in which the total haul from tax revenues to 

this government went up by 33 per cent, or over 600 million a 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you don’t see too many households in this 

province  or businesses, for that matter  who received 33 

per cent more in revenues over the last five years. There aren’t 

too many families that experienced an income windfall last 

year, except perhaps for the Bryant family. There aren’t too 

many families in this province who are expecting an increase in  



596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

income of 3.3 per cent this year either. Certainly not workers at 

SaskTel or the employees this government laid off from the 

Highways department yesterday. 

 

Given these windfall revenues that more than offset a meagre 

$43 million reduction in federal transfer payments, you would 

have to wonder what this government is doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The papers in this budget show once again that we pay the 

highest personal income taxes of almost every province in the 

country. This government offers some petty tax breaks and yet 

is still collecting more money from us. Of that $100 million 

increase in tax revenue this year, a full $62 million is coming 

straight from personal income taxes. 

 

With revenues like this, I would like to know why this 

government cannot engage in real tax reform. What are they 

doing with all of this money? Mr. Speaker, if this government 

would engage in some real form of tax relief, some of the 

mom-and-pop shops that employ people in this province could 

get back to hiring staff. 

 

Instead, this government is happy having 4,000 fewer people 

working this year and keep on collecting more tax money from 

those who are lucky enough to work. They’d rather see more 

taxes being paid than more people working and paying taxes. 

Human dignity is not an issue with the members opposite. It’s 

not a concern, because their friends already have jobs. And as 

we’ve seen in recent weeks, some of them have pretty fat jobs 

too. Mr. Speaker, I know my colleagues will have many more 

concerns to raise on this budget too, and I look forward to their 

comments. 

 

I must say that there is no way I can support this budget. 

There’s no possible way that I could ever support a document 

that blames others and then simply avoids dealing with the real 

problems of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Saskatchewan people deserve better. They deserve politicians 

who will spend their time trying to make their lives a little 

better. The members opposite promised a new day dawning, but 

only delivered the dawning of a new day of disappointment. 

 

The province continues to be plagued by problems of high 

taxes, lack of jobs, underemployment; and rural Saskatchewan 

continues to be under siege. Under these circumstances, there’s 

no way that my constituents want to support this budget, and on 

their behalf, I will be voting against it. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, bearing in mind Beauchesne’s, section 168, which 

states in part: 

 

Reflections upon the character or actions of the Speaker 

may be punished, as breaches of privilege. 

 

And recognizing that it has been some time since your election  

to the position of Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I must tell you that this 

is my first opportunity to enter into debate since that election 

and I do hope that it’s appropriate for me to  and that it’s still 

in order for me  to congratulate you publicly on your election 

and to say some kind words in this regard. 

 

I might add that I did say some kind words, Mr. Speaker, to the 

media the day that you were elected, although I wasn’t able to 

do it to the House. But the media, being what they are, choose 

to ignore kind words and choose to insert other words if such 

are said. I didn’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since your election you have shown us your 

excellent command of the Chair. This is no surprise, especially 

for those of us in the NDP caucus who, since your election in 

1988 as caucus Chair, have seen firsthand the qualities that 

made you an excellent Chair of our caucus and will make you 

an excellent Speaker. 

 

You showed a strong knowledge of the parliamentary process. 

You displayed great patience. I might say you were also 

appropriately impatient and kept the process going. You are 

attentive, you are firm, and you blended this with the right 

amount of humour, and your rulings were wise. 

 

Now that’s not to say that I agreed totally with the way you 

handled everything. For example, I found the daily two-bits and 

a haircut tattoo just a little bit too much for my liking. I would 

have preferred a nice, contemplative Gregorian chant myself. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, please accept my sincere congratulations 

and my best wishes. 

 

I also want to congratulate the Deputy Speaker, the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. I know him as a member who is keenly 

interested in the parliamentary process and I am also confident 

that he will do a good job in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

I also want to recognize and congratulate our new 

Sergeant-at-Arms, Patrick Shaw, on his appointment. And I’m 

pleased to see the return of the same Table officers as we had 

last year, Mr. Speaker. Given Saskatchewan history of training 

Table officers and then to see these Table officers moving on to 

other jurisdictions, one never knows what one might find at the 

beginning of the session. But I’m pleased to see that we have 

stability in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to extend my congratulations to all members and I 

look forward to working with them. I especially welcome the 

new members. I’m impressed by their commitment to the 

legislative process. I was impressed by their contributions that 

I’ve seen so far. I’ve read all of their speeches in the throne 

speech debate; some were excellent, some were less so. 

 

I was very interested to, as an example, to listen to the remarks 

by the member for Arm River during the throne speech debate, 

where he gave us a chronology of the members that had been 

elected to serve the people in that riding since 1905. I found 

that very interesting. 

 

And I might say that I was also touched by his kind comments  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

 

by the immediate previous member for Arm River, Gerald 

Muirhead. I know that it’s a fact of life that we tend to emulate 

the media and move as packs; that when someone is down to 

think negatively of them. So therefore I was touched that he 

would have some kind words to say about the previous member 

for Arm River. And I appreciated that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the people of Regina Victoria 

for their support in the last election. I don’t want to get into a 

detailed description at this point of Regina Victoria. I might say 

that it’s primarily a place of modest homes. It was the first 

home for many people from Europe who moved to Canada to 

seek better opportunities, and hence parts of Regina Victoria 

was graced in the past with names such as German Town; 

names such as Garlic Flats. Those are names that are politically 

incorrect now, but those were the names that reflected, in those 

days, the part of town that I represent. 

 

This is a part of Regina that has modest homes, but I might say, 

these are people with immodest hopes and immodest dreams. 

These are people that have worked hard to create opportunities 

for their children. They value hard work. They also value 

education. And it’s a privilege to represent the people of Regina 

Victoria, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in a world of change. Now it may be trite 

to say that because it’s been said so many times. But 

nevertheless it’s true that we live in a world of change, and it’s 

change that impacts heavily on Saskatchewan. 

 

(1115) 

 

Saskatchewan is not an island, but Saskatchewan especially is 

very dependent on the world outside. Saskatchewan is almost 

totally dependent on trade. Saskatchewan produces farm 

produce by some of the most efficient farmers, if not the most 

efficient farmers, in the world. We export minerals. We also 

export much of what is manufactured in Saskatchewan. This is 

not a consumer economy; this is an export economy. And as 

such, when changes sweep the world, these changes impact 

Saskatchewan much more so than it might other jurisdictions. 

Other jurisdictions might be able to shield their people more 

effectively against change than we are able to do. 

 

Now change also creates opportunities, Mr. Speaker. I met with 

a friend of mine a few weeks ago who does a fair amount of 

work with agricultural organizations in exploring future trends, 

and he was telling me that in the last 10 years, as an example, 

the world has seen the introduction of 400 million new 

television sets. And one might ask, well what impact could that 

possibly have on Saskatchewan, except that these television sets 

also provide programing to many parts of the world which is 

North American programing. 

 

So we see the evolution of what some would call American 

cultural imperialism. We also see a strong trend towards the 

world accepting North American consumer trends, and 

therefore we see in isolated villages children wearing “No Fear” 

T-shirts, or wanting “No Fear” T-shirts, wearing the Nike shoes. 

 

We also see, interestingly enough for Saskatchewan, much 

more of an interest in beef products because they want 

McDonald’s hamburgers. We also see much more of an up-take 

in grain products. Sri Lanka is an example where the 

middle-class is growing, and there is economic growth to 6 per 

cent a year. I know that the flour mill which has served that 

country over the years has now reached capacity, and the 

country needs a new flour mill. Why? Because of changes in 

consumer trends in that country. And that has a major impact on 

exporting provinces like Saskatchewan. So in that sense, change 

is positive for us. 

 

Also see change . . . I read the other day that satellite 

technology has been evolved to the point where farmers can 

now use satellite technology to enable them to do something 

called precision farming. That is to say, they will be able to use 

the right amount of fertilizer in the right spot using satellite 

technology. 

 

The next thing you’ll know, they’ll be able to use global 

positioning to drive their tractors while they sit in the house and 

operate the tractor with a computer by remote control. I suspect 

that too will have some major bearing on farm size and 

structure of Saskatchewan. 

 

But nevertheless, change is around us. Change affects us. 

Change is fast paced. And change can also be very unsettling, 

Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan. It can also be 

very positive. 

 

For example, during the election campaign I was interested to 

meet a woman on the doorstep who had a patch over her eye, 

and I asked her what had happened. This is an elderly woman. 

She said, well I just had cataract surgery. And I said, well were 

you in the hospital long? She said, no. I went this morning. 

 

This morning! Yes, she said. I went this morning, and it’s much 

different than when I was a nurse and you had to go to the 

hospital when you had cataract surgery and you had to be 

immobilized in a hospital bed for a week — immobilized for a 

week so that the surgery had a change of being successful. Now 

cataract surgery can be done on an out-patient basis. 

 

This is tremendous news and this is good news if you’re having 

cataract surgery. But it’s unsettling for people that work in the 

institutions in Saskatchewan. It’s unsettling for those who work 

in the health care sector because that kind of technological 

change and that kind of change in medical technology then also 

implies other changes in the institutions. So therefore change 

can be good but change can also be very unsettling. 

 

As we move forward into the 21st century, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to make sure that we deal appropriately with change; that 

we set to rest concerns and anxieties about change and how it 

will affect us. Mr. Speaker, that is why I’m pleased to support 

the budget, because the budget provides stability for today and I 

see that it provides hope for a better century ahead, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked about stability . . . 

 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I hesitate to interrupt the member 

from Regina Victoria. I would, however, seek leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I’m pleased to 

introduce to the legislature, to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

legislature, some distinguished visitors from China. 

 

I have not had the opportunity to meet these people before and 

I’m relying on some notes, so to the extent that this information 

may be in error, I apologize. 

 

We have visiting with us, and I’m going here from right to left, 

I think, Dr. Hsieh, who I think is well known to many people at 

the University of Regina. With him is Xiang Naiming, who is 

vice-president and associate professor of the Kunming 

University of Science and Technology. With him as well is 

Huang Qingmei, who is vice-president and professor of the 

Southern Institute of Metallurgy. 

 

And with him as well is Dr. Sun Zongqi, who is with the China 

National Non-Ferrous Metals Industrial Corporation. Also, I’m 

told is, Chen Dake, who is with the Guilin College of 

Engineering. It is part of an education delegation who are here 

to develop a training program through the University of Regina. 

 

I am told that Dr. Sun is the head of the education bureau; there 

are 10 universities and colleges. I found when I was in China 

that the statistics are quite impressive for someone who lives in 

a province with a population of only a million people. 

 

The metallurgy industry that we . . . the industry in that part of 

China has 1.2 million employees and there are 1,700 mines, and 

this is only a part of China. They’ve come to Regina. One of the 

things I discovered when I was in China was that there’s a lot of 

interest in partnering with Saskatchewan in developing 

educational programs. And I think the University of Regina, Dr. 

Hsieh will confirm this, is equally interested. They have much 

to teach us; we have something we might teach them. 

 

So I welcome our distinguished visitors here and ask them to 

rise. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  And would hope that they would . . . 

they’ll find their visit useful. I’m going to try this in Mandarin; 

we’ll see how it goes: bukiqi. There, I think I got it. Good. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  With leave, to introduce guests as well. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you. On 

behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to extend a 

sincere welcome to our guests from China, and I hope that your 

visits and your meetings prove to be very productive. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

support the budget because the budget provides two important 

considerations for Saskatchewan people. The first is stability; 

secondly is hope. 

 

This budget again is a surplus budget; there is no deficit. That is 

a sign of stability. That gives people some hope that there will 

be stability in the future; that there will be continued stability in 

the province’s finances. To have two surplus budgets in a row 

is no small feat in Saskatchewan, given our recent history. So I 

think that’s a strong sign of stability in our finances. 

 

Also there are no tax increases. That too is a sign of stability. In 

fact we are continuing with tax decreases which were 

announced previously. Those too are important signs of 

stability. 

 

We have also continued funding this year, Mr. Speaker, for the 

vital programs offered by the province in the areas of health, 

education, and social services, notwithstanding federal cuts in 

transfer payments in the magnitude of approximately $100 

million. The province will continue to provide funding for those 

areas now that the federal government has made it clear that it 

wants to reduce funding for education, health, and social 

services, and it’s in that area that the federal government has 

cut, and cut massively, in its budget. That created massive 

uncertainty for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Nevertheless, the provincial government has seen fit to 

back-fill, or to ensure that funding is provided for those 

important programs in Saskatchewan, notwithstanding the 

actions of the federal government. So again that is evidence of 

stability, which is much needed in Saskatchewan. 

 

Stability is needed by Saskatchewan people so they can make 

their own decisions about their own future. And they need to 

have stability because if there is no stability it becomes difficult 

for people to plan for their futures. It’s hard for them to make 

personal decisions about where they should go. If they don’t 

know what the tax load is going to be in the future, how can 

they make decisions about spending money, as an example. 

This budget provides an important element of stability. 



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

 

It also provides a very important element of stability for the 

business sector in Saskatchewan. The business sector cannot 

operate effectively if a government is lurching one way one day, 

lurching the other way the next day; one day running deficits, 

the next day running deficits. That then provides uncertainty 

about what the government may have to do in the future in 

order to correct those deficits. 

 

And I want to, and I’m not often inclined, to quote the former 

premier of Saskatchewan, Grant Devine. But it was Grant 

Devine who at one time in a gem of wisdom, offered us the 

following. And he said that you know when you run deficits, 

it’s . . . what you’re doing is that you’re deferring taxes. I think 

this is before he was elected, Mr. Speaker. He said that if you 

run deficits, you’re in a sense deferring taxes. 

 

Well we ran deficits for a number of years; we were deferring 

taxes. This creates great uncertainty on the part of business 

people about what their future holds in this jurisdiction. How 

can you make a business plan? How can you look to the future 

as to what your costs will be, at least in the area of taxes, if 

there is this uncertainty hanging over you. 

 

And so in this sense again this budget affirms stability in 

Saskatchewan. I think that’s good for the business sector. This 

allows the business sector to be able to make informed choices 

about the future and what the future holds in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think it’s also an important signal to the financial community 

and we should not underestimate this, given Saskatchewan’s 

credit rating as it has evolved over the years. I think that we 

need at all times to assure the financial community, those who 

make decisions about borrowing and loans to the province, that 

in fact we have a stable administration, we have a stable fiscal 

policy. That this is a good place for lenders to loan their money 

and that we are worthy of solid credit ratings  perhaps an 

increase or an upgrade in our credit ratings  and therefore a 

decrease in our interest payments. 

 

So from that point of view  the budget  I support it. It 

provides important elements of stability  stability that is 

much needed in Saskatchewan given very recent tumultuous 

times in our province. 

 

The budget also provides hope. The budget, importantly, sets 

the stage for continued reduction in Saskatchewan’s debt. It 

proposes that, as opposed to a $14.9 billion debt in 1994, this 

debt will be reduced by the year 2000 to $12.5 billion and that’s 

a . . . as opposed to being 68.3 per cent of the gross domestic 

product, which is a reflection of our ability to repay debt of 

68.3, it’s a reduction to 44.3 by the year 2000. Or to put it in 

terms that the public might easier understand, as opposed to 

being $14,700 per capita it will be reduced to $12,200 per 

capita. 

 

(1130) 

 

It’s the debt that is one of the great destabilizing factors that 

Saskatchewan has to contend with. We saw a tremendous 

acceleration of the debt that the taxpayers must support during 

the 1980s, and as the debt increased, our interest payments that  

we need to make on that debt increased tremendously, and so 

that any solid plan to reduce the debt and thereby also to reduce 

the interest payments that are expected of Saskatchewan people 

is a sign of hope for the future  hope that fewer of their tax 

dollars are going out of Saskatchewan, hope that more of their 

tax dollars will be staying here in Saskatchewan, and hope that 

their children will not have to bear the full, crushing burden of 

the debt load that we inherited in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s also hope in this budget when I look at the targeted 

initiatives to encourage business expansion. This provides hope 

that the economy in Saskatchewan will continue to grow. The 

Minister of Finance earlier today related figures by Nesbitt 

Burns which indicated that the Saskatchewan economy is 

projected in 1996 to grow strongly. I think there are many other 

factors that one can point to, especially in the area of the wheat 

economy, which will suggest that the economy will prove to be 

strong in 1996 and into the future. 

 

But there are also targeted initiatives in the budget which I think 

will further encourage business expansion in Saskatchewan. For 

example, I’m pleased to see that there is a $7 million capital 

investment for Innovation Place in Saskatoon to encourage 

agriculture biotech research. I think that the $7 million capital 

investment will initially create or help to create 125 high-tech 

jobs and hopefully many more spin-off jobs down the road. 

 

But this is a sure sign and a certain sign by the provincial 

government that it wants to invest in the future and a future that 

provides a greater variety of opportunities for young people in 

the job market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this $7 million commitment for 

Saskatoon is good for Saskatoon and it’s good for the province. 

And I don’t mind saying that I hope equally that at some future 

time it will be appropriate for the provincial government to 

invest in high-tech developments in Regina, especially in the 

area of information technology, and that that too might help to 

create more job opportunities in high-tech sectors for 

Saskatchewan young people. That, I think, would be a prudent 

investment and good for Regina, but also good for all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So in this case, this is an investment that’s good for Saskatoon 

and good for all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that there are those that are given to 

boasting about their home towns and that’s the point of view 

that they always put forward, that they’re given to braggadocio. 

Personally, I find that kind of boasting rather immature and I’m 

not given to that myself. And I believe in this case, that this 

investment for Saskatoon is a good investment for all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m also pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that there is a commitment 

by the government to provide, I think, $238 million, almost a 

quarter of a billion dollars, over the next four years to diversify 

and strengthen agriculture in a number of important areas. This 

is what we need to do to give Saskatchewan producers the help 

they need to be able to make informed choices about their  



600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

decisions and their investments in agriculture and to provide for 

a more productive farm economy. 

 

Some of the other particular details  there’s a continuation in 

the reduction to the corporate income tax on manufacturing and 

processing, Mr. Speaker, on profits in that area, from 17 per 

cent to as low as 10 per cent, and again, dependent on the 

business activity and new jobs being located in Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s also a continuation of the reduction in the aviation fuel 

tax which resulted last year in an 80 per cent increase in 

business for Saskatchewan-based fuel dealers this year . . . or 

last year, as well as creation of new jobs. 

 

There’s also beginning this year . . . or next year on January 1, 

1997 improved tax treatment for Saskatchewan-based 

inter-jurisdictional truckers by ensuring that all 

inter-jurisdictional truckers follow the same tax rules. And this 

should stimulate repairs and equipment sales within the 

province and again lead to more jobs. 

 

So in that sense I see the budget being a hopeful document; one 

that will encourage job growth, provides hope for our young 

people that there will in fact be jobs in Saskatchewan when they 

graduate from the institutes and universities they attend. 

 

There’s also, in another area, I think, hope for Saskatchewan 

people in the area of social programs. By managing prudently to 

ensure the continuation of vital government programs in health 

care, education, social services, we give people hope, Mr. 

Speaker, hope that  for example, in the area of health care  

we will continue to be there or that health care will continue to 

be there when Saskatchewan people need health care; that they 

know that health care will continue in the future to be a right for 

them as opposed to simply being a privilege, as some provinces 

are indicating they want health care to be; that there is some 

hope in the future that health care will continue to be universal, 

that it will be accessible, and that it will be publicly funded. 

 

So in those two important areas, Mr. Speaker, I support the 

budget because, on the one hand, it provides important stability 

after a decade of instability created by rather inconsistent and 

harmful fiscal policies. And it also provides hope for the future 

as we move forward into the 21st century, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a few moments to also review 

what the other parties in Saskatchewan have to say about fiscal 

policy. I think our track record is clear over these last few years 

as to how we propose to govern the public’s finances. But I 

think we also need to look at what the opposition might have to 

say, what their approach might be to public finances, what their 

concept of fiscal policy might be, what their stand is on the 

major financial issues of the day. 

 

Now it’s hard to tell from their speeches. It’s not the nature of 

the opposition to propose solutions; it’s the nature of the 

opposition to oppose what it is that the government is doing and 

to find fault with anything and everything that the government 

is doing. So it’s hard to tell from their speeches. 

 

Now if you were to take their speeches and look at them and 

what they say, you would see that the opposition stand for 

lower taxes, higher spending; at least they’ve given us evidence 

of that. They want higher spending on highways. They want 

more spending in the area of crop insurance because they want 

offices maintained where they’re not needed. They wanted 

more spending in the areas of GRIP. Every day they remind us. 

They want more spending in certain areas of health care to keep 

institutions such as the Plains open. They also stand of course 

for surplus budgets. It would be wrong of any opposition party 

now to say that they support deficits, even though the 

Conservatives did support that approach. And of course they 

stand for massive debt reduction. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 

they have no coherent policy. They are a mass of contradictions 

in terms of what they say. 

 

But surely there must be something, there must be something, 

Mr. Speaker, that sets them apart from the government or, for 

that matter, that sets them apart from each other. There must be 

some coherent approach in the things that they say. There must 

be some congruent philosophy that comes out of the statements 

that they make, out of the speeches that they’ve made in this 

House. 

 

And I say yes, there is something. If you listen very, very 

carefully to the speeches made by the members opposite, if you 

read very carefully the speeches that they’ve made, if you read 

very carefully the campaign platforms that they campaigned on 

in the last election, the odd hint does get out. It’s like Leonard 

Cohen once said in a song. He said something like, there’s a 

crack in everything; that’s how the light gets in. 

 

So if you look hard enough, there is a crack, Mr. Speaker, the 

light does get in, and we are able to see what it is that they stand 

for in the areas of governing or administrating the public’s 

finances. 

 

First let me deal with the Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker. The 

Conservative Party has a strong tradition in Saskatchewan of 

governing in the recent past. This is a party, under the former 

premier of Grant Devine, that gave new meaning to the word 

spendthrift. This was a government that was characterized by 

extravagance and wasteful spending, and also characterized by 

some other questionable activities, but I won’t get into that, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m very mindful of the sub judice conventions that 

are found in the rules of order and that govern our speeches 

here in the House. So I don’t want to get into that part of it. 

 

But it is fair to say that the PCs (Progressive Conservative) 

financially  financially  in the areas of fiscal policy were a 

government that started badly and went downhill thereafter. 

This is a government that started with the philosophy as 

expounded by that financial wizard from Kindersley, one Bob 

Andrew, who read a book on stimulative deficits and decided 

that this was the course for Saskatchewan to go. And in his very 

first budget offered Saskatchewan a deficit and successive 

Finance ministers under the Tories kept it going ever since. 

 

They started us on a track to successive deficits and annual 

borrowing to make ends meet. It was a bizarre record of 

profligacy unmatched anywhere in Canada and perhaps in the  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

 

Commonwealth. I’ve yet to hear of the horror stories inflicted 

on Saskatchewan from anywhere else in the Commonwealth, 

Mr. Speaker. I think the Globe and Mail had it right when they 

commented on the Conservative government of Grant Devine 

and said something to the effect that they were arguably, 

arguably the worst government ever seen in Canada. 

 

This is a record so unlike that of Douglas, Lloyd, Thatcher  

even Thatcher, yes Thatcher  and Blakeney, all premiers who 

believed in a fiscal policy that was sustainable and in managing 

the public’s finances in a way that meant that you didn’t borrow 

to make ends meet, that you provided important elements of 

stability. And Ross Thatcher, like the CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) and the NDP premiers, believed in 

balanced budgets. And in that sense, he had a very good record 

for Saskatchewan, unlike the PCs. But this is the track record of 

the PCs opposite we’re dealing with, a record I don’t think that 

Saskatchewan people will ever forget and a record I think that 

we should make sure that they must never forget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the inheritors, the inheritors of that record, the current PC 

caucus or, as I know them, the triple R party, the triple R party, 

Mr. Speaker. . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  What’s that? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Rural right-wing rump party, Mr. 

Speaker, the inheritors of the Devine record. And it’s amazing 

that they’re still around. I give them credit for that. 

 

This current PC caucus has done everything that it can within 

its power in the last number of years to try and dissociate 

themselves from the Devine record. Wasn’t it just this last year 

also that they held a provincial convention to see if they should 

dissociate themselves from the federal PCs, to dissociate 

themselves from the record of Brian Mulroney, and I guess 

from the record of John Diefenbaker and others? 

 

But this is of course hard to do. Four out of the five, I must 

remind the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, ran in 1991 on the Devine 

PC record. They ran on the Devine PC platform. And they can 

say all they want about, well we weren’t there; we didn’t make 

those decisions; we were new. They ran on that record in 1991 

in strong support, proudly in support, of Grant Devine. But 

they’re trying very hard to change, to reform themselves if you 

like, trying very hard to reform themselves. 

 

And it’s instructive how they do that, Mr. Speaker. One, I see 

that they focus attention on a few highly emotive issues, issues 

that have very little in the way of financial consequences but 

push the right emotional buttons  issues like taxation for 

status Indians, issues such as welfare abuse, and lately, issues 

such as MLA pay and pensions. I can’t think of three issues that 

have stronger emotional content. But when you examine them, 

financially speaking, they are not as significant as many other 

issues, but those issues seem to be irrelevant for the PCs, Mr. 

Speaker. What they do is they pick targets that create emotional 

reactions and in this way try to form an association between 

themselves and fiscal prudence. 

 

I was also amused, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday we saw a new  

tact by the PC Party where the leader of the PC Party, the 

member for Kindersley, tried to . . . well he didn’t try, gave 

some faint praise for the budget in his comments in his 

immediate post-budget reaction. He gave the Finance minister 

and gave the NDP government some faint praise of what we 

had done in the budget. And I think that this might be a new 

tact on their part that if they say good things about our 

government, which has a very good track record in financial 

matters, that by associating themselves with us, that some of it 

might rub off on them and therefore seem as credible in the 

financial sense. 

 

(1145) 

 

Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, they have worked hard, and I say 

with some success. That’s why they still have five members in 

this House, and they’re not totally gone to oblivion. I think it’s 

a credit to their political ingenuity. And perhaps . . . I know that 

there is some discussion about the Leader of the Third Party, 

the PC Party, about just what kind of academic background he 

did have. Some said it was in welding. Was it perhaps in social 

engineering or political engineering, Mr. Speaker, that has led 

them to this state where they still have five members in the 

House? But they will never rid themselves of the legacy of the 

Devine administration, Mr. Speaker, and that disastrous time in 

our history. 

 

Now one of the reasons that they will never be able to rid 

themselves of that legacy is their approach of picking on the 

weak. Are there any weaker groups in Saskatchewan society 

than first nations people? Are there any weaker groups in 

Saskatchewan society but those that have to depend on welfare? 

Are there weaker groups that you can name? But these are the 

targets by the Tories; these are the targets. 

 

And in that way, they follow exactly the same approach 

followed by Grant Devine which was the approach of divide 

and conquer, that you find certain targets, that you pick on them 

hoping that by picking on those targets that you can get the 

mass of people behind you on strong emotional issues. This was 

an approach of divide and conquer and ultimately, ultimately 

led to the demise of the Devine government. 

 

But the present PC caucus, in following in the footsteps in 

Devine, in those kinds of tactics, I think will serve to remind 

people of the Devine administration. So it’s obvious that over 

time that the PC caucus has to find another approach if they 

ever want to be again relevant to the people of Saskatchewan. 

It’s not enough to pick on the poor and to pick on the weak and 

hope that somehow that will catapult you to strong support on 

the part of the majority of the people. 

 

To get the support of the majority of the people, you need to 

form bridges between groups in society. You need to form 

bridges between people in society if you want the majority of 

the people to support you. You can’t follow the approach that 

they’re following now and which reminds us of the Devine 

administration. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that they will not be 

able to rid themselves of the Devine monkey on their backs is  



602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

that every so once in awhile they slip up. They just slip up, 

notwithstanding their best effort and all of their discipline to 

say things in a way that will never, never, never again remind us 

of the profligacy of the Devine administration. Every once in 

awhile they slip up. They let loose with something, a little gem 

that just serves to remind us of where they’ve come from. 

 

Now a prime example of that is the member for Moosomin, Mr. 

Speaker, who, when the issue of Cameco shares was first raised 

in the public and there was some discussion about the 

government selling off Cameco shares and what should be done 

with the proceeds of those shares, the member for Moosomin 

took the approach that you should sell a few shares every year 

to make ends meet. 

 

But if you sell a few shares this year, then you could use the 

proceeds from that to maintain your current levels of spending, 

and that next year you would do the same thing again, and so on 

and so on. In fact he said, and I quote from the Leader-Post; he 

said . . . and this is the member for Moosomin He said, quote: 

 

Toth said, the government would only have to sell 

one-tenth of its Cameco shares to make up the $100 

million shortfall in federal transfer payments. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, this is we know of course very, very, 

very incorrect thinking in the current fiscal climate. This is 

simply not the way to go. And I think the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald said it best a few days later when they said that using 

the proceeds of a sale of assets to maintain day-to-day spending 

would work for a year or two but cannot be sustained. 

 

And this is why the government has proposed . and that is 

why other spokespersons in the oppositions have taken the 

approach  that if you’re going to sell off assets, those assets 

should be used to lower your debt. And as you lower your debt, 

then you lower your interest payments forever. And that this is a 

far more sustainable option for the disposition of assets and the 

proceeds that come from the disposition of those assets. 

 

But there you had it. You had a little slip-up by the member for 

Moosomin who served to remind us of the philosophy that 

governed the Devine administration, and that is that if you’ve 

got a problem today, just borrow the money and make ends 

meet the best you can. Worry about tomorrow some other day. 

These are not people that were particularly future oriented. And 

I think that it’s to their credit that a few days later the member 

from Moosomin was completely contradicted by his own 

leader, the Leader of the Third Party who said oh no, no, no, no. 

For sure, any proceeds from the disposition of those assets must 

go to debt reduction, and clearly contradicting his member. 

 

They must look upon him  and remembering that the member 

from Moosomin was elected in 1986 and actually served in the 

Devine administration  he must look upon him as a bit of an 

odd relative or something like that, somebody that you shuffle 

off to the side and you don’t haul out when there’s important 

financial issues that have to be dealt with. He’s a bit 

embarrassing that way for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s just not the member from Moosomin himself that has 

slipped up. The PC leader himself slipped up one day in the 

heat of a moment in debate here in the legislature. And it just 

came out. He blurted it out, a little faux pas, a very telling 

comment, and I refer members to March 4, Hansard or his 

comments on March 4 when the Leader of the Opposition was 

responding to the Speech from the Throne and he said on page 

51 . . . he was talking about the Premier’s efforts in 1991, 

following the provincial election, to obtain federal support for 

agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

And if members will remember, those are years when there was 

still a great deal of uncertainly in the agricultural sector. Many 

farmers were facing crushing debt loads which were impacting 

on their farm operations. There was grave concern about the 

future of agriculture in Saskatchewan, and the Premier 

undertook to go to Ottawa to put the case for Saskatchewan 

farmers and to remind the government of the day that 

agriculture is a very important industry in terms of export 

earnings for all of Canada and therefore deserved federal 

support, and it shouldn’t simply be left to the provinces. So the 

Premier went to Ottawa with a number of producers and 

representative agricultural groups to press the point with the 

federal government. 

 

And the Leader of the Opposition talked about this . . . or not 

the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader the Third Party, the 

leader of the PC Party, my apologies to the official opposition 

for that little slip-up. But he talked about the Premier’s efforts 

to obtain federal support for agriculture. 

 

And he said: 

 

Well I recall after the election in 1991, the Premier loaded 

up a plane of people, said he was going to go down to 

Ottawa and he was going to grab some money away from 

them and bring it back and distribute it to farmers. 

 

Now this is putting it in his own words about the Premier’s 

effort to press the point about the need for federal involvement 

in agricultural support. He puts it in his own words that the 

Premier was going to go and get money for the farmers. 

 

Then he goes on to say: “And what did we get?” What did we 

get? He said, we. “We didn’t get one dime from you people 

. . .” We. We didn’t get one dime. We? Who’s we? The 

members of the PC caucus, that they didn’t get a dime to put in 

their pockets? Is this not the classic Conservative problem of 

inability to distinguish, inability to distinguish between public 

finance and your personal pocketbook? This is the problem that 

was being expounded by the member for Kindersley, the Leader 

of the Third Party: an inability to differentiate between the 

public’s business and the public purse and personal pursuits 

and the personal pocketbooks. 

 

We, we  not the farmers of Saskatchewan, not the people of 

Saskatchewan but “we didn’t get one dime”. We didn’t get one 

dime. Like some lobby group on the floor of the legislature, 

well we didn’t get anything. An inability to distinguish between 

the public purse, between public policy and private pursuits  

the classic Tory problem. 



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

 

And it slipped out that day, Mr. Speaker, and it’ll slip out again 

because they might change their spots, but we still know them 

for what they are, Mr. Speaker. And you’ll see it again. It’ll be 

kind of like this comet, Hyakutake’s comet. You know, a little 

faint and you’re not quite clear what it is. But when you see it, 

you know it for what it is. That’s what it is, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

the real PC disease: the inability to distinguish. 

 

These are also the people that said at one time that deficits are 

good. Deficits are good as long as you put money in your own 

pocket. These are the people that now say deficits are bad if I 

have to pay for the deficits that were incurred to put money in 

my pocket. And these are the people that say government 

spending is good if I get benefit from the government spending. 

But government spending is now bad if I have to pay for the 

government spending that benefit me in the first place. That’s 

the real PC disease: an ingrained selfishness, an inability to 

consider the public good, Mr. Speaker. 

 

No, I don’t think we’re going to see the PCs again in my 

lifetime as a real significant force in Saskatchewan. These are 

not people that have the ability to appeal to all of the people of 

Saskatchewan. This is a rump party, and they’re destined to stay 

as that for some time to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just say a few words about the approach 

of the official opposition and their approach to public finance, 

to fiscal policy. And I might say that this is a group that’s 

somewhat more difficult to figure out. This is not a group that 

has a track record in recent years. I did mention earlier the 

Thatcher years and the fiscal policy of premier Thatcher in the 

‘60s. But since that time, we have not seen any significant 

Liberal force in Saskatchewan, and so it’s difficult to figure out 

just where they stand. 

 

Now the only real document we have that might help us discern 

what it is that their position is on the significant public . . . the 

management of the public’s finances is their campaign 

document from the last election, something called Restoring 

Health to Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Liberal action plan 

for lower taxes, better health care, more jobs, smaller 

government. This is the only real evidence we have of what 

their approach is to public financing. And I tell you the 

centrepiece of this document is a proposal by them to lower the 

sales tax from 9 per cent, 9 per cent which it is currently, to 5 

per cent. And they say that you could handle this because 

lowering the sales tax in that way would create such an 

economic boom in Saskatchewan of 8 per cent economic 

growth every year, that the economic growth would provide 

such revenues so as to make up for the revenues that you lose 

by cutting the sales tax. Now that was their approach. 

 

It is an understatement to say that this proposal by theirs raised 

some eyebrows, an understatement. It is more appropriate to say 

that this is a proposal that was laughed at by anybody that ever 

had any common sense and any knowledge of economics, with 

the exception of the techno-weenies and the propeller heads that 

they had to help them write this in the first . . . (inaudible) . . . 

Mr. Speaker. But the rest of anybody that was reputable laughed 

at it. This was economic hocus-pocus. It was unworkable. This 

was a non-starter. This was DOA, dead on  

arrival, as soon as it came out, very dead on arrival. But that’s 

what we have in trying to discern their plan or at least their 

approach to public finance. 

 

But is it yours? I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, whose plan this is 

because this is the plan that came forward under their leader 

who is now the independent Liberal member for Saskatoon 

Greystone who was then the Liberal leader. And throughout the 

document, this campaign platform, it mentions her. And they 

use the words, her name and Liberal interchangeably. 

 

So I’m not sure whose document this is. Is it her platform? Or 

is this the platform of the official opposition? I don’t know. Put 

up your hands. Whose is it? Who wants to claim ownership of 

this document? Who wants it? Whose is this? Is this the 

platform of the member for Saskatoon Greystone? Or is this the 

official platform of the members of the official opposition? 

Somebody put up your hands and let us know who owns this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one’s putting up their hands. No one’s 

claiming any ownership of that document and for very good 

reason, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the election there has been very little to 

indicate the overall approach of the official opposition to 

questions of fiscal policy. There was a little glimmer of 

something one day when the member for Thunder Creek  

who I understand is their finance spokesperson and was the 

person who responded to the Speech from the Throne  there 

was a little glimmer of something one day when there was an 

article in the Leader-Post on WCB (Workers’ Compensation 

Board) rates to rise. And business, opposition parties crying 

foul. There was criticism of a proposal by the Workers’ 

Compensation Board to increase rates. And it was very 

instructive to read the comments by the member for Thunder 

Creek at that point, who said . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  What did he say? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well the member from Thunder Creek 

said, and I quote from the article: 

 

Liberal Gerard Aldridge said no increase should be 

permitted as long as there is a surplus in the WCB’s injury 

fund. 

 

So he’s saying that as long as there is a surplus in things, you 

should never increase rates. As long as there’s a surplus, you 

should never restructure to ensure future sustainability. So it’s 

kind of like the old Tory approach that if you’ve got it, spend it. 

And then when you don’t got it, you borrow it. And when you 

can’t borrow it, you sell off what you’ve got. 

 

Now I saw in that article, I saw in that article, Mr. Speaker, just 

a glimmer, a glimmer of similarities between the official 

opposition and the old Tory approach. If you’ve got it, spend it, 

and if you don’t have it, borrow it. Don’t try and restructure. 

Don’t try and restructure it to ensure future sustainability. Don’t 

try and restructure to ensure stability and to ensure hope. No,  



604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

you just spend what you’ve got, Mr. Speaker, so kind of like the 

PCs in that way. 

 

And that was the first glimmer that we had of some congruent, 

coherent fiscal policy on their part. Other than that, it’s just 

simply to criticize the government. But in this way, he was 

being proactive. He said: no, I’m not just going to criticize you 

for what you’re doing; this is what you should do. Well if that’s 

the approach, then, boy, I think Saskatchewan people had better 

watch out because it’s more of the same old thing that they had 

under the Devine PCs. 

 

But it’s hard to figure out what they stand for, Mr. Speaker. But 

I do know that they display a tendency for creative figuring. 

And there’s some examples of that. A very recent instance was 

the issue of Crown tendering where there was in a fact even a 

motion before the House which said in part that the Assembly 

demand the government repeal the unfair Crown Construction 

Tendering Agreement which has, since its implementation, cost 

the taxpayers of this province $118 million last year alone. 

 

But the figures that we’ve got from the Crown Investments 

Corporation said that in the period of March until November, 

’95  and the Crown Tendering Agreement came into place in 

March of ’95  from March of ’95 until November of ’95, 

there were 47 projects tendered and awarded under the terms of 

this Crown corporation tendering agreement which states that 

costs taxpayers $118 million. 

 

But the total value of those contracts was $15 million. So I’m 

still trying to figure on how $15 million of contract, you could 

have overruns of $118 million. I just don’t understand, and I 

would commend to the members a sharp pencil, a reliable 

calculator, and some good, old fashioned homework to 

understand the finances of the province. 

 

Another example  no, I better not get into this  is the 

insistence by the member for Thunder Creek that federal 

offloading, the cuts in federal transfers, are really not what they 

seem. He says it’s not $100 million. It’s much less than that 

because you’ve got tax points, tax points that were 

implemented, I think, almost 20 years ago now. 

 

What the federal government of the day said, look, we’re going 

to not only transfer you money to support health, 

post-secondary education and social services; we’re also going 

to lower our taxes by thirteen and a half per cent so that you can 

increase your taxes by thirteen and a half per cent. So therefore 

you also get revenue in that way. And that’s what happened. 

They’d lower their taxes, but only one little problem is that 

since that time the federal government has more than made up 

for that cut in taxes. So what the member is saying, is that well, 

it’s really not that bad. It’s not really $100-plus million in cuts 

in transfer payments you’re experiencing here; it’s only $40 

million and you could increase taxes to realize the rest. 

 

That’s what he’s saying. But these are the same people that say 

we should be reducing taxes. So it’s a bit unclear just where 

they stand. As it was yesterday, as it was yesterday in his 

opening comments and his response to the budget speech, the 

member for Thunder Creek, who is the official spokesperson  

for financial matters for that party and therefore he must put 

some weight in his words and that when he says something we 

must assume, reasonably so, that this represents the position of 

the official opposition. 

 

Where he berated, berated  went up one side of the 

government and down the other side of the government  for 

its job creation record and said this is the worst job creation 

record in all of Canada. This is terrible; this is bad; this is 

wrong; you’ve got to do better; we don’t see anything like this 

in the rest of Canada. He just took a strip off us for our job 

creation record. 

 

It was a scathing attack, a scathing attack. That’s what he said. 

He said, at one point, we had the worst job creation record in 

Canada. This is questionable, by the way, because 

Saskatchewan also has the lowest unemployment rate in 

Canada, but nevertheless we won’t get into that. 

 

But on the other hand, shortly thereafter, shortly thereafter he 

berated the government for what he called a tax increase. He 

said, there is in fact a $100 million tax increase in this budget. 

And what he’s done is that he pointed out that tax revenues this 

year will be $100 million higher than they were last year. Not 

because tax rates have gone up  in fact some tax rates have 

gone down  not because tax rates have gone up, but because 

tax revenues reflect the economy of the province. So that as the 

economy improves and more people work, more people pay 

taxes to the government. 

 

Even though the rates don’t change, the amount of tax revenue 

will increase. As the economy improves, more people will go 

out and spend what it is that they earn. Therefore you will see 

increases in consumer purchases; therefore you will see 

increases in sales tax revenue for the government. 

 

He calls that a tax increase, but it’s not a tax increase. In fact 

what it is is solid evidence of an economy that is strong, an 

economy that is working, and a total contradiction of what he 

said only moments before about an economy that isn’t working, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  This is an official opposition party that 

contradicts itself, that has a propensity for creative figuring, Mr. 

Speaker. Only time will tell just how well they will do and 

whether they’re able to make, launch, some coherent criticism 

of the government on its policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I want to sit down, I want to offer them an 

opportunity. I want to offer the official opposition an 

opportunity to do that  to come forward. And now this is no 

revival meeting, but I want them to . . . to give them an 

opportunity to come forward and to, on a very critical matter  

a very critical matter of public finance, a very critical matter of 

public finance  to state clearly, succinctly, without question, 

where it is that they stand. 

 

And the question I refer to is the GST, the goods and services 

tax. This is an issue that still hangs over us like some cloud.  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

 

This is an issue that is unresolved in Canada and an issue that 

yet may impact Saskatchewan. It is like some cloud that hangs 

over us and creates much uncertainty. It would be helpful if all 

of the members of the House could agree as to how 

Saskatchewan should deal with this critical question of the 

goods and services tax, the GST. 

 

Why is this an issue? Well it kind of dates back to the last 

federal election, Mr. Speaker, when the federal Liberals in the 

run up to the election campaign . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  What did they say? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Well the federal Liberals promised that 

they were going to abolish  they were going to abolish  the 

GST. In fact Sheila Copps, a Liberal candidate . . . Sheila 

Copps I think is a person who is well known to members of the 

Assembly and those in the listening public, who is now the 

Deputy Prime Minister of Canada and a Liberal candidate in 

1993. She said, I’ve already said personally and very directly 

that if the GST is not abolished — abolished — I’ll resign. 

 

I don’t know how clear you can get. I think you’ve got to be 

accountable on the things that you say you’re going to do and 

you have to deliver on them. She said she was going to abolish. 

 

Now also in 1993 another Liberal candidate by the name of 

Jean Chrétien said, we will scrap — scrap — the GST. Okay. 

 

Now abolish means to put an end to the existence or practice of 

something. Scrap means discard as useless. Very clear. Very 

clear. Abolish, scrap, get rid of, never see it again, demise, gone 

to meet its maker, for ever, no longer an imposition on the 

people of Canada. That’s what they said. 

 

But then I guess in the propeller heads that made up the federal 

red policy . . . or the federal red book, they said, a Liberal 

government will replace the GST; not scrap, not abolish, but 

replace, which means to take the place of, succeed, to be 

substituted for, be succeeded or have one’s place filled by 

another, be superseded. That’s what the Liberal policy was in 

1993. 

 

But now of course, now of course, the Liberals are saying 

something else, because they realize the full import of what it 

would be to abolish, scrap the GST, or for that matter, to even 

try and replace the GST. They don’t know what to do. They’re 

panicking. This is a very firm campaign commitment on their 

behalf. 

 

So now they’re saying not that they’re going to abolish or scrap 

or even replace; now they’re saying, what we really meant to 

say all along is that our promise was to harmonize the GST with 

the provincial sales tax  to harmonize. Harmonize means to 

bring into or be in harmony; make or form a pleasing or 

consistent whole. That’s what their platform is now apparently. 

 

And how glibly it just slides off the tongue of the federal 

Finance minister. Oh yes, we want to harmonize our GST. 

That’s a real issue that we have in Canada. We want to 

harmonize the GST with the provincial sales tax. And if only  

these provinces get on board like the way they should, because 

this has been our promise all along, to harmonize. How glibly it 

flies off his tongue. Forget about scrap, abolish, or even 

replace, now the issue seems to be harmonize. 

 

Well the bottom line — and I don’t want to get into this in great 

detail because I’m hoping that the official opposition will pick 

us up on this opportunity to put squarely before the people of 

Saskatchewan their position on this important matter by perhaps 

bringing a motion to this House as to where they stand — there 

is major differences between the provincial sales tax as we 

know it and the GST. 

 

The GST is of course a much broader base. It means that as 

opposed to the current situation where people don’t pay the 

sales tax on restaurant meals, under the GST, they would pay 

the GST on restaurant meals, any number of services; that if 

you have a carpenter to come into the house to install some new 

kitchen cupboards, at this point the carpenter doesn’t charge 

you any provincial sales on his services, but under the GST, 

he’s obliged to also tax you for the services that he provides. 

 

Now the other major difference is that business inputs are 

recognized under the GST and this would . . . if we recognize 

all business inputs in Saskatchewan it would mean that we 

would lose probably about one-half of our current provincial 

sales tax revenues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see the member for Arm River is on his feet and 

I think he wants to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McLane:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1215) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In listening to 

yesterday’s budget and today’s budget reply and support in 

favour, I’ve heard the federal government’s name mentioned 

quite a bit and I just thought it would be interesting that a 

federal member come to visit us today and partake in listening 

to some of the logic. And I’d, through you, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce the member for Souris-Moose 

Mountain, Mr. Bernie Collins, and I’d ask you to welcome him 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen:  Mr. Speaker, I want to extend this  



606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

opportunity . . . and I haven’t discussed this with my colleagues 

but I state this with some degree of certainty that I feel I’m 

comfortable in extending an opportunity to the official 

opposition to put a motion before the House which clearly and 

succinctly states their position on the question of harmonization 

of the PST with the GST. Never mind about abolishing or 

scrapping it, we know that’s kind of gone now, that part of the 

platform is gone. Just tell us where you stand on that critical 

issue. 

 

For that matter, it would be very interesting, very interesting to 

see where the third party, the PCs, stand on this because this 

was the part in 1991 on which most of the current members ran 

 on a program to in fact harmonize the GST with the 

provincial sales tax. But did I get some sense yesterday from the 

question in question period that the Leader of the Third Party, 

the member from Kindersley, the PC Leader, is now having 

some questions about that? 

 

I’m not really clear and I think that it’s appropriate that the 

member for Thunder Creek, as official financial spokesperson, 

puts a motion before the House to make it clear just where it is 

that he and his party stand. Do they agree with Sheila Copps of 

1993, or do they agree with Sheila Copps of today? Do they 

agree with Jean Chrétien of 1993? Do they agree with Paul 

Martin today? Which is it? 

 

We don’t know and I think this provides you with an excellent 

opportunity to make it clear  as opposed to simply criticizing 

this or criticizing that  to make it clear where you actually 

stand for something. 

 

Now I want to extend that opportunity to the members and I 

hope that they’ll pick up on that opportunity and in fact let us 

know where they stand. 

 

Do they agree with the federal members of parliament who are 

panicking like people caught in a fire, running around and 

saying, well if it wasn’t for the Saskatchewan government we’d 

be harmonized by now? Well you bet, you bet. You bet it’s 

because of the provincial government we’re not harmonized by 

now, when you look at some of the impacts of harmonizing — 

that the provincial coffers would lose in excess of $100 million 

a year on top of all the other cuts from Ottawa; that we’re going 

to take some further cuts from Ottawa by harmonizing the GST 

and the impact that it will have on consumers of this province. 

 

I think it was the Finance minister from B.C. (British 

Columbia) who estimated the impact on the average family 

would be something like $400 a year. Now she may be unkind; 

she’s not sort of giving business any credit for any pass-through 

that there might be, you know, on these business inputs. But 

even assuming there’s a 50 per cent pass-through, it still means 

something like a $200 impact on Saskatchewan families every 

year, you know. 

 

So these are significant financial issues, and I think it’s a 

golden opportunity for the Liberals to make it clear where they 

stand. Mr. Speaker, we would like to know where they stand on 

that, and also whether they agree with their Liberal soul 

brothers in Ottawa and the members of parliament for  

Saskatchewan of the Liberal persuasion who are running around 

saying they favour harmonization. I think this is a critical 

financial issue, and we deserve to know where they stand. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before sitting down again I want to just say 

that I support the budget because I think the budget is an 

important document of stability and hope for the 21st century, 

and it deserves the support of the members of the House, as it 

will be supported by the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal 

of pleasure to rise in my place in the House and join the debate 

on the budget speech, particularly after hearing that very 

eloquent and very coherent and comprehensive exposition of 

the budget speech by the member from Regina Victoria. Not 

only did he clearly outline for all the members in this House the 

thrusts, the aims, the objectives of the 1996-97 budget, he also 

very clearly pointed out the paradoxes, inconsistencies, and 

indeed downright incompetence of the members opposite, as 

they run around trotting out tried and true techniques that  

I’m sorry  I don’t believe the people of Saskatchewan will be 

fooled by any longer. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan know that we have a difficult 

financial situation. They’ve known this for some time, even 

before they turfed the Tories out of office. That is indeed the 

reason the Tories got turfed out of office. The people of 

Saskatchewan were fed up with the financial flimflam that we 

saw during the ’80s. The people of Saskatchewan demanded 

that we have fiscal prudence, fiscal responsibility, in this 

province. At the same time they said let’s have compassion. 

Let’s have caring. Let’s maintain our social programs. Let’s not 

have the politics of division and derision that seemed to have 

characterized the debate of the ’80s and the early ‘90s for far 

too long. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

know very clearly what the problems are that beset this 

changing society. The people of Saskatchewan are ready to 

shoulder responsibility and to carry forth, with their heads held 

high, and to create a better future for themselves, their children, 

and their grandchildren. 

 

The Deputy Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Jess:  With leave, to ask permission to introduce guests, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 

Mr. Joe Holden who is sitting up in the Speaker’s gallery. Joe is 

a political activist and long-time, dedicated cooperator from the 

north-west part of the province in the district of Marshall, I 

believe. And I would like to ask all members to join with me in  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

 

welcoming Joe to the session. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I would 

like to join with the member from Redberry Lake in also 

welcoming Mr. Holden to this House. 

 

It is wonderful to see somebody who has dedicated his life to 

the cooperative movement coming to this legislature at this 

time. Because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 

this budget is about  it’s about cooperation. It’s about 

cooperation and compassion and community. Those are the 

themes that the people of Saskatchewan wish their government 

to take forward into the next century. Those are the themes that 

the New Democratic Party wishes to take forward into the new 

century. 

 

And quite frankly, if the members opposite wish to be around 

for the next century, those are the themes that they better start 

listening to and acting on. It is no longer the politics of division. 

I say to the members opposite, it is time they recognized that 

cooperation is the vehicle that will take us into the 21st century 

— cooperation, not competition. It is compassion that will take 

us forward into the 21st century — compassion, not mean-

spirited charity. It is community that will take us forward into 

the 21st century, not rugged individualism. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is time, and this government has 

heard it very clearly, that all of us in this legislature listen to the 

people of Saskatchewan and find ways to transform their ideals 

 their ideals of cooperation, community and compassion  

into a workable blueprint that will move us away from blueprint 

state socialism and from chaotic and anarchic rugged 

individualism and will move us forward into the 21st century 

with our heads held high. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday I listened with considerable 

pride to the Minister of Finance as she presented the budget 

speech in this House. I listened with pride to know that we have 

established a record in this Dominion of Canada. We are the 

first province not only to have balanced our budget in the ‘90s. 

We are the first province to have done an encore and to have 

done it two years in a row. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know as 

a result of the budget that the Finance minister tabled yesterday 

that we will have four more years of balanced budget. We will 

reduce the debt beset upon us by the Tories of the ‘80s. We will 

reduce the debt by $2.4 billion which obviously means the 

interest payments will be reduced correspondingly. I believe the  

estimate is by some $100 million per year which obviously free 

up money for important government programs. Our budget also 

will see no tax increases and will see government expenses cut 

by some $230 million just in this next year alone. 

 

Those are the kinds of things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I would 

think all responsible people  all responsible legislators, all 

responsible opinion-shapers, all responsible interest and 

advocacy groups  would hear and would take some pride in. 

Balanced budgets, no tax increase, and a strong social safety 

net. Those are the kinds of things the people of Saskatchewan 

are saying they want. Those are the kinds of things that this 

‘96-97 budget speech delivers. 

 

And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I left the legislature 

yesterday it was with a heavy heart because I went out into the 

lobby and I listened to people. I listened to elected members 

opposite, I listened to the spokespersons for various advocacy 

groups. And what did I hear? I heard carping and complaining, I 

heard doom and gloom, but most of all I think I heard greed. It 

was, not me, don’t do it to me; do it to some other group. If 

you’ve got to do it, okay, we’ll recognize maybe that the 

province’s finances are in tough shape, but don’t touch me, 

touch somebody else. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I have been out talking to people 

in this province and most particularly in my own constituency, I 

don’t believe that those politics of me first, or only me, or 

greedy me, prevail any longer in this province, if indeed they 

ever did prevail. I think that the opinion-shapers and the 

doommongers in the seats opposite are drastically out of touch 

with the reality that is current in the Saskatchewan of today. 

 

(1230) 

 

And I’ll tell you why I think that. I received some very 

compelling proof as I went home to my basement apartment to 

watch the 6 o’clock news to see what all the wondrous 

opinion-shapers  the SUMA and the SARM reps, the union 

reps, the business reps, the student reps, all those people  to 

see what they were saying about this budget. 

 

When I went home I talked to my god-daughter, who has been 

staying with me here in Regina this past week. She’s 18 years 

old, and like most 18-year-olds, she’s probably more interested 

in the latest video on MuchMusic than she is in a budget. But 

what she did was she turned on the television yesterday 

afternoon and she watched the Finance minister present the 

budget. This young woman is extremely intelligent, extremely 

accurate in her observations. But she is not someone who is 

involved in politics on a day-to-day basis. 

 

Her reaction to the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker? She said to 

me, you know, it’s not too bad. It’s actually a good budget. She 

said: she  referring to the Finance minister  she knows 

what she’s doing. She’s cool and she’s calm and most of all, 

she cares. I think it’s a really good budget, she said. And I was 

just blown away to hear that reaction from an 18-year-old after I 

had just finished ploughing my way through the crowd of doom 

sayers out in the rotunda of the Legislative Building. 

 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 1996 

 

It was so refreshing to hear somebody cut through all the typical 

groans that we have come to expect round about budget time 

and to hear somebody say, hey, it’s not too bad. I think the 

province is in good shape. I congratulate my god-daughter for 

having that kind of sense to realize that this is a good budget. 

And I congratulate all people like her. I think that maybe what 

we need to do in this legislature is perhaps get back to the 

dreams and ideals of the 18-year-olds and look at things from 

their points of view rather than looking at things from our oh-

so-sophisticated and oh-so-jaded points of view. 

 

I say that, Mr. Speaker, because as many, many members have 

referred to many times in this House, we are in a time of change 

right now. We are privileged in Canada to live in what most 

people in the world would consider to be the lap of luxury. At 

the same time, we see that there are many, many global changes 

that could lead to some drastic alterations in terms of that 

luxury that we have. So people are running around scared, 

worried about the future, concerned about change, and I 

understand that. And I can empathize with their motivation, 

with their need to want to have some security in their lives. 

 

The budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the member from Regina 

Victoria clearly articulated, is a very strong vehicle for bringing 

some security into their lives. At the same time, governments 

cannot nor should they do it all. It is time that all of us 

collectively rose above the easy, glib objections to everything 

and understood that there is a totally different reality in this 

world right now. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the year 2000, 400 to 500 million 

people in east Asia will enjoy a standard of living equal to that 

enjoyed by the people living in Europe right now. We should all 

be very pleased about that rather than saying, oh me, oh my, all 

the jobs are going offshore. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Asia 

Pacific, not even including China and Japan, will manufacture 

29 per cent of the world’s output, as much as the European 

union does now. 

 

Clearly things are changing. Clearly the world’s economy is 

changing, and clearly we recognize here in Saskatchewan that 

we have to be ready for that change. We have to recognize that 

new ways, modernized structures, sustainable structures will be 

the only way that we can go forth boldly into the 21st century 

and maintain a similar or better standard of living for all people 

in this province. 

 

That means that what we have to do is change the structures, 

change the old ways of doing things, and get with it in terms of 

a modern agenda. I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our 

government is doing that. We are doing that through a process 

of involving the community, devolving authority and 

responsibility to communities, changing the focus away from 

the state to the community and to families. 

 

We know, as legislators, that we have the responsibility to give 

people the hope of a better life, but we also know that people in 

turn have a responsibility to give something back to their 

community. We intend, Mr. Speaker, with this budget, with the 

legislative agenda we’ve outlined, to work towards finding that 

balance between the state and the community, between rights  

and responsibilities. We intend, Mr. Speaker, to bolster the 

foundations of civil society so that we can achieve some 

community consensus on moral and social values, so we can 

emphasize the responsibilities that all of us have for good 

citizenship and so that we can focus on our strong 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Our modern task which will be made much easier by the 

measures outlined in this budget is to move the public agenda 

away from the central level and down to the community level. 

We cannot do this though, based simply on encouraging people 

to change their attitudes. We also have to have economic 

change. That means that we have to have firm and strong 

measures as we do in this budget to have a stronger economy 

and to build prosperity and to have jobs for the new century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is too easy to get caught up, and all of us tend to 

do that. It is too easy to get caught up in the day-to-day political 

crises and titillations and to lose sight of why we’re actually 

doing the job we are doing, which is being a politician. 

 

We have to understand that there are larger issues out there, and 

we have to see them in the larger context. Times indeed are a 

changin’. And people are looking for stability and security in 

those changing times. The security and stability that they are 

looking for is a strong social safety net and, at the same time, a 

strong ability for them to seize initiative and to be able to work 

for themselves and for their families. 

 

We cannot ignore these realities. We do need to focus on what 

is happening in this society and to make sure that we have built 

the cornerstones for prosperity and the cornerstones for 

preserving the quality of life in Canada. 

 

We cannot do this, Mr. Speaker, by doing as the members 

opposite do: callously appealing to the worst in people. That 

kind of political skulduggery, I would suggest, is passé. It is 

simply something that people all over the world, but people 

particularly in Saskatchewan, are not willing to accept any 

longer. 

 

As the Speaker said this morning in his ruling, it is time that we 

understand and separate humour from lack of civility. I endorse 

his ruling this morning. I think that it was a very wise ruling, 

and I hope that all of us, on all sides of the House, pay heed to 

it and work to appeal to the best in people rather than the worst 

in people. We, as politicians, can do better. And we must do 

better  for ourselves, for our children, and our grandchildren. 

 

We on this side of the House have dedicated ourselves to saying 

we will do better. I ask the members opposite us to join with us 

and not simply engage in picayune rhetoric, but rather to help 

us as we work to restructure the traditional tools that people 

have looked to for stability and security as we work to 

modernize them, as we work to ensure that they are sustainable. 

I ask them to understand that the interests of the community at 

large are better and more important than individual agendas, no 

matter how eloquent those individual spokespersons may be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget speech will, as other members have 

pointed out, will build prosperity and jobs for the new century.  



March 29, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

 

It will preserve the cornerstones of our quality of life. And most 

importantly, it will restructure and streamline our government 

so that people then have freedom to choose and have freedom 

to have some control over their own futures. 

 

We will be able to move from focusing on an economy and a 

government that merely plays with money to instead having a 

wealth-producing economy in this province. We will do it by 

devolving structures to the local community levels, but at the 

same time devolving authority there as well. We will do it, in 

essence, by giving up power so that together all of us are more 

empowered. 

 

There are incredible possibilities within Saskatchewan if we 

are, all of us, willing to look to the future, willing to give up 

past habits of simply crying and grovelling for our own 

individual self-interests, but instead are willing to focus on the 

larger community interests  the larger interests of a truly 

strong and vibrant democracy. 

 

I believe that that is what this budget does. It puts those 

cornerstones in place. And I believe that we can survive, thrive, 

and prosper in the next century if we, all of us, get on board and 

work towards that stronger community sense of values in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see that the hour is now getting rather 

late, and so with a great deal of pride I say to you, I support the 

budget speech. I support the approach that our government is 

giving towards restructuring our government and our economy, 

and I do therefore at this time move to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:45 p.m. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................585 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................585 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
  Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................585 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................586 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................586 
  Murray .......................................................................................................................................................................................586 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................598 
  Krawetz......................................................................................................................................................................................598 
  McLane ......................................................................................................................................................................................605 
  Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................606 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sintaluta Train Derailment 
  Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................586 
 Saskatchewan Sport Athlete of the Year Awards 
  Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................586 
 Z99’s Ninth Radio-thon 
  Trew ...........................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 High School Basketball Championships 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Procrastination Week 
  Upshall .......................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Male Athlete of the Year 
  Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................587 
 Shell Lake Volunteers 
  Johnson ......................................................................................................................................................................................588 
 School Conservation Program 
  Whitmore ...................................................................................................................................................................................588 
ORAL QUESTIONS 
 Tax Relief 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................588 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................588 
 Municipal Government Amalgamation 
  Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................589 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................589 
 Local Government Funding Cuts 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................590 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................590 
 Education Funding Cuts 
  Heppner .....................................................................................................................................................................................590 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................591 
 Crown Construction Tendering Agreement 
  Gantefoer ...................................................................................................................................................................................591 
  Romanow ...................................................................................................................................................................................591 
 Job Creation 
  Draude .......................................................................................................................................................................................592 
  MacKinnon ................................................................................................................................................................................592 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 62  An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (Ordering Implementation Negated 

by Crown/“OINC”) 
  Boyd ...........................................................................................................................................................................................593 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................593 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Shillington..................................................................................................................................................................................593 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................593 
  Van Mulligen .............................................................................................................................................................................596 
  Lorje ...........................................................................................................................................................................................606 
 


