













































March 5, 1996


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 67 

 March 5, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I again 

today have petitions with respect to SaskPower, and I’ll read the 

prayer quickly: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from the Gronlid, 

Choiceland areas of the province; Regina, Birch Hills  

basically from all over Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present 

them on their behalf today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 

petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Biggar, Fort Qu’Appelle, Wood 

Mountain, Regina, Scout Lake, Assiniboia, Cut Knife, Fir 

Mountain  across the province, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

present them on behalf of the people today. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 

a petition. This petition is signed by many individuals from the 

Assiniboine Valley Health District, specifically in the Kamsack 

area, and the prayer that they have to the Assembly is: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to order a moratorium on 

hospital and nursing home closures until after an election 

for a new board can be held; and further that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to ensure the strategic plan is 

withdrawn and that a new plan be developed by the new 

board through widespread grass roots consultation. 

 

I so present. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition  

relating to firearm ownership. And I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to unequivocally oppose 

changes to present legislation regarding firearm ownership 

and instead urge the federal government to deal with the 

criminal use of firearms by imposing stiffer penalties on 

abusers, recognizing that gun control and crime control are 

not synonymous, and allowing provinces to deal with gun 

control legislation on a provincial basis. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these come from places such as Weyburn, Imperial, 

Radville, Kerrobert, Tribune. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

that has not yet been presented to the Assembly during this 

session. So I’ll just read the prayer, because it is 

self-explanatory: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to allocate adequate funding 

dedicated toward the double-laning of Highway No. 1; and 

further, that the Government of Saskatchewan direct any 

monies available from federal infrastructure programs 

toward double-laning Highway No. 1, rather than 

allocating these funds toward capital construction 

projections in the province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

From the town of Consul and Vidora and surrounding area. I’m 

happy to present these, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates and freeze 

any further utility rates; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

immediately repeal the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Thursday next ask the government the following question: 

 

To the minister responsible for Health, regarding health 

district boards across the province. According to the 

Provincial Auditor’s audited statements of each health 

board: how many health district boards ran deficits in the 

‘94-95 fiscal year; according to the Provincial Auditor’s 

figures, how many health districts ran deficits in the  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 68 

‘93-94 fiscal year; how many health districts expect to run 

deficits in the ‘96-97 fiscal year; and do you plan to 

honour the former Health minister’s commitment to 

provide our caucus copies of the Provincial Auditor’s 

audited statements for each health district? 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Thursday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for the Provincial Secretary, 

regarding the former employee, Ms. Chandra Prasad: why 

did Ms. Chandra Prasad receive a severance of $25,900 

after resigning from the position of junior protocol officer 

after working for the Provincial Secretary’s office for nine 

months; who approved Ms. Prasad’s severance; and what 

formula was used to determine the amount of severance 

received by Ms. Prasad? 

 

I so present. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members in the 

Assembly 51 grade 4 students sitting in your Speaker’s gallery, 

and some members behind the bar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re here this afternoon with teachers Ms. 

Betty-Ann Faber and Ms. Joli Bauer who were kind enough to 

invite me to the school to talk with the students about 

governance, about party philosophy, and I know that they are 

looking at the systems of government in their studies in school. 

I have hanging above my desk in my office a wonderful 

thank-you decoration that was sent after my visit and I was able 

to receive a wonderful pin. I’m not going to point that out as I 

know we’re not to do that today, but they’ll know where that’s 

located. 

 

We’ll be meeting after their tour in room 218 and sharing 

refreshments and I’ll be able to answer their questions about 

what they observed today. I would ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming the students from St. Marguerite Bourgeoys. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce guests sitting in your gallery. 

Fred Heron, general secretary of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation, and joining him this afternoon is Derwyn 

Crozier-Smith, assistant general secretary. I’d like to welcome 

these two gentlemen to our legislature and I hope they enjoy the 

proceedings. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) caucus, I too would like to welcome 

here Mr. Fred Heron, executive director of the STF 

(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation)  I’ve worked with him 

in the past; we understand each other quite well  and Derwyn  

Crozier-Smith as well. I hope you enjoy this time in the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to 

the members of the Legislative Assembly, some guests from my 

constituency. We have with us the president of the Humboldt 

constituency, Liberal Humboldt constituency, my daughter 

Nicole Julé, and my husband Robert Julé. Please welcome 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you not 

two very fine gentlemen from the STF, but two very fine 

constituents from Saskatoon Southeast, Mr. Fred Herron and 

Mr. Derwyn Crozier-Smith. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly, two gentlemen seated in your gallery. 

They are Bert Ottenson of the sheet metal workers’ union and 

John McLeod of the construction labourers’ union. Gentlemen, 

welcome to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

National Engineering Week 

 

Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 

recognition of National Engineering Week, which runs from 

March 2 to 9. Mr. Speaker, much like your job, when an 

engineer does his job correctly, it goes virtually unnoticed. 

 

Professional engineers have a role to play in just about 

everything we do in this world. Engineers plan; they design and 

build the highways on which we drive. They envision, invent, 

and design the equipment we use on our farms and the cars that 

we drive. The technology these people come up with helps us 

all build a better province and a better country. They build our 

bridges and our office buildings. Engineers design safe systems 

for the delivery of drinking water to our homes, schools, 

businesses, and hospitals. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t also take this 

opportunity to point out that this province . . . in this province, 

we have one of the best engineering programs in the country. 

The University of Saskatchewan School of Engineering year in 

and year out is classed amongst the best training facilities in all 

of North America. Like everything else, this proves we in 

Saskatchewan have much to provide to the rest of the world in 

terms of technology. When these students graduate, they join 

the great ranks of engineers throughout the country and the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not schooled in engineering. There are better 

people in this House to speak on the subject. Perhaps the  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

Leader of the Third Party could engineer a comment on this 

subject, but perhaps not. Nevertheless, I’d like to offer 

congratulations to all the professional engineers who have such 

a profound impact on all our lives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan’s Film Industry 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week in Santa 

Monica, California, the American film market is holding its 

annual trade show. This is one of the world’s leading shows in 

markets of its kind. Attracting over a thousand delegates, it 

gives exhibitors a venue to display their wares. And, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan is there. 

 

Today SaskFILM is hosting a reception which will allow 16 

Saskatchewan industry representatives to meet with producers, 

present Saskatchewan’s attractions to the industry, and show 

good cause for more movie business being done here. 

 

The film industry in Saskatchewan is expanding. And whether 

that’s because of the movie star looks of our Premier or the 

star-studded cast in our cabinet, the fact is that the combined 

efforts of government and industry are paying off. Last year 

production levels reached $15 million, generated an economic 

impact of $48 million, and created 581 jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Mr. Speaker, we plan to build on this 

success through the many cooperative initiatives for the film 

industry which are in the Partnership for Growth, including a 

cultural industries development strategy, a new media business 

plan, and a joint partnership to establish a new sound stage 

facility in Saskatchewan. That’s good news for the industry, it’s 

good news for the economy, and it is good news for those of us 

who like to eat popcorn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Winter Games 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, on Thursday February 29, the 

communities of Tisdale, Star City, and Melfort rolled out the 

red carpet for the site selection committee for the 1998 

Saskatchewan Winter Games. The selection committee was 

visiting the communities who are bidding for the 1998 Winter 

Games to determine which bid will be best suited to host these 

games. 

 

In a wonderful spirit of cooperation, these three communities 

are presenting a joint bid for these games. The combined 

resources of volunteers and facilities will create a much 

stronger bid than any other individual effort. It was fantastic to 

see Highway 3 from Melfort to Tisdale blitzed by yellow, blue, 

and green signs proclaiming Highway 1998. 

 

The selection committee will make their choice sometime in 

May. If community spirit, excitement, and facilities sway the 

vote, then I assure you that the people of Melfort, Tisdale, Star  

City and the Wapiti Valley ski resort will host the 1998 

Saskatchewan Winter Games. 

 

I ask this Assembly to join me in congratulating them for this 

great effort. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Meadow Lake Tribal Council and 

Nicaraguan Natives Sign Agreement 

 

Mr. Sonntag:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Something quite 

remarkable is taking place, starting in my constituency and 

stretching actually to the coast of Nicaragua in Central America 

 remarkable and ironic in a very pleasant sort of a way. 

 

The Meadow Lake Tribal Council is a political and corporate 

organization representing thousands of Cree and Dene people. 

The council has become one of the most active and successful 

entrepreneurial groups in Canada. Chief Richard Gladue and 

the council are taking their expertise and experience to the 

Miskito Indians of Nicaragua.. 

 

Our first nations people know something of exploitation, having 

experienced it firsthand. Now instead of doing what was done 

to them, they are giving a hand to a people who have had their 

own brush with exploitation. This is what I meant when I said 

pleasantly ironic. 

 

Last month, the MLTC (Meadow Lake Tribal Council) and the 

Miskito Indians signed an agreement in principle to study the 

feasibility of joint venture opportunities in forestry, mining, oil, 

and natural gas. This is a first for Canada and quite possibly for 

the world, Mr. Speaker  the first international agreement by 

two first nations organizations. 

 

I want to take this opportunity to congratulate Chief Richard 

Gladue and the tribal council for their business acumen and for 

their eagerness to help the Miskitos in their own efforts to 

establish themselves. I should also mention that the Minister of 

Economic Development was present at the signing at the 

request of the tribal council. This gave him the opportunity to 

discuss other opportunities for Saskatchewan in the Central 

American region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears that through the efforts of the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council, a part of the Americas is being 

rediscovered  another very pleasant irony. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Highways 

 

Mr. Goohsen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently the 

number of accidents on Saskatchewan highways was reported. 

It is important to note that while the number of overall 

accidents has declined, I’m sorry to say that the number of 

fatalities in our province has risen above the five-year average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a rural MLA (Member of the Legislative  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 70 

Assembly) who travels for eight hours on our provincial 

highways to and from the legislature numerous times each 

month, I know firsthand what the condition of our highways . . . 

and what it is, and they’re not very good. In fact I can foresee 

increased accidents and fatalities in 1996 because of the 

horrible condition of our highways. Two individuals were killed 

in my constituency last week, and we offer our condolences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina’s mayor has called for the twinning of the 

No. 1 Highway for financial reasons. I believe that it must be 

done for safety reasons. There is no dollar value on human life, 

Mr. Speaker. And there is no other solution to address this 

problem than making our provincial highways safe again by 

repairing them. I urge the government to heed the advice of the 

Canadian Automobile Association  the CAA  

municipalities, our caucus, and several other organizations that 

have brought this issue to the attention of the government. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rising Gas Prices 

 

Mr. Trew:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You may remember a 

statement I made last April concerning rising gasoline prices in 

the city of Regina. A year ago gas prices jumped by 3 cents a 

litre overnight, and motorists were mad as heck. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I get a sense of dêjà vu because once again gas prices 

have jumped overnight by 3 cents a litre in Regina. 

 

Saskatchewan produces a significant percentage of the 

country’s oil and yet our province has some of the highest 

prices in Canada for gasoline. For a long time motorists have 

been trying to find out the reason for these gas price changes 

and motorists want answers. 

 

On Monday, Regina Member of Parliament member, John 

Solomon, introduced a private members’ Bill in the House of 

Commons to set up a national energy price review commission. 

It makes sense to work for a solution to the problem rather than 

simply blaming someone. 

 

We’ve learned in the past that blame alone will get us nowhere, 

Mr. Speaker. Action speaks louder than words, and it is action 

that is needed on this matter, which begs for some answers. 

Perhaps the issue of rising gasoline prices will finally receive 

the attention it deserves and maybe it won’t. But wouldn’t it be 

nice if in the future I could stand up in this House and report 

that Regina motorists’ concerns have been answered? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Bruno Train Derailment 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to express 

my concern for the families near my home town of Bruno who 

faced danger after yesterday’s train derailment. This accident 

saw six cars jump the tracks and a few contained potentially 

explosive material; reports state there are butane leaks. Bruno is 

my home town and I know the families who are in danger, and I 

have taught at the school that was shut down as a precautionary 

measure. 

I trust the government is assisting the emergency clean-up 

operation in every way possible. It is my hope that all 

precautions are being taken to alleviate any harmful impact on 

the environment. I would like CN (Canadian National) officials 

to take a close look at the cause of the derailment, and several 

others that have occurred recently. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Corporation Tax Cuts 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. 

Mr. Speaker, this government is telling the public the cupboard 

is bare. They tell the people of Saskatchewan that they’re going 

to break every promise in their book and cut our programs. 

While saying this, Mr. Speaker, the latest set of Public Accounts 

reveal this government is giving larger and larger tax breaks to 

Husky Oil. Will the Premier explain how he can justify offering 

more and more give-aways to a wealthy corporation when he is 

threatening cuts for the rest of us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. 

member for the question, but I think he really has in mind the 

Liberal campaign promise when he talks about broken 

promises. I think it was broken from the very day that it was 

announced. You’re not talking about our promises. Our promise 

is a promise which is geared on building for the future and 

rebuilding the province of Saskatchewan, preparing it for the 

21st century. That means job opportunities. That means 

educational reform. It means local governments reform. It 

means social services reform. It means moving forward in a 

progressive and positive way. 

 

Now with respect to the Bi-Provincial project, which you’re 

referring to, this is something which we inherited from the 

former administration, and I might add, have taken a number of 

steps to strengthen the fiscal position and the economic viability 

of this operation in concert with our partners, Husky. 

 

This is an inherited one, and I think it has the potential, with a 

little bit of management and good luck, to still be a profitable 

one in the interest of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

If the hon. member from Thunder Creek was less worried about 

destroying and bringing down business, and was more 

concerned about positively being constructive, about building 

up business, we’d all be better off in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, need I remind this Premier, two 

weeks ago you condemned offering tax breaks to rich 

corporations in your province-wide address. Today we find that 

this government is more than doubling the tax holiday offered 

to Husky. Their tax give-away has gone from $3.6 million to  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

$8.4 million all at the expense of the rest of us. 

 

Will the Premier admit this government has two standards: less 

for the rest of us and more for the rich? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: Mr. Speaker, it there is a double 

standard anywhere it is in the Liberal Party — a double 

standard which, when you talk about tax fairness, I wish you 

would give that speech not to this House but give it to your 

cousins in Ottawa about tax fairness. 

 

Ask them where they stand on the GST (goods and services 

tax). Remember that promise about the GST, they were going to 

do away with it? And just make sure that tomorrow’s budget 

with your Liberal cousins isn’t one which has something like 

the GST but renamed. 

 

Ask your federal cousins to develop a set of taxation policies 

for all Canadians which are fair and are comprehensive, and not 

full of loopholes for the rich banks of this world, and a lot of 

your corporate friends to be able to make huge, huge profits 

while destroying people and laying them off. 

 

Please don’t get up in this House and lecture us about what I 

think is a fair taxation policy given the parameters of the federal 

government’s inactivity. Tell the story where it should be told 

 to the Liberals  to the men and women of your party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I know I heard the Premier 

earlier say he couldn’t get out of this deal of giving a tax break 

to a rich corporation. Might I remind the Premier that this 

government thinks nothing of breaking contracts and promises 

with this province’s farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain how he can break 

contracts with these Saskatchewan people yet he can’t find a 

way to get us out of a deal that’s making the rich richer every 

year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I might say with 

the most respect that I can muster for the hon. member opposite 

that this question is absolutely ludicrous. There is an investment 

in Bi- Provincial in the order, generally speaking, of about $270 

million of taxpayers’ money. We didn’t make that investment; it 

was made by the Conservatives when they were in government. 

That is what we inherited and what we managed and what we 

are continuing to manage. 

 

There is an investment, which is in the interest of the taxpayers, 

that requires careful, proper, sound, prudent business 

decision-making. If you had the responsibility of sitting in the 

treasury benches, which I doubt that you will ever have, you too 

would have, I hope, that kind of an approach when it comes to 

this particular issue. 

 

So don’t over simplify issues in the issue, as you describe it, of 

breaking some contracts here and not breaking other contracts 

there. That is absolutely off the mark. And I’m saying to the 

member opposite look, the agenda for this government and for 

this province is building and preparing for the 21st century. It’s 

an agenda of hope and opportunity and prosperity. Come and 

join us in moving in that progressive direction and don’t be a 

part of the doom and gloom gang. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, I would say that the Premier’s 

being a little presumptuous in suggesting who may be sitting 

across the floor in a few years from now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the government that the 

amount of money they are now giving Husky could help to stop 

this government’s cuts to rural programs and almost would be 

enough to keep the Plains hospital open. How can the Premier 

possibly justify giving the 141st largest corporation in Canada 

tax give-aways when he and his government are closing 

hospitals and threatening cuts to education and our rural 

services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where the 

question is in that statement. But on the assumption that it was 

not an exclamation mark but a question mark at the end, I 

would begin by saying to the hon. member first that before he 

does assume to be able to run a government, the first thing that 

he and his colleagues should learn is how to run a political 

party responsibly and fairly  something which sadly they have 

not be able to yet demonstrate to people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Look, I say to the hon. member opposite  and he’ll know as 

this session goes on in the next three, four years and wait till the 

budget  that the policy of this government is to build for the 

future of the province of Saskatchewan, to have no province 

bypass Saskatchewan, that we do it in a positive and a 

progressive way, that we honour our values of community and 

of sharing and of opportunity, that we provide as much hope as 

we can. 

 

We need to do much more. I understand that. We’ve done much 

more. This is the policy that we take. It is not good enough for 

the hon. member opposite to try to take some figures out of 

context, out of the factual basis, and work it on the basis of 

attacking. That  I’m afraid to say  is the approach of the 

member from Shaunavon. It should not be your approach as a 

rookie member of the House. And if I may so to the other 

members of the Liberal caucus, it should not be their approach 

either. Reject the Shaunavon direction in this regard. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Mr. Speaker, it seems the Premier spends a 

lot of time worrying about our shop over here. I think he should 

worry about somebody in the back benches. 

 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 72 

Mr. Speaker, on the first day of the 1991 election, the Premier 

made the following remark about the previous Conservative 

administration, and I’ll quote: 

 

When people are starving in many areas, when local 

businesses are having difficult times trying to keep things 

afloat, our government is pumping this kind of money into 

these large corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are still going to food banks. We still have 

child poverty in this province. Businesses are still going 

through a hard time. Will the Premier explain how he can 

justify giving one of the largest corporations in this country this 

kind of a give-away when his government still hasn’t eased the 

problems of the average person? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Well, Mr. Speaker, this is again the 

same question restated in different words that the hon. member 

asked me at the beginning of a question period. And I don’t 

know how much more I can answer to him other than to say that 

I’m assuming that the Liberal Party in the province of 

Saskatchewan is . . . that there should be no tax breaks for 

business, no tax breaks to support business, or no tax breaks 

generally. I guess that’s your position. 

 

It wasn’t what you campaigned upon. You campaigned upon 

reducing the sales tax to 7, and I think it was down to 5. The 

business tax was to be reduced. All of that’s right out the 

window now  what you campaigned upon. And if that’s what 

the Liberal member is saying is the position of the provincial 

Liberals in the province of Saskatchewan, so let the word go 

forward to the small-business community and to the 

entrepreneurs and the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to close, Mr. Speaker, on this answer by saying that the 

Liberal Party is doing more to harm the aspect of investment 

and growth and opportunity by their constant doom and gloom 

— when the facts don’t support it — that that member and each 

and every one of the Liberal members of caucus propagate in 

the province of Saskatchewan wrongly and incorrectly. 

 

Please, get on with the agenda of building for the future. Let’s 

build for that hope and prosperity. Let’s be progressive; and 

let’s not be totally negative all the time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Job Creation 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my questions this 

afternoon are for the Minister of Economic Development. Well, 

Mr. Minister, another day, another round of lay-offs in NDP 

(New Democratic Party) Saskatchewan. Sixty dairy workers 

have now lost their jobs at Agrifoods International. That brings 

the total to about 450 lay-offs in the last couple of weeks. 

 

And worst of all, there is no good news for these people about 

any job creation strategy in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 

throne speech promised jobs, jobs, jobs. But all we have seen  

so far is lay-offs, lay-offs and more lay-offs. Well, Mr. 

Minister, where are all the jobs? Where are all the new jobs you 

promised, and where is the hope for those 450 people who’ve 

been laid off in recent weeks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, the member, as 

yesterday, comes to the House and indicates that some 

companies are downsizing and changing their structure. And 

obviously as the economy changes and we move towards the 

next century, that in fact he will be able to come here probably 

every day and talk about companies that are changing, some 

that will be downsizing. 

 

And obviously I will be able to get up and talk about: shuttle 

craft sets global course; and the Farm and Garden Centre, 20 

years and still growing; Saskatoon International Road 

Dynamics, 41 per cent increase in sales and many more jobs; 

Microgro, a new company, the only greenhouse in Canada 

doing micropropagation for ornamental horticulture; Thomson 

Meats, here’s an article: this year’s sales’ budget has increased 

by 230 per cent — products going to Japan, Korea, United 

States; SED Systems manufacturing a radar component that’s 

going into armoured vehicles around . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. Next question. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Mr. Minister, and the net effect of all of what 

you are saying is, is that since January of ‘95 to January of ‘96, 

Saskatchewan lost 5,000 jobs, according to StatsCanada. From 

January ’92 to January ’96, there were about 3,000 jobs created 

in Saskatchewan, according to StatsCan. 

 

During the exact same time frame in Alberta, there were 

103,000 new jobs created. So there probably are jobs, Mr. 

Minister. So there probably are jobs for those people who’ve 

been laid off; unfortunately they’re all in Alberta. That’s where 

they are. Mr. Minister, when are you going to adopt some 

pre-employment policies like the ones our caucus has and will 

introduce? When are you going to start creating a positive job 

creation strategy in this province and some hope for those 450 

people who have been laid off in the last couple of weeks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, over the last few 

months we’ve had the opportunity to deal with literally 

hundreds of business people from across the province. And in 

conjunction with them, with the cooperative movement and 

many working people, they have endorsed Partnership for 

Growth, a document that lays the pathway for job creation and a 

changing economy that will continue on the path of creating 

employment. Since 1992 when we did a similar exercise known 

as Partnership for Renewal, 10,000 more people are working 

now than were in 1992 when we started out on this project. 

 

And I want to indicate to the member opposite that when he 

was in government, his party was in government, in 1989, 

18,000 people out-migrated from the province  18,000 

people. That was the result of their economic strategy. 



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

An Hon. Member:  And they’re still doing it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  No, it is not 18,000. Last year the 

record had improved to 3,000. 

 

So I want to say to the member opposite that Saskatchewan, in 

conjunction with the business community, has a design for 

economic development that stands in stark contrast to the lack 

of a policy that existed in the last term of your administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Potential Lay-offs at Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Education. Madam Minister, 

we’ve been notified that in the next few days you’ll be laying 

off a large number of people at the Wascana, Palliser, and 

Kelsey institutes. Can you confirm this, Madam Minister, and 

how many people will lose their jobs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the 

information that the member gives. I doubt if it’s true, because 

if it were true, I think I’d have been notified about it. But I will 

look into the matter and report back to the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Reorganization of Education 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, this one is for the Madam 

Minister of Education. You’re presently meeting with school 

divisions across the province, talking about reforms your 

government plans to implement in the near future. 

 

Madam Minister, people who attended these meetings have told 

us that you plan to create regional educational authorities, and 

these super-boards will govern K to 12, libraries, SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 

and regional colleges within a large district. People attending 

these meetings have told us that you plan to replace existing 

elected school board members with politically appointed 

super-board members. 

 

Madam Minister, how can you possibly justify filling your 

super-education boards with political appointees that are not 

accountable to local communities or to local people and will 

have the power to tax? Super-board members will be 

accountable only to you. How can you justify this, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 

welcome the question from the hon. member. 

 

As the public knows, the Government of Saskatchewan has 

undergone a major consultation process with the public in 

preparation of moving our province into the 21st century, and 

we’re looking forward to the future. We are not looking to the 

past, but we’re looking forward to the future to ensure that our 

young people, our citizens, have access to the very best 

education and skills training program in order that we can meet 

the new realities of the 21st century. 

 

I have had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to meet with school 

trustees from across the province, and there’ll be many more 

meetings in order to consult with them on the future. 

 

How do we reshape our education system in order to meet those 

new challenges? We are not saying, Mr. Speaker  just in 

deference to the member  we are not saying in any sense of 

the word that we are going to politically appointed boards. That 

is not the route that we’re going to go. We are not going to be 

like Alberta, Ralph Klein’s Alberta, PC; and we’re not going 

the Liberal route in New Brunswick where they have just turned 

all teachers into provincial civil servants and will eliminate all 

school boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, for the Madam Minister. 

Having spent most of my life in this province’s school system, 

the phrase “no taxation without representation” is well etched in 

my mind. I’m wondering, with these super-boards that will 

probably be appointed, because the health boards seem to be, 

do you also now propose therefore to remove school tax from 

property? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I welcome the question. I 

have to tell you I’m surprised by the question. Given that this 

member has been involved in the school system in this province 

all of his life, he well knows that schools collect property taxes 

along with provincial grants. We fund the K to 12 system. No 

government, Mr. Speaker  and the member should know this 

 no government would move to take away the local board’s 

ability to tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Gross Revenue Insurance Plan Overpayments 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, Mr. 

Speaker, hundreds of farmers have sent GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance plan) wind-up bills into my office asking that I try 

and hold this government to its promise, a promise not to 

collect on these bills, Mr. Speaker. One Saskatchewan farmer 

who feels betrayed by this government writes, and I quote: 

 

My biggest source of frustration and anger is the fact that 

the previous Agriculture minister, during last spring’s 

election, promised that no farmer would have to repay any 

money to GRIP. The government sure changed its tune. 

 

I’d like to table this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the Minister of Agriculture admit in this House that it was 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 74 

his government that broke a contract  a promise to the 

Saskatchewan farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like you to tell the hon. member opposite that his questions 

the other day fizzled right out, and I think the same thing will 

happen today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question that the hon. member asks again and 

again and again is whether this government is going to stop 

acting like a businesslike government and a business man 

running the Crop Insurance Corporation and either forgive 

interest or cancel bills. Well again the answer is no. 

 

And I would like to just quote to the hon. member a little 

clipping from the Fort Qu’Appelle Times a few days ago. And it 

goes like this: 

 

Will we ever be blessed by a day when our provincial 

Liberal Party  Saskatchewan’s Official Opposition  

doesn’t crank up the “whine meter” one more decibel? 

 

If what we’ve seen for the past couple months emanating 

out of the Regina office is any indication, we shouldn’t be 

expecting the wailing and whimpering to cease any time in 

the foreseeable future. 

 

The Liberals have taken the science of constructive 

criticism by an Opposition and have succeeded in debasing 

it into a daily or almost daily session of whine, whine, 

whine. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Order. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Producers in this 

province feel betrayed and they are demanding answers. I 

would now like to quote from the same letter I referred to 

earlier, in which a farmer writes, and I quote: 

 

I don’t know who else to turn to for help as my resident 

MLA, the Minister of Agriculture, is part of the reason I’m 

in this mess in the first place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been clearly established that the Agriculture 

minister and this government broke its promise. Given this fact, 

can the minister comment on whether his government’s ability 

to collect on these bills has been compromised? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I know it might be a 

surprise to the member opposite, but everybody in my 

constituency didn’t vote for me. I just want to get that clear. 

 

The answer is no; nothing has been compromised, nothing will 

be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to finish off this letter talking about the 

Liberal position on the collection of the GRIP bills by one 

telling paragraph, last paragraph: 

 

Party strategists have given the Liberal MLAs bad advice. 

Haven’t they caught on that people want their politicians to 

do politics differently? Isn’t that what provincial Liberals 

promised us they were going to do? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a little bit of hypocrisy here. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll just end off by saying that this opposition 

continues on this topic. I invite them to walk out the door today, 

go to the nearest crop insurance meeting that we’re holding 

across this province — 10 of them — put forward their brilliant 

ideas for the future. We’ll receive anything they might put 

forward, and let’s build a good Crop Insurance Corporation for 

the farmers of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McLane:  The member opposite’s comments are clearly 

an example of an insensitive big government, and that’s what 

the people of this province dislike. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Friday this government refused an emergency 

debate of GRIP on this issue. When questioned by the media 

outside about this decision, the Minister of Agriculture 

responded by stating, let’s get off this silliness of hey, you made 

a promise; you broke your promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, does the minister believe that bills, many of which 

are in the thousands of dollars and threaten the livelihood of 

many Saskatchewan farmers, is silliness? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. I know what silliness is. I’ve witnessed it daily for the 

past four days from the members of the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the member a question. February 7 

or thereabouts there was a letter sent out from the federal 

government. The federal government sent out 1,300 letters to 

Saskatchewan farmers. Guess what they were doing? 

 

An Hon. Member:  What? 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  They were collecting outstanding 

overpayments from the western grain stabilization accounts  

your federal cousins — a little bit of a mixed message there. 

Mr. Speaker, so what the federal government is going to do, if 

you don’t pay your outstanding overpayment from your federal 

WGSA (western grain stabilization account), then they’re going 

to deduct it off the Crow benefit. You don’t remember the 

Crow benefit? That’s the $320 million a year the Liberals have 

taken out of the farmers’ pockets; that’s the Crow benefit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the member to clarify. Please clarify 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  Send the bills in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  I will be more credible than to ask  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

farmers to send the bills in. But I would ask the Liberals to 

please clarify their position on this matter. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. Last question. 

 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many similarities 

between this government and the previous Conservative federal 

government which started that process. Mr. Speaker, because of 

promises made by this government, Saskatchewan farmers did 

not budget for this added expense. As a result of broken 

promises, many farm families cannot simply afford to carry this 

additional financial burden. 

 

Can the Minister explain if he is aware of the term promissory 

estoppel and will he indicate whether it’s applicable in this 

case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Upshall:  Mr. Speaker, let me be serious for a 

moment. Farmers of this province understand the GRIP 

program very well. They understand as farmers they have to pay 

their bills, as they pay their fertilizer bill or their fuel bill or 

their pesticide bill; they have to pay bills. 

 

They understand that the GRIP was an overpayment that was 

. . . that they were paid out, and because the grain prices went 

up they were in an overpayment situation. They understand that 

we deferred the premiums for 1994 but they didn’t have to pay 

until the wind-down of the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the Liberal Party is being very 

irresponsible by playing their silly politics with an important 

issue of bills that farmers know have to be paid back. They 

don’t expect, nor should expect, to have that bill forgiven. But 

what we are doing in this government is trying to build a new, 

solid crop insurance foundation for the farmers of this province. 

We’re having our meetings across this province; we’ll continue 

to do that, and by 1997 we’ll have a good, solid farm crop 

insurance program for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 1  An Act to provide for the Enforcement 

of the Code of Ethical Conduct for Members of the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly (Anti-corruption) 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

move that a Bill to provide for the Enforcement of the Code of 

Ethical Conduct for Members of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly (Anti-corruption) be now introduced and read the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I ask leave to make a statement of concern to  

members. 

 

The Speaker:  The hon. member from Saskatoon Southeast 

has request leave to make a statement of interest to members. 

Perhaps if you’d like to indicate the nature of that statement to 

members before they . . . 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Condolences to a member in this House. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All too often in this 

society we bear witness to tragedy in a workplace. And we 

know from looking at statistics that very frequently tragedy 

strikes in mining. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the 

members’ attention to the fact that last week there was a tragic 

mining accident in Flin Flon, Manitoba. The funeral service will 

be held tomorrow for Mr. Richard Beasley. 

 

I would like members to know that the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena will be leaving early today to attend the 

funeral for a member of her family. And it is imperative, I 

believe, in these turbulent times that we find it in our hearts to 

extend concern and sympathy across provincial borders and 

across political borders. I think it is also imperative that we 

pause to reflect on the waste of lives and the sadness for 

survivors of all people killed in workplace accidents. 

 

So on behalf of the government members, and I believe on 

behalf of all members of this House, I extend our sympathy, 

concern, and condolences to the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Toth:  Mr. Speaker, if I could have leave as well to 

express condolences. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the member has 

just expressed certainly our concern and the fact that many of us 

as individuals over time certainly run into situations or come 

across situations where tragedies do strike. And while it’s 

difficult to prevent some of the tragedies that happen, and my 

colleague the member from Maple Creek related one this 

afternoon that wasn’t directly related to this House, but we 

certainly feel for the families involved. 

 

And as an opposition caucus and as a third party caucus we 

express as well our condolences to the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena and trust that she will let her family 

members know and the family realize that the members of this 

Assembly are thinking of her at this time. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 76 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murrell, seconded by Mr. 

Thomson, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 

Boyd. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today to 

speak before this Assembly for the first time. Like a lot of other 

first-time members in this Assembly, I have to admit that I 

wasn’t always quite sure of what I’d set myself up for when I 

ran for office last June. I will refrain, though, from a lengthy 

dissertation on the characteristics of my constituency. Most of 

you that have had the opportunity to enjoy a holiday in northern 

Saskatchewan will have travelled through my constituency of 

Rosthern at some time. I will have to also say you probably 

drove on some very crowded highways that we hope will be 

alleviated some time soon. Aside from that experience, you 

know the good things that exist in the Sask valley area. 

 

I want to start my remarks by reflecting some of the comments 

made by other members. As others have said, both in this 

session and throughout the history of this Assembly, fulfilling 

the role of a democratic representative of the people is a 

profound and a moving experience to anyone. Suddenly you 

have the awareness thrust onto you that you are no longer just 

speaking for yourself any more. Of course, we’re all here 

because we are intensely concerned about the future of this 

province. And we all have our own ideas about which way to 

provide for that future. 

 

Yet in many ways, you have to put your own ideas and beliefs 

on the back burner. It is not, after all, just the expression of 

what we 58 people think that makes this place a dynamic and 

important institution. Rather, it is the commitment that we all 

undertake to be honest brokers of the views of our constituents. 

In carrying out that duty, I feel that I’m assisted by a long 

history and the proud traditions that this Assembly boasts. 

 

British-style parliamentary democracy is quite an awe-inspiring 

institution. It has evolved and grown over eight centuries. It has 

been exported to the four corners of the globe. It has become 

the standard of democratic government for cultures as diverse 

as the East Indian, the Australian, the Hong Kong Chinese, and 

of course, thankfully, our own. It is a tradition of flexible, 

adaptable, and yet effective government that deserves the 

deepest respect from all the members of this Assembly. And 

indeed from all members of our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate you at this time on the 

position that you have. I appreciated it very much when you 

spoke with emotion in your acceptance speech, an emotion that 

we very often don’t always contribute to this House. And I 

think this House could use much more of that. 

 

I was somewhat awed shortly after the election when I drove 

through my constituency and suddenly realized that I was not 

just speaking for myself; I had the job of speaking for all those 

people in that constituency. And it’s truly an awe-inspiring 

position and it is an awe-inspiring House and an awe-inspiring 

institution. 

 

Today I wish that my parents were alive and in the gallery. They 

are not. I would like to give thanks to my wife and my family 

for the support that they give. 

 

And I would like to give special thanks this time to my 

mother-in-law, Helen Fast. Mother-in-laws are traditionally the 

butt of many jokes. My mother-in-law is a very classy person. 

She is very politically astute and has always had much faith in 

my political activities. And so I appreciate her very much. 

 

As a new member of the PC opposition caucus I have been 

assigned a number of critic duties and I would like at this time 

to share some of my thoughts on those ideas. 

 

On the topic of municipal government, the provincial 

government has been floating some trial balloons that involve 

municipal amalgamation. These suggestions are, quite frankly, I 

believe, an insult to the good government that the people of 

Saskatchewan enjoy at the municipal level. The provincial 

government’s approach to this is typical of the kind of 

heavy-handed centralism of which the members opposite are so 

justifiably infamous and, unfortunately, infamously proud. 

 

We saw the fiasco of rural hospital closures and the 

government’s attempt to dictate local changes in Regina led to 

insensitive and often irrational moves that left some 

communities over an hour’s drive from adequate medical care. 

 

The fact is that communities themselves will always be much 

more in touch with the grass roots needs and therefore are the 

best judges of where resources should be allocated and where 

efficiencies can be made. 

 

When we talk about municipal politicians and leaders, we’re 

not talking about a group of people who sequester themselves 

away in a marble palace once a year to make decisions. They 

make their decisions in the middle of the activity, in the middle 

of all the people whom they serve and who they tax. 

 

The brave people who contribute their time to running our 

municipalities share their lives in every conceivable way with 

the people for whom they make decisions. Responsible 

government isn’t just a theory to these people. If they mess up, 

they literally can’t leave the house without hearing about it. 

 

When you add to this a very important fact, that they all manage 

to run balanced budgets year in and year out in spite of 

overwhelming pressures from this government that have been 

placed on them, it is easy to see that municipal politicians 

deserve our deep respect. They certainly don’t deserve to be 

lectured on how to manage their affairs or to be told what 

services or what administrative structures they should use. 

 

For these reasons, our caucus, and myself personally, feel that  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

the top-down approach to municipal reform that this 

government seems to be favouring is dead wrong. I will grant 

you that there are too many overlapping municipal governments 

in this province, but the municipalities themselves are aware of 

this, and they are keenly aware of wasteful practices in their 

level of government, and they are most anxious and most 

capable to fix those problems. 

 

It is my contention that our job on the provincial level is not to 

try to do the municipalities’ jobs for them, but rather to get out 

of their way, clear out some of the red tape, and let them do 

what they know best. 

 

Municipalities are at present cooperating in things from 

administration sharing to snow clearing. In my constituency 

they take many joint responsibilities where two or three or even 

more municipalities get together and share work. They share in 

fire protection. They share in garbage disposal. They share in 

libraries. They share EMOs (Emergency Measures 

Organization). They share in skating and curling rinks. They 

share in maintaining swimming pools. They share in golf 

courses. They share in the restoration of historical sites. We 

need to give them the options and then give them the choice on 

how to do it. 

 

(1430) 

 

The no-nonsense, no-sacred-cows approach of the municipal 

governments contrasts very sharply with the provincial 

government. As of the last budget, 12 out of 24 government 

departments are actually spending more than they were in 1991. 

The government on the whole was spending a quarter of a 

billion more than in 1991. 

 

The bureaucratic empires in this city continue to spread with 

abandon and inevitably soak up more and more expensive 

office space as they go. The Premier himself holds on to his 

large cabinet. These are the people, Mr. Speaker, who are now 

going around presuming to tell municipalities how to 

amalgamate and how to cut back. 

 

Again the key in fostering efficiency on the municipal level is 

simply to get out of the way and to make sure the path is cleared 

for those jurisdictions that want to amalgamate. One complaint 

on this score that I’ve noticed is the situation where a small 

community wanted to see all of their tax dollars go towards 

services rather than administrative costs. So consequently they 

tried to hand over both their tax revenue and their 

responsibilities to the RM (rural municipality). The RM 

refused. Mr. Speaker, we need to look at situations where when 

this amalgamation wants to occur, it can occur. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heppner:  But let’s make sure we don’t tell them when 

it occurs and to whom it occurs. 

 

On the other side of the coin, Mr. Speaker, some municipalities 

may actually prefer to spend more money on administration 

than on services to people. That should be their choice; it is 

their choice and should remain so. Mr. Speaker, many people in  

this province want their government to be close to them. In 

many ways and in many communities, this has been one of the 

strengths of Saskatchewan life, and they should have the right 

to spend their tax dollars on that particular option if they so 

choose. This entire issue of municipal reform comes down to a 

question of choices. 

 

The government is trying to deprive local people of the 

decision-making powers, just as they did when they closed the 

rural hospitals and pushed through their model of district health 

boards. The PC caucus believes that local people should be 

given the freedom to exercise the good judgement that they 

have always demonstrated in these situations. 

 

Another area that government has discussed with regards to 

amalgamation is the education sector. This is an area of special 

interest to me since I am the education critic for the caucus and 

more especially because of my personal background in this 

area. 

 

In the area of educational administration, I think there is a much 

less effective cause to be made for any sort of amalgamation 

than in the municipal government level. Unlike municipalities, 

where there are substantial salary and office costs to consider, 

school districts have relatively few such costs and are already 

running pretty close to the bone. We know that the only real 

cuts in education is through school closures. These decisions 

need to be left to the elected. 

 

I think it is significant that district school boards run their 

meetings on a per diem as low as $10 per member per meeting. 

Yet we still seem to get very qualified people holding these 

offices, and we don’t hear complaints about those people going 

broke while attending school board meetings. Compare this, 

Mr. Speaker, to a few of the boards and commissions that the 

government operates with per diems running into the hundreds 

of dollars. 

 

Once again, as with municipalities, I think the provincial 

government can learn a lot about efficiency from the local level 

rather than the other way around. Given the fact that the 

administrative costs of school districts is already quite low, the 

only place you can realize substantial savings is closing 

schools. This isn’t something I can personally advocate, and I 

think everyone in this Assembly realizes the kind of hardships 

that would come with a large round of school closures. I think 

the government and indeed the public at large is going to have 

to accept either something close to our current spending on the 

education system or some rather very serious pain. 

 

School district amalgamation doesn’t offer any magic solutions 

to this problem. This government has been busy backing away 

from commitment to increasing school funding. The only torch 

they seem to be prepared to hold out to education is the torch 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

I also feel that amalgamating school boards and school districts 

would be a mistake from another perspective. Currently elected 

school boards are very responsive and responsible to the local 

taxpayer. Because they are elected, they are the natural 

custodians of the local property tax level. 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 78 

On the other hand, it has already been discussed that larger 

school district boards would need some tax powers to cover 

their areas of responsibility. These boards would be focused 

mainly on the voices of teachers and students in expressing 

their local educational needs. Of course these views are all very 

valid and necessary, but they often don’t consider the ability of 

taxpayers to foot the bill. I would have very serious fears about 

a non-elected board having influence over taxes without the 

taxpayer having some influence over them. 

 

On the subject of education funding, I had the pleasure last 

week of meeting with a delegation from the University of 

Saskatchewan Students Union. I was quite impressed about 

how realistic these students were about government funding 

and about the plans the government seems to have in mind for 

post-secondary education. 

 

Obviously they are not happy about the prospect of further cuts. 

But instead of just sitting on their hands, they are trying to think 

of some solutions. They weren’t looking for a free ride for 

themselves, nor were they in favour of the government 

providing an out-and-out bail-out to fix the University of 

Regina’s debt problem. And I appreciate the minister’s 

statement on that, that he wouldn’t provide that sort of funding. 

The students should be commended for that position. 

 

They brought something to my attention, an issue that I think it 

is important to mention here. In carrying out its assessment of 

the two universities, the government gives each university an 

equal per student grant. As these students pointed out, it is 

arbitrary and unfair to hand out a flat per head grant in this way. 

Each university has its specialities. And the fact that some 

colleges, like medicine for example, are much more expensive 

to run than courses that require nothing more than a professor 

and a few desks. 

 

For this reason, they felt it would be fairer for everyone 

involved if the government assessed each university’s needs on 

a cost-per-student basis and made its grants accordingly. I think 

that would be eminently fair. I would urge this Assembly to 

keep this concern in mind in our deliberation on education. I 

think the students had a good point on that issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I took my chair today without 

touching on something that is kind of a pet issue for me, namely 

health education in our schools. Our society is increasingly 

suffering from the effect of sexually transmitted diseases and 

teen pregnancies. The newspapers are covered with these kinds 

of information and they are usually quite disheartening. 

 

These problems are obviously devastating to the lives they 

affect. They also cause a drain on our health and social service 

systems. Clearly the single most effective way of controlling 

these problems is by educating our young people about them. In 

accomplishing this task, we should not be depriving ourselves 

of any useful information or successful tactics that are 

available. Yet that is exactly what we are doing. 

 

In spite of years of protest on this subject, the Saskatchewan 

education system refuses to include abstinence education as the  

major part of the resources for health education. I’m sure most 

of you have heard of Teen Aid, the foremost group in the 

promotion of abstinence among teens. This group continues to 

be shut out of our schools for no particular reason. The message 

of Teen Aid is a pretty simple one. The only 100 per cent 

guarantee against sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy 

is abstinence. Last time I checked, that was pretty much the 

same kind of message that most parents in Saskatchewan give 

their kids at home. We’re not talking about some radical new 

theory here. Nonetheless I am not saying that our school system 

should change its curriculum to suit Teen Aid’s agenda. 

 

However at present their simple message is not even allowed to 

be presented as an authorized option in our schools. They can 

bring in speakers from AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 

syndrome) organizations, speakers from gay and lesbian 

societies, but heaven forbid if they bring in too much Teen Aid. 

It is time our Department of Education sheds its virgin phobia 

and promotes chastity, not leaky prophylactics. What is perhaps 

the most galling about this situation is that Teen Aid, which I 

would say reflects the views of most Saskatchewan families, 

receives no funding from the government while other 

organizations, whose views are  to put it diplomatically  a 

little more alternative, receive thousands of dollars of grants. 

 

I think it is important, as an issue of fairness, it should receive 

the same funding that other groups do, or all of these 

organizations should be cut off and left to fend for themselves 

through donations. In fact that last option might be preferable 

since it would give the education system a little more accurate 

barometer of which groups enjoy the support of the community. 

 

Another topic that I feel I must say a few words about is that of 

the federal government’s gun control legislation. I am a gun 

owner myself and it goes without saying that I am opposed to 

this federal law. I know that there is broad, all-party support for 

the fight against this legislation, so I don’t feel that I need to 

spend a lot of time on arguments you’ve probably already heard 

and already understand. 

 

Just to touch on them, Mr. Speaker. This Assembly should 

continue to consider issues like the cost of that program; the 

degree in which it attempts to impose an Eastern solution on 

what isn’t even a problem in the West; the general 

ineffectiveness of such legislation, especially when many of 

those crimes, and probably most of them, are committed by 

knives and clubs and hands, not guns. 

 

I would also like to add the comment, Mr. Speaker, that we 

should perhaps do a survey of violent crimes to see whether 

drugs or alcohol were the contributing factors. If this in fact 

proves to be the case, perhaps those are the areas where we 

need to be focusing our enforcement efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close my remarks by repeating that I am 

grateful for this opportunity to speak to this Assembly. In spite 

of that attitude, I must say that I have great reservations about 

this government and the plan that they have outlined in their 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

One of the main reasons that I sought to represent my  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

constituents in this Assembly is that I had the misfortune of 

witnessing on a daily basis the damage that this government has 

done to this province. Coming from a predominantly rural area, 

I have seen my friends and neighbours in my community suffer 

from the neglect of a government that has, from all evidence, 

just simply written off rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Almost from its first days in office, this government has laid 

hardship after hardship on the shoulders of rural Saskatchewan. 

Things like ripping up GRIP contracts with 60,000 rural 

farmers in Saskatchewan; irrationally and insensitively shutting 

down 52 rural hospitals; increasing fees and taxes of all kinds; 

performing acts of back-door taxation through utility rate 

increases, as is most evident in the recent increase in SaskPower 

rates — increases which fell particularly hard on the shoulders 

of farmers and other rural residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could easily spend many hours listing the 

failures of this government. However, I want to address one 

issue in particular: the issue which led the Hon. Leader of the 

Third Party and myself to move the motion that is in front of us 

now. I’m referring of course to the claw-back of the GRIP 

overpayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one on either side of the House, at least not in 

the PC caucus, is suggesting that farmers shouldn’t pay their 

bills. What we are saying, however, is that it is high time this 

government learned to keep its word to the farmers, especially 

about GRIP. 

 

We saw in 1992 how lightly they regarded the binding contracts 

that had been signed with Saskatchewan farmers. Now we see 

how lightly they regard their own election promises. Of course 

the line that we are hearing out of the government these days is 

that there never was any election promise. 

 

Well isn’t that just a dandy little excuse in trying to rewrite 

history. Unfortunately for this government, the proof is in the 

June 3 edition of the Leader-Post. You can’t get it much clearer 

than that statement. All the spin-doctoring in the world isn’t 

going to get you out of that particular one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the actions of this government on the issue of 

GRIP represents the worst kind of cynical and manipulative 

election politics. Since we have seen that the members opposite 

never intended to keep their election promises, we really have 

to question the validity of the mandate that they received under 

those conditions. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the 

amendment to the Speech from the Throne. I urge the members 

of this Assembly to show that they hold to the proudest 

traditions of this House by voting for that amendment. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to  

extend my congratulations on your election as Speaker of this 

House. I am positive that your impartiality, your humour, and 

your knowledge will serve this House very well in your new 

capacity. Already you have demonstrated your wisdom and your 

ability to make impartial decisions. I also remember your 

admonitions as caucus leader for the members to be pithy in 

their remarks. Mr. Speaker, I shall try to be pithy in my remarks 

today. 

 

Also, congratulations to the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood in his election as Deputy Speaker. I 

don’t think any of us will argue with him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to stand in this Assembly as a 

representative of the people in the constituency of Swift 

Current. This constituency has had a great representation by 

notable members. If we go back far enough, Harry Gibbs, a 

railway worker, E.I. Wood, a farmer and a former cabinet 

minister, and of course John Penner, Gentleman John, who 

represented this constituency during the last term and gave so 

much of himself in this great province. 

 

He also gave me advice and encouragement once I decided to 

seek the nomination for the Swift Current constituency. Thank 

you, John, and now I know that the people of Swift Current 

constituency and the people of Saskatchewan appreciate all you 

did while an MLA and a minister of this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  A few words with regards to the Swift Current 

constituency. The Swift Current constituency, after 

redistribution, runs from the beautiful South Saskatchewan 

River in the north to Lake Pelletier in the south, and includes 

the city of Swift Current and numerous villages, the largest 

being Stewart Valley in the north and Wymark in the south. 

 

It is a diverse constituency and is rich in its cultural heritage. A 

large number of Norwegians in the north; Mennonites in the 

south who, by the way, originally settled on a reserve known as 

the Mennonite Reserve; and other numerous ethnic and 

religious groups which comprise the mosaic of Canada. The 

constituents are an industrious group, very progressive, very 

energetic, and very creative. 

 

I must acknowledge the importance that my upbringing in a 

Mennonite household has had on my life. It is only after one 

reaches a certain stage in their life that one appreciates the 

hardship, the love, the commitment of one’s parents. My 

parents were very frugal, looked after our needs, and always 

had that extra compassion, care, and concern for the less 

fortunate. Although not involved politically, their efforts 

centred around the church, and through this institution they 

were able to contribute to the welfare of their fellow man. 

 

My mother taught her principles by the quiet, magnificent 

example of her own life, and the occasional stunning power of 

her simple words. And that is why I naturally gravitated towards 

a career of service, first as a teacher and then to politics, and 

especially the New Democratic Party, whose policies of 

compassion, care, and concern for their fellow man  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 80 

greatly appeal to my sense of social justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  That is why I decided to seek an election as an 

NDP  to strive to enhance the social programs so that they 

would not only be preserved but strengthened and expanded if 

necessary; a party concerned with the needs, dreams, and 

expectations of the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what other political party, when organizing a 

fund-raising function, ask you to donate the food, then tells you 

to prepare it, then charges you for the meal, pleads, begs, and 

cajoles you for a donation, and then if there’s some food left 

over they sell it back to you. A great bunch. 

 

I’m proud to stand here today as a member of a government 

which is caring, compassionate, and concerned about the future 

of all the citizens in this province. Mr. Speaker, Swift Current 

has often been referred as one of the top 10 cities in Canada, 

and as Saskatchewan has been declared by the United Nations 

to be the best place in the world to live, it only follows that my 

constituency must be the greatest place in the whole wide world 

in which to live, and I heartily agree. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member:  And they have a good MLA too. 

 

Mr. Wall:  Thank you. Agriculture plays a vital part in our 

economy. The farms in the south-west are becoming larger. 

They are diversifying. The growing of the cereal crops of course 

is foremost but the pulse crop and the exotic crops like 

canaryseed, thyme, safflower, all are part of the agricultural 

scene. 

 

New, innovative machinery is manufactured in this area. Rem 

Manufacturing that sends agriculture implements and parts 

throughout the world is located here. Seventy-five-foot 

swathers are found in the fields. Agriculture has experienced a 

great year, and with diversification will become even more 

important in the future. Mr. Speaker, the new safety nets 

proposed by this government will only add to the quality of life 

in the rural areas. 

 

Manufacturing is another major industry in this region — Spar 

Group, and all of you have probably found these products all 

across Canada; and Urban Forest Recyclers which supplies the 

U.S. (United States) market with egg crates. Mr. Speaker, 

thanks to the policies of this government, manufacturing has 

become a major partner in this constituency and this great 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk for a moment 

about our Partnership for Growth. You hear the word 

partnership a lot these days because quite frankly it only makes 

common sense to include all the sectors and facets of society in 

the decision-making process, and by working together we will 

build on the strengths of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

We demonstrated this through our extensive consultation 

process with the public right across the province. Ordinary 

citizens, farmers, business leaders, educators, students, and 

many others expressed their dreams, their visions, their hopes 

for the future. And most important of all, we listened. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wall:  And that’s how we create economic activity, new 

opportunities, and a positive business climate  by forging 

new partnerships. Partnership For Growth will help the 

economy prosper and create meaningful jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will, over the next term, reduce 

the number of regulations which impact small businesses. It is 

the responsibility of government to create a suitable climate for 

businesses, especially small businesses, because they are the 

ones who create the new jobs and we need to help them along. 

Compare our record of job creation with the federal Liberals. 

 

We will also educate young people about the option of going 

into business for themselves and make regional economic 

development authorities, the REDAs, the focal point for their 

development in the communities. 

 

I’m really excited about the entrepreneurial centre being 

developed in Swift Current. Through the REDA and the 

chamber of commerce, a partnership of educational leaders, 

business leaders, agricultural entrepreneurs, credit union 

representatives, government representatives, a centre is being 

organized to encourage and provide, young people particularly, 

an opportunity to focus their ambition on creating new 

businesses. 

 

As our Deputy Premier expressed at a REDA meeting in Swift 

Current in early January, when we were young  that’s only a 

short time ago for me; I’m not so sure about the Deputy Premier 

 we assumed we would be working for someone or some 

organization during our lifetime. Perhaps now we should be 

helping the younger generation to look at operating their own 

business. I look forward to great things from REDA and the 

entrepreneurial centres not only in the south-west, but in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the establishment of the Saskatchewan Trade and 

Export Partnership Corporation will help increase trade. This is 

a major source of where Saskatchewan’s economic growth will 

take place in the 21st century. 

 

The local Urban Forest Recyclers Inc. is a great example of the 

value of exports. This company, located in Swift Current, is 

operating 24 hours a day, seven days a week; employs around 

70 people and produces egg flats from recycled newspaper and 

exports almost all of it to areas in the United States. A super 

story. 

 

Another great success story is T S Metals which just recently 

exported metal siding and corrugated roofs to  guess where? 

 to Japan and also to New Zealand. 

 

Preliminary plans are being negotiated to bring in another  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

industry which will use local resources to manufacture a 

product which will be exported to other parts of Canada and the 

United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that has excellent potential is the 

tourism sector. To create growth and increase job growth 

through Partnership For Growth, we will be developing a 

provincial tourism strategy. We as a province have so much to 

offer. And in the great south-west we have numerous bed and 

breakfast farms, dude ranches, superb fishing and water 

activities on the Saskatchewan River, historical settlements 

such as . . . (inaudible) . . . towns, the Mennonite village, and of 

course beautiful regional parks and superb golf courses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of these were developed by the local people 

who saw a need and went out and did something about it. The 

good old Saskatchewan way  it’s working. 

 

I am very excited about the tourism strategy being developed to 

make people aware of the best place in the whole world to live. 

I ask all of you to be on the lookout for “See More Sights.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, many businesses in Saskatchewan are expanding 

and hiring additional employees because of the positive climate 

that has been created for doing business in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has a strong commitment in 

creating meaningful jobs for Saskatchewan people and 

providing for training for jobs of tomorrow. As mentioned by 

the member for Battleford-Cut Knife in her eloquent reply to 

the Speech from the Throne, 1995 was a good year. Retail sales 

jumped 5.1 per cent in the first nine months of 1995, surpassing 

the increase in the so-called tax-free Alberta. 

 

Production of oil rose 8.4 per cent, evidenced by the 

tremendous activity in the oil patch around Swift Current and in 

the south-east. Production of gas rose over 9 per cent. The 

major grains, pulse crops, and speciality crops were harvested at 

a rate of 6 per cent higher than the 10-year average. And the 

employment rate remains the highest in all of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, Saskatchewan is 

considered the best place in the world to live, based on a United 

Nations index. The index defines quality of life by combining 

life expectancy, educational attainment, and gross domestic 

product adjusted for the cost of living. Not only is 

Saskatchewan the best place in the world to live but we 

consistently maintain one of the lowest unemployment rates in 

the country. We accomplish this despite the federal offloading. 

 

We were the first province to balance the budget and along 

comes Ottawa with a hundred million dollar shortfall in transfer 

payments. This federal money was destined for areas like 

health, education, and social programs, the very things the 

Saskatchewan citizens said were most important. 

 

Despite all these cuts from Ottawa  and make no mistake 

about it, the cuts were deep  our government has a plan to 

cushion these Draconian cuts, a plan that is workable, that 

makes common sense, and responds to what the public is 

asking. 

Mr. Speaker, concerning government spending, our government 

has shown positive leadership in this area. It’s a fact, despite the 

naysayers, that our operating costs are already the lowest per 

capita in all of Canada. Clearly we are demonstrating that we 

can reduce spending and cut at the top and do so without 

dismantling the health, education, and social programs as the 

federal government is wanting to do. 

 

Nearly 40 per cent cut in social program transfers over the next 

four-year period by the federal government. There’s no talk of 

tax reform, no talk of Senate abolishment, or the elimination of 

tax breaks to large corporations. It doesn’t require a rocket 

scientist to determine the Liberals’ priorities. 

 

During the last term, our government set out to improve and 

sustain the health benefits which we have come to accept as 

normal. The evolution of medicare to a model of wellness 

required firm and wise leadership and this was provided by our 

government led by our Premier. 

 

The Swift Current constituency is proud to have been the 

forerunner of universal health care in Canada. During the ‘40s 

these people recognized a need, formed partnerships and 

created Health Region No. 1, a board which is still in existence 

and has come full circle. Mr. Frank Peters, who worked in the 

Health Region No. 1, now serves as a member of the Swift 

Current district health board, an example of the commitment of 

the people to necessary reform and the universality of health 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education has been part and parcel of all my life; 

first as a student, then as an educator and an administrator, and 

now as a member of a caucus committee whose one area of 

concern is education. Education has changed, just like 

everything else, and is changing, perhaps not as fast as some 

people would prefer but nevertheless changing. 

 

I’m not as critical of our education system as some people are. 

More students are staying in school longer, are graduating with 

some powerful skills, and I do not believe that it is the fault of 

the education system alone when jobs are not available for the 

graduates. Corporations, society as a whole, and yes, even 

governments must shoulder some of the responsibility along 

with the schools. 

 

If the member from Regina South is an example of our end 

product, our province is in good hands. I have interviewed 

hundreds of grade 12 graduates during the last few years and 

have been impressed by their skills, their confidence, their 

ambitions, and their optimism. 

 

(1500) 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is need for change. Yes, there are 

people who have not received the full benefits of the 

educational system, and yes, changes will occur. That is why 

I’m pleased that our government, instead of following Ottawa’s 

lead, instead of slashing the education transfers by millions of 

dollars, has promised to work with the educational leaders and 

the people of Saskatchewan to develop a system which will be 

fiscally responsible and provide the students with the tools  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 82 

necessary to enter the 21st century. 

 

I’m also very humble in considering the great trust and 

responsibility the people of Swift Current constituency have 

placed in me as an elected representative, and in the traditions 

of the MLAs of the past, I will serve them to the best of my 

ability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to take just a moment to reaffirm 

something you said in your opening remarks as Speaker. I 

believe they were timely and well chosen and I believe they 

speak to the source of our commitment as public servants. I too 

state categorically that the profession of democratic politics is a 

noble one. I believe that the desire to place one’s beliefs, 

affiliations, and character before the public is a profoundly 

selfless act. Further, I believe that those who enter this 

profession are decent, dedicated, public-spirited women and 

men. 

 

Twenty-five hundred years ago, Aristotle said that the good of 

the people must be the goal of the science of politics. Perhaps 

some things have changed over the years, but that observation 

has not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is easy for people to misjudge an institution by 

its dysfunctional parts; to denounce the group because of the 

actions of some individuals. That is an understandable reaction. 

I’m afraid that is what has happened to us — that the cynicism 

which the public seems to have for all politicians has been 

fuelled by the actions of a few, and also of course by the 

uncertainty we all feel as times change so rapidly around us. 

 

If some elected members have lowered the standard, and 

unfortunately they have, Mr. Speaker, then it falls to the rest of 

us to do what we can to restore the dignity of our chosen 

profession  second profession for most of us  to its proper 

place in the mind of the voters. It seems to me that we do that 

by simply rolling up our sleeves and working as diligently as we 

can. Mr. Speaker, I know that you do that and I intend to follow 

your example. 

 

John F. Kennedy once said that in his country every mother 

wanted her son to be president, but none wanted them to be 

politicians. Perhaps we can close that gap a little bit in our time 

here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe our government has a great plan for the 

future and I will certainly be supporting the motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, members 

of the legislature, esteemed guests and friends, it is an honour 

to offer my comments in response to the Speech from the 

Throne. I believe they will reflect what the majority of my 

constituents would say were they here today. 

 

I would first like to offer my congratulations to all elected and 

re-elected members, and to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the Deputy 

Speaker. You have been chosen to uphold the democratic 

traditions of the legislature and I respectfully join all members  

in wishing you well. I would also like to acknowledge the 

Clerk, the Deputy Clerk, and staff of the Legislative Assembly, 

and thank them for their help in the past months. 

 

It is a great privilege to be here representing the Humboldt 

constituency. It is located in central Saskatchewan and features 

several unique historic sites. Within the boundaries of the 

Humboldt constituency are the battlegrounds of Batoche, the 

Red River Trail, and the home of the Benedictine monks, St. 

Peter’s Colony. 

 

Well the people of my constituency, in their great wisdom, have 

elected a woman to get the job done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  And I fully expect that the trend to elect more 

women to govern will continue. There is a clear indication by 

the public of its need for a more balanced approach in decision 

making. The citizens of Saskatchewan require justice, they 

require respect, they require common sense and compassion. 

These are values that are for the most part lacking in 

government today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this province want their elected 

officials to embody those principles. If one looks around our 

world today, it is obvious that there is a power shift taking 

place. People want a government that will assist them in 

directing their energies towards making a vital contribution to 

society. Governments who insist upon clinging to the politics of 

power and control are destroying the very basis of our 

communities. This kind of government is no longer trusted. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if people no longer trust their government, 

they will soon refuse to be governed by them. Elected officials 

will be elected in the future by their ability to understand that 

the mandate given them by the people is one of service and not 

control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, the people of the Humboldt 

constituency are an extraordinary people. They are enthusiastic 

and they have a strong work ethic. They believe in family and 

community. These are qualities that our parents and 

grandparents based their lives on. From their predecessors, they 

have inherited a vision of community centred around their 

spiritual beliefs. They have a respect for individual initiative 

and still they have a clear understanding of their need for each 

other. 

 

This attitude has supported and strengthened them in their 

communities in the past and it continues to do so now. And I 

thank God for that, as it bolsters their resolve to stand firm, 

defending the lifeblood of rural Saskatchewan. Through this 

reliance on one another, they have weathered many storms by 

using positive energies to protect their valued heritage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to share with this Assembly and with 

the people of Saskatchewan the names of just a few individuals, 

organizations, and businesses involved in the ongoing creative 

work of the Humboldt constituency. We have Bourgault  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

Industries, and Freeform Plastic Products of St. Brieux; PAMI 

(Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute), CanAmera Foods, 

Del-Air Systems. We have shared hog operations in Cudworth, 

Humboldt, and throughout the constituency. We have Hillcrest 

Farms, Leon’s Welding & Repair in Bruno, Redi-mix, and 

Buckle Transport in Bruno. We have Belle Pulses, and Mic-Ren 

Seeds in Bellevue; Horizon Seeds, and Hold-on Industries in 

Aberdeen. Kirsch Construction in Middle Lake. Foresters Seed 

Farm, Russell Hanson’s lynx farm near Domremy. We have 

Ferme Champentre vacation farm of St. Denis. Blazing 

Wildflower Seed company in St. Benedict. Wolverine 

Resources of Humboldt, Wakaw Marine & Outfitting, and 

Helga’s Herbs in Aberdeen. 

 

I must also commend the Ursulines, the Elizabethans, and the 

Daughters of Providence for their contributions to health, 

education, and family life over the years. 

 

I am pleased to recognize the following people for their great 

achievements. High-Line Manufacturing of Vonda, and Mumby 

Manufacturing of St. Brieux, for reaching the finals in the 1995 

ABEX (Awards for Business Excellence) awards. And 

Precision Profiles Plus of St. Brieux for winning the ABEX 

award for the best new venture in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Saide Urban, who won the Saskatchewan Career Work 

Education Association Award of Excellence, and Jason 

Leuschen for the E.F. Ambassador Scholarship and for 

participating in the 1995 Youth Parliament, and to Sasha White 

and Trent Washkowsky for winning the Governor General’s 

Medal. 

 

The surrounding communities also enjoy a wide range of 

activities and entertainment provided by a score of sports and 

cultural organizations, including the Humboldt Broncos. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of my constituency have tenacity and 

determination. For example, plans for the REACT waste 

management operation are under way in the Humboldt district. 

Although the Minister of Environment was reluctant to help, 

local supporters were adamant that this value added project 

continue. Through a massive lobbying campaign, they 

eventually convinced the government to honour its 

commitment. 

 

I am equally as proud of the grade 12 students of Humboldt 

Collegiate who have become involved in the political process 

by meeting with the Minister of Highways, explaining their 

views on the need for a new highway, No. 368. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I applaud the farmers of my constituency. 

How very courageous they have chosen to be over the past four 

years through difficult times and blatant disregard by this 

government. They have been betrayed, cheated, and ignored. 

These are people who feed the world, and they deserve the 

utmost of respect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thanks to their tenacious and adaptable spirits, 

they have persevered. And although many of them are down,  

they refuse to be beaten. Many are risk-takers who are growing 

new crops and adding value to their primary commodities. 

 

I can only hope that the government will begin to value farmers 

and truly support their efforts to expand business opportunities 

and create jobs as promised in the Speech from the Throne. I 

worry though because of the present government’s refusal to 

create an environment supportive of new growth. I am 

concerned for all the people of this province. 

 

Our sons and daughters are looking for jobs. Five hundred 

Saskatchewan residents have lost their jobs within the last two 

weeks. Unemployment rates are high. Welfare rolls are high, 

and the number of people on social assistance is growing. More 

people are forced to rely on food banks for sustenance. There is 

growing violence, spousal and child abuse, drug, alcohol, and 

gambling addictions. Child poverty, child prostitution, and 

increasing numbers of teen pregnancies are symptoms of a 

social time bomb waiting to explode. Our children are being hit 

especially hard, Mr. Speaker, and nothing in the government’s 

throne speech was able to reassure me that changes will be 

carefully structured to address these problems, now or in the 

long term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, daily I receive calls from desperate people telling 

me of children falling between the cracks  children 

traumatized and in situations that place their lives at great risk. 

Grandmothers speak of efforts to offer solutions. They have 

sought support and help from the Minister of Social Services, 

only to be referred to the rule book which spells out inadequate 

policies that do not address the root of their problems. The 

system is failing our children, Mr. Speaker. What does their 

future hold if this government continues with their distorted 

sense of values? 

 

We, as members of this Assembly, must remember that the 

business we do here each and every day should be based on 

what is best for the people who elected us. We must respect 

their intelligence and their ability to deal with issues facing 

their communities. We must support their ability to identify 

problems, to pool resources, to develop strategies, and then to 

implement solutions of their own. Mr. Speaker, I will work to 

ensure that the government acknowledges its most important 

obligation: to truly listen to the people of this province. 

 

As Social Service critic for the official opposition, I am taking 

note of how the government is treating the disadvantaged 

people of Saskatchewan. The policies of this government and of 

the previous government have served to create dependencies. 

We all pay a high price for that, not only in actual dollars, but in 

the quality of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that government chooses which social 

forces to liberate and which to suppress. Because of this, 

governments are ultimately responsible for what we become. 

Therefore government members bear a heightened 

responsibility for the moral state of society. And it is their 

responsibility to seek out the best in that society and to develop 

and strengthen it. And I, Mr. Speaker, along with the people of 

this province, truly hope that this government will begin to 

develop policies and programs that will improve the quality of  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 84 

life for those in need. We need policies that serve to restore 

people’s dignity, their faith, and their sense of personal 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government’s discussion paper on 

Redesigning Social Assistance does not live up to this moral 

obligation. For example, had this government placed some 

value on true consultation with people instead of assuming it 

knows best, it may have instituted proposals to address the real 

problems, and not merely those that would manipulate numbers 

for political gain. 

 

I see nothing in this document that will create sustainable 

employment. Rather, this government is suggesting a reform 

package that will move a number of dependent people from one 

program budget to another. Regrettably, this smacks of the 

politics of the 1980s. Mr. Speaker, the government has placed a 

burden on the people of Saskatchewan, both financially and 

spiritually. The majority of people are dissatisfied with the 

government’s handling of social services, education, health 

care, and with the high level of taxation, and lack of jobs. 

 

(1515) 

 

Low voter turn-out during the last election is indicative of the 

growing cynicism evident in this province. Each of us, as 

elected representatives of the people, must realize that every 

decision that we make has long-reaching implications. We must 

restore people's faith in government and eliminate their feelings 

of powerlessness. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am anxiously awaiting the day when the 

NDP government will stop blaming every difficulty on previous 

administrations and the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Blaming others is a sign of weakness and 

demonstrates a refusal to accept responsibility. People expect 

more than finger pointing. They look forward to the day when 

collaborative efforts bring about constructive solutions to our 

problems. 

 

Time and again, Mr. Speaker, I have been persuaded that 

goodwill is slumbering in our society. It’s just that many people 

are confused. They don’t know what to rely on, where to begin, 

or how to find meaningful outlets. 

 

Politicians can awaken this potential, they can offer it direction, 

and they can ease its passage. There are many challenges to be 

met in the days and the years ahead and many opportunities 

worthy of pursuit. It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government will use the power the citizens of this good 

province have assigned to its members to serve the people well. 

 

The best way to improve the lives of people is to encourage 

them to help themselves, to help them see their potential. We 

can help by creating policies and legislation that provides 

sustainable benefits to all of us. 

 

May I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by counselling all members of  

this legislature to respect the wisdom, values, and aspirations of 

our Saskatchewan seniors and to heed their directions when 

facing these challenges. May we conduct ourselves with 

integrity, prudence, and competence that is expected of us as 

members of this Assembly. And may we look to you, Mr. 

Speaker, for guidance and direction in our conduct. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to conclude by expressing my confidence in 

the philosophy of liberalism: free enterprise with a social 

conscience. Therefore I cannot support the motion to approve 

the Speech from the Throne as it makes mockery of the 

principles my constituents and I believe in. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

let me begin by congratulating you, sir, Mr. Speaker. Your new 

role is a vitally important one requiring wisdom, fairness, and 

 yes  determination. And although the members of this 

Assembly will miss your entertaining oratory in debate, we are 

fortunate indeed to be the beneficiaries of many of the attributes 

that you bring to your position as Speaker. And I look forward 

as well to the guidance of the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood as he assumes duties as Deputy Speaker. 

 

I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome new members to 

this Assembly and especially the mover from Battleford-Cut 

Knife and the seconder from Regina South who did admirably 

well in their first speeches to us yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  One of the most enjoyable experiences of 

speaking once again in this forum is to acknowledge the new 

staff and the experienced staff. To the new Sergeant-at-Arms 

and the pages, I do say welcome. And to the Clerk, Clerks, and 

Deputy Clerks and their staff, to those at Hansard, the staff at 

the Legislative Library, to the security who greet us and care for 

us in our absence, to the Office of the Law Clerk, audio-visual 

services who, many people in the province don’t realize, stay 

here as long as we do into the night on occasion, and  yes  

the cleaning staff. I say thanks in advance for facilitating our 

work on the behalf of the public. 

 

It has been one very long year, Mr. Speaker, since I had the 

privilege of replying to the Speech from the Throne in the last 

session. And much has happened since; many, many things 

have changed. The opportunities I have to participate in this 

House may be more limited, but that only makes them much 

more precious. Therefore it is an honour for me to rise today in 

my place as the elected member for Saskatoon Greystone and 

speak these words. 

 

Fellow members of the Assembly, I am the public servant of the 

people of Saskatoon Greystone. The families who live in my 

constituency  parents and grandparents, children and 

grandchildren  are like the families who live in your 

constituencies. Saskatoon Greystone was the largest urban 

constituency before the redrawing of the electoral boundaries. 

And yes indeed, my constituency changed substantially right 

prior to the last election. Greystone has 11,649 voters today. Of  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

all the identified occupations in my constituency, retirees, 

homemakers, and students constitute over 51 per cent of the 

demographic make-up. And 53 per cent of the voters in my 

constituency are women. 

 

Each of the individuals in these 7,300 households in Saskatoon 

Greystone has their own set of personal goals and each its own 

set of obstacles. But all of them have basic needs, and all of 

them want and deserve to provide for their needs or to be 

looked upon with compassion if they are unable to do so. 

 

Too often in the heat of debate and under the pressures of 

partisan politics, we forget that we are here because we asked 

for and received the support of people, the people who vote for 

us in our constituencies. They did not support us because they 

knew how much we enjoyed the happenings of this Assembly. 

They did not support us to further our political careers. They 

supported us because they have expectations  expectations of 

their political system, of their government, of the ever-

increasing taxation dollars that are demanded from them by 

civic, provincial, and federal governments. They elected us to 

represent them. 

 

When times are good, people do not think much about their 

government. They assume that government is there to regulate 

and supervise the operation of agencies and departments 

necessary to keep law and order, to maintain infrastructure, and 

to deliver essential services. When times are good, politicians 

cut ribbons, and sometimes they cut cakes. When times are bad, 

politicians cut programs, and they cut jobs. 

 

Government policies are more than just rhetoric that becomes 

legislation. Government policies have a direct impact on the 

lives of real people. And in the Speech from the Throne, there’s 

a reference to sweeping changes to social assistance. I’m 

optimistic about this commitment and I hope that the 

government will be very thoughtful and very thorough in its 

approach because there are such serious, serious problems in 

this area, many of which were eloquently, I think, described by 

the hon. member from Humboldt. 

 

The legislation that was introduced in Bill 58, for instance, was 

directed in part at eliminating prejudice against social assistance 

recipients. But this government’s failure to take action on the 

issue of damage deposits is now causing a backlash in the 

market-place, a backlash which is directed at this very 

administration. Unfortunately the very people that the 

government was trying to protect by Bill 58 are being caught in 

the crossfire, and they really are hurting. 

 

Whatever the proposed changes, one hopes that they will 

hopefully reward those people who are trying to get ahead, 

trying to become independent of the system, and by the same 

token discourage, in fact deter and, if necessary, even punish 

those who abuse our very precious safety nets. 

 

It is no secret that the social welfare system is not a friend to 

those who are trying to escape its grasp. And a poignant 

example came to me in a telephone call just within this past 

week, and I’d like to share it with you and the members of this 

Assembly. 

A woman called looking for information about how much one 

can earn while collecting social assistance before their benefits 

are reduced. And she was advocating for a young, single mother 

who had reached a hopeless impasse. 

 

In trying to call Social Services, this is what I specifically 

experienced. We experienced the frustration of reaching voice 

mail after voice mail, sometimes being told that the mailbox 

was full. And for people in desperate circumstances to be 

thwarted in their attempts to even talk to a real person at the 

other end of the line is a very, very difficult thing to accept. 

 

Now we did manage to find out that the limit on what this 

young mother can earn before having her benefits reduced is 

$50 plus 20 per cent of her net income, not to exceed $150 a 

month. That, Mr. Speaker, is government policy. 

 

And here is her reality. The young woman gets a total of 

$533.68 every month. In addition, she can earn $150 before her 

benefits are reduced. Every extra dollar she earns comes off her 

welfare cheque, dollar for dollar. 

 

She found a job and she found it through New Careers, a 

government program. She leaves her baby with a sitter and 

works about 25 hours a week at a bar, but it costs almost $20 

per night for a sitter. And at the end of the week she earns $150 

and pays out a hundred dollars for a sitter. At the end of the 

month, she should be ahead by $200. 

 

Now if the system worked, she would be able to have a little 

extra money for the basic needs for herself and for her daughter. 

But the system doesn’t work. It most certainly doesn’t work as 

well as we would like it to and that’s why I assume that this is 

being addressed by the government. 

 

The fact is that of the $600 she earned, $450 is deducted from 

her already meagre allowance of $533.68. And in the end she 

has only $75 more to show for working for a whole month. This 

is her reality, Mr. Speaker. It may not be the case for the 

member from Saskatoon who is shaking his head, but this is in 

fact what she is living. 

 

So why bother working, she asks. Not only does she only come 

out $75 ahead, she now has an extra $400 expense for a sitter. 

This young woman has concluded that her life and 

circumstances are hopeless, a tragedy in any case if people 

believe their circumstance is hopeless. She feels that the system 

is actually punishing her for wanting to work. A young woman 

who is excited just months ago about the possibility of having a 

job and improving her life and earning her own way is now 

bitter, discouraged, and resigned to the living on welfare. 

 

Now we do all hope, and I believe that everyone of us hopes, 

that the government’s commitment to changing social 

assistance in Saskatchewan is very real, and the government has 

my commitment to assist with accomplishing that. 

 

These are not the best of times, Mr. Speaker. They are not the 

best of times for the people of Saskatoon Greystone. They most 

certainly are not the best of times for people who typically 

struggle even when times are good  the poor, the  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 86 

unemployed, the aged, the infirm. These are tough times indeed 

for many, many people, and we must not lose sight that the 

priorities of every member in this Assembly should remain 

fixed on that particular fact. 

 

I know that the opening of the legislature is a time when 

rhetoric is served up like hors d’oeuvres in a holiday season, 

and the Speech from the Throne tells us things like, and I’m 

going to give a direct quote: “Our province has restored its 

financial health.” 

 

But it’s hard for people, when they’re sitting at home listening 

to this, to that very statement, to find the tangible evidence in 

their own reality because they see through the rhetoric pretty 

quickly, Mr. Speaker, and they ask very tough questions, tough 

questions of people like me. They say if our province has 

restored its financial health why are my taxes so high? And they 

say things like this to me: when am I going to get a chance to 

restore the financial health of my family now that the 

government has forced me to exhaust my savings just to pay my 

bills? Those are the questions that I’m being asked. 

 

And when they are told, as in the Speech from the Throne, that 

our economy is growing and strong, they pick up the paper and 

they see that 128 people were laid off at Saskatchewan 

newspapers; and then they look at their phone bill and they see 

long-distance charges to their own children, who now live in 

British Columbia and Alberta because this government failed to 

deliver on its promise in the past of jobs, and they say yes, 

right, the economy is strong and growing but not in this 

province of Saskatchewan or my children wouldn’t have to 

leave. 

 

(1530) 

 

It is important, it is important to be optimistic. It’s important for 

us to be enthusiastic, but it is even more important to be 

responsible and to be very, very realistic, to point to the realism 

and not to try to distort people’s expectations so that we can do 

true problem solving as legislators in this Assembly. 

 

Everyone in government, and indeed in the media, are talking 

about the 21st century, and how exciting it is to prepare for the 

new millennium. But at the kitchen tables in my constituency, 

and I’m sure in other people’s constituencies as well, people are 

talking about the end of the month. They’re talking about the 

new crop year. They’re wondering if they can make it to pay 

day. They’re wondering what will happen to them if they lose 

their job. What will happen if they don’t find a job soon. 

 

In some parts of the province where 1995 was not a good year, 

they’re wondering how they can plant this year’s crop and pay 

last year’s bills. Regular folks are not thinking about preparing 

for the next century, Mr. Speaker, and they’re hoping that this 

administration has not forgotten about today in its enthusiasm 

to get ready for the next millennium. 

 

So I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan and 

those in Saskatoon Greystone can look forward to seeing a 

focus on their own priorities, the people’s priorities, in this, our 

session. 

Now speaking of priorities, the government indicates that yet 

again it’s first priority is jobs and growth. It seems to me that 

the whole Partnership for Renewal was predicated upon the 

notion that jobs and growth were the priority last time. Now, 

the word priority means preceding in order of importance. 

There are very few people in the world who have the luxury of 

having just one priority in their lives, and nobody gets to spend 

all their time on just one priority. 

 

Finance is a priority for everyone. From government to grade 

school allowance earners  everyone has to deal with finances 

and debt and money obligations. But there is also family and 

friends and work and health and community. Just as the citizens 

of Saskatchewan have to divide their time and resources 

between their most pressing priorities, they expect their 

government, this government, to deploy some of the resources 

that they as taxpayers provide to addressing the financial 

management of government. And they fully expect that the rest 

of their resources will be directed to their priorities of job 

creation and health care and education. 

 

To imply, Mr. Speaker, that all the Crown’s horses and all the 

Crown’s men have been so preoccupied with the Department of 

Finance that nothing else could be a priority is truly 

unfortunate. To imply that the Minister of Finance was 

preventing the Minister of Economic Development from doing 

his job is almost absurd. Would the government have us believe 

that job creation will now take off because the Minister of 

Finance and all of the number crunchers who were dealing with 

the management of the deficit and the Treasury Board issues are 

now free to lend a hand or to lend their expertise to getting the 

economy on track? 

 

I think we sell the people of this province short if we think the 

public believes that the Partnership for Growth is any different 

from the Partnership for Renewal. After all, Mr. Speaker, does 

anyone really believe that this government has had job creation 

solutions all along but was withholding it from the people until 

it could become, in quotes, the first priority? Of course not. No 

one believes that. 

 

The facts are that the NDP has failed to stimulate the economy. 

They have failed to create the climate necessary for business to 

go about the business of creating jobs. The fact is that we have 

had a net loss of employers in Saskatchewan under this 

administration. The fact is that there are fewer people working 

today than there were a year ago. This is not rhetoric. It is not 

misplaced prioritizing. It is fact. 

 

And while everyone in Saskatchewan agrees without question 

that it is incumbent upon any government to manage with fiscal 

prudence, while everyone agrees that jobs are a priority, while 

everyone agrees that the NDP have been talking about jobs 

being a priority since 1991, nobody can measure the evidence 

that the NDP has successfully addressed this priority. Whether 

it was the NDP’s first or second priority is irrelevant. What is 

relevant to people looking for work is that this government 

talked the talk, but not walked the walk. It has promised jobs 

but not delivered jobs. 

 

And so we say beware, because the people are watching us.  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

They’re watching all of us, and they’re wanting so much for 

this administration to succeed in this very, very crucial area. 

They’re wanting all of us to work on their behalf to do the best 

job possible. But they’re not willing to accept from any of us 

empty promises or excuses or simple finger pointing any longer. 

They want action; they want it swift and they want it decisive. 

And they want results  not manipulated statistics, not bizarre 

interpretations of isolated blips on the seasonally adjusted 

employment figures. 

 

They want to go out and apply for a real job and they want to 

get a real pay cheque. That’s what they want. That is what they 

are being promised and that is what they deserve to expect. 

 

Now how it is achieved isn’t important to any one of them. 

When it is achieved is very important because they want jobs 

now. And they want the 10,000 jobs promised in the last term 

but were not delivered. And they want the other 30,000 jobs 

that the government promised by the end of 1999, and they 

want them in a timely fashion. And they are waiting and I’m 

waiting too. 

 

The throne speech talked about reducing regulatory burden, 

about trade and export, about regional economic development. 

These are very, very good things to talk about. They’re even 

more important things and better things to do. Saskatchewan 

can do much better. On that we all concur. And it will do better 

when the focus is on the right things. 

 

But the disconcerting thing is that this government continues to 

believe that it has been doing the right things in the economy 

when it really has been doing the left things, or what I term the 

wrong things  high taxation levels, the decision in workers’ 

compensation, union-only tendering policies. These are 

disincentives. And the government knows this because the job 

creators come to them and tell them this. 

 

As many of us agree and have agreed and I think many people, 

perhaps even on the government side, would concur, Mr. 

Howe’s statement in the Star-Phoenix of March 4 really does 

state something with which we have to be able to concur with 

an open mind. Now this was right under where it stated, 128 

jobs lost, and it’s from the March 14 Star-Phoenix, and I quote: 

 

The economy should be roaring down the blacktop judging 

by the strong signals coming from the retail, resource, and 

agriculture sectors. Export sales are also up dramatically. 

Despite all the good news, the economy is sputtering 

because of government policies that choke business and 

job creation. 

 

Now Howe says the economy grew by about 2 per cent in 1994 

and that it will likely do the same thing in 1995. This is less 

than Saskatchewan’s historical average of over 3 per cent. 

 

Now how do we figure this, Mr. Speaker? Just think on this. 

How do we expect to even maintain our historical average if we 

can’t even have average growth when we have optimal 

economic conditions? How could we have had actual growth of 

more than 3 per cent despite years of 21 per cent interest rates, 

drought, grasshoppers, low resource prices, and yet today with  

low interest rates, higher than average agricultural prices, 

zooming resource prices, we can’t even maintain the average, 

never mind exceed the projections. 

 

Now there are plenty of ideas about how to get government out 

of the economy. One can decide on which to pick. But at least 

pick one, is what I say, Mr. Speaker. Choose a plan which will 

stop the meddling and the market-place manipulation, and then 

let our economy grow for people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this government wants to do right by the 

people of Saskatchewan. I believe they want to succeed where 

they, perhaps, and others have failed in the past. But in order to 

do that, there has to be change. The election is over. No one is 

going to change the government. But perhaps we can help to 

change the way that all members of government think. 

 

Perhaps through debate we can modify the approach on some 

issues. And if we can do that, as members of the opposition and 

as members of the Assembly as a whole, then we are going to 

most certainly earn our pay cheques and deserve the respect of 

the electors that they showed us at the polls in June. 

 

There will be almost 100 pieces of legislation brought forward 

this session. That’s a gargantuan load of distractions for a 

government that claims to have only one priority. There are 

more than 500 statutes on the books in Saskatchewan. This 

means that by what will come forward in this session, that will 

be changed by some 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It would be easy to conclude that this government intends to 

tinker with perhaps all of them before its time in power ends. 

The trouble is, Mr. Speaker, that there has been too much 

tinkering and not enough strategically planned reform to our 

system. And I truly hope that there is a strategy at work by 

which these 100 pieces of legislation and amendments will play 

some role in creating a much more viable free enterprise 

economy in our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I hope that the government will replace the ready, fire, aim 

approach it employed in health care reform with a more careful 

plan when it comes to the proposed reforms in education and 

municipal government. And it is simply not good enough to 

have the attitude that something is wrong with Saskatchewan so 

government will arbitrarily fiddle with everything, hoping that it 

might accidentally push the right button, or pull the right lever, 

as the Minister of Economic Development is so fond of saying. 

 

By tinkering with everything, as this government seems to love 

to do, Mr. Speaker, the situation could go from malfunctioning 

to irreparable. And because everything has been fiddled with, 

from health care to education to the economy to municipal 

government, we may indeed arrive at a point where nothing is 

working and nobody can fix anything. 

 

So I urge the government to continue to seek advice, and most 

certainly to heed that advice from people who are out there and 

live day-to-day lives, both in the business world and municipal 

government and so forth. By all means, the government should 

fix crop insurance, but one hopes that while doing so, it will  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 88 

indeed keep in mind what crop insurance is for and who it is 

for. It is not about politics. It’s not about patronage. It’s not 

even about getting even with previous administrations for what 

they did to our people. It is so important to obtain 

knowledgeable input about building the kind of efficient, 

reliable system that can operate with low overhead and set a 

zero tolerance policy for political interference. 

 

It’s good that this will be addressed, but the process is what we 

want to hear about. And it’s important to note what producers 

want, and that it is what the people who understand their roles 

as employees at Crop Insurance really want too. 

 

I want to mention briefly the aspect of intergovernmental 

cooperation, Mr. Speaker. This is a tough world. It’s tough for 

all governments. And when we have common goals, we have to 

stick together. We have to support one another along the way 

despite our partisan differences. People will tolerate 

partisanship on the campaign trail; in fact they come to expect 

it. And they expect it at political gatherings as well. But they 

don’t want to see it or hear it when the best interests of their 

families and their communities are at stake. 

 

(1545) 

 

And I understand the federal and provincial governments across 

the nation are in a very difficult era of devolution and 

evolution. There will be changes to the status quo similar to 

those which the provincial government has initiated with 

municipal governments. It is so critical for our provincial 

government to acknowledge the contributions that have been 

made by the federal government to programs in our province 

that benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

If this Assembly continues to be a platform for the provincial 

New Democrats to denigrate the federal Liberals, instead of a 

vehicle through which federal-provincial cooperation can be 

fostered and acknowledged, then we can’t pretend to be acting 

in the best interests of the people who elected both 

governments, Mr. Speaker, because it was the people’s choice. 

It was their choice to put a majority of Liberal MPs (Members 

of Parliament) in Ottawa and a majority of New Democrats in 

this Assembly. 

 

So it is incumbent upon us to be gracious about the resources 

that flow to us from the taxpayers through the federal 

government from Ottawa. It is incumbent upon us to present a 

fair and accurate picture of how those resources are being 

allocated. And everyone is aware that there will be changes to 

transfer payments in health care and education and social 

services. But not everyone wants to play the game of good cop, 

bad cop that this government seems determined to force into the 

agenda of every speech and every question period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it concerns me a great deal because I truly believe 

that the people of this province will not be served well if in fact 

Reform members are sent to Ottawa the next go-around. And if 

we think we will be better off sending Members of Parliament 

to Ottawa who carry the Reform flag, we will not. Our 

government relations will not be as good. We most certainly 

would not have the same kind of cooperation. And with this  

incessant, persistent denigration, this is precisely the message 

that the people of this province will receive. And I don’t think 

that is going to serve us well in terms of serving the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the people of our province and of our nation 

from which governments receive their mandate. The throne 

speech indicates that the government, and I quote: “accepts a 

renewed mandate from the people of Saskatchewan with 

enthusiasm.” Once again I say, caution. And I caution the 

government not to get caught up in rhetoric and forget our 

collective reality. Yes they won the election. But the reality is 

only 68 per cent of eligible electors voted. That’s a tragedy, and 

it’s a travesty, and it is an embarrassment. And less than half of 

those people, Mr. Speaker, voted to endorse this government. 

That’s correct. Of 636,000 eligible voters only 408,000 people 

voted, and 193,000 of them gave this government its mandate. 

As a percentage, that is support from just one in three people 

eligible to vote. 

 

It is important not to confuse being elected with having the 

unequivocal support of the majority. Ultimately we have to 

remember that people deserve to know what the plan is for the 

province because this is where they want to spend their futures. 

And regardless of the enthusiasm for its mandate, this 

government has an obligation. It has an obligation to the people 

to let them know its plans, specific plans, openly and in detail 

from the outset if it intends to make any more sweeping 

changes that will affect the fabric of people’s communities. 

 

Now I was hopeful of course that I could play a greater role in 

this session, in which we could set aside the rhetoric and focus 

on the real, day-to-day problems of people and find ways in 

which we could all create the solutions. My role in this session 

will now be far, far different from what most of us, I think, 

anticipated that it would be. However, Mr. Speaker, one thing is 

certain; I am here to serve. I am here to serve the constituents of 

Greystone, and I intend to use every opportunity to convey their 

concerns, their criticisms, and indeed their compliments on the 

performance of this government throughout the session. 

 

And before my summation, Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank my 

family, who have given me unconditional love and support in 

my seven years in political life. And too often they’ve really 

sacrificed their time and their needs for me for what they saw as 

the longer-term, greater good. To them and to my true friends, I 

say my life would be meaningless without them. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, the throne speech as always is laden 

with good intentions. And as always, the proof will be in the 

pudding. There are many things missing from the speech such 

as a commitment to lower taxes and increase our competitive 

position. The intention to tinker with dozens of statutes is also a 

concern for me, and I made it a comment last week about the 

fact that there is a government much larger than our own 

serving people many, many greater in populace that are putting 

forward 30 pieces of legislation in their province. 

 

I also want to point out, interestingly enough, that a year ago 

they put forward 53 pieces of legislation in Alberta. And 

collectively the private members’ public Bills and the private  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

members’ Bills put forward in Alberta exceeded the number of 

government Bills. And as a result of that kind of participation 

from their official opposition and the encouragement of the 

public to get involved with private members’ Bills, they were 

able to have hearings ignited throughout the province that did a 

great deal to influence public policy. And I think that that’s 

great. I think it’s great because what it does is to renew a sense 

of democracy and involvement in government practice. 

 

Having said all that, Mr. Speaker, for the record let me say that 

while I support much of the intent of the Speech from the 

Throne, I shall, out of respect for the electors of Saskatoon 

Greystone and the many Saskatchewan citizens with whom I 

continue to consult, I will withhold my support from the motion 

until such time as I see evidence that the good intentions are 

resulting in tangible, positive actions by this government. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I never thought I 

would have one up on you, but here we are me in my second 

term as MLA, you in your first term as Speaker. If you need any 

help from an old-timer like me, just ask. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do congratulate you. Like other members, I feel 

good that you are in charge of the House. With you in charge, 

dignity, order will be kept. I congratulate you, as I thank the 

voters of Saskatchewan Rivers constituency for re-electing me. 

Some of my voters know me from last time. Some I inherited 

with the changes of the new boundaries. But I am proud to say 

that the voters in both the old and new parts of my constituency 

support me and reject opposition parties. 

 

Like the member from Battleford-Cut Knife said, my re-election 

was because of the record and the leadership of the New 

Democratic Party. I am proud to be part of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford:  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Rivers extends 

from MacDowall to the west, to Birch Hills on the south, White 

Fox on the east, Waskesiu on the north. It swallows the town of 

Prince Albert and spits out two constituencies  Prince Albert 

Carlton and Prince Albert Northcote. There are five first nation 

reserves in my constituency. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly today, 10 students and a teacher from the 

Earl Grey School, grade 11 and 12 law class. 

 

I would ask all members to please show their respect and make  

them welcome. And I want to welcome them here this afternoon 

and hope you enjoy the proceedings that are going on. So I’d 

ask all members to please welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Langford:  As I said, Mr. Speaker, there are five first 

nation reserves in my constituency  Sturgeon Lake, Little 

Red, Muskoday, James Smith, and Wahpeton. We have 

forestry, farming, diamond explorations, fishing and farming 

activities, and small-business classes. We have pulp and paper 

and several small lumber mills and post-treating plants. 

 

There are traditional crops, but some very exciting new 

developments in farming are also taking place. The town of 

Choiceland, on the top of the farming area of Saskatchewan, 

has a potato-processing plant that provides jobs for Choiceland 

so they don’t have to go to our large cities. And we have 

farmers in the Birch Hills area that are planting garlic. Garlic, as 

you know, Mr. Speaker, is the wonder drug of today. Few 

people who chew several cloves of garlic a day suffer from 

being . . . (inaudible) . . . I think that’s a proven fact. 

 

Saskatchewan Rivers is the entrance to most of Saskatchewan’s 

best tourist attraction. Part of the Partnership for Growth is 

built on tourism, and people come here because of the fishing, 

the hunting, and the scenery. Every year people in the Candle 

Lake area host Sask 100, Mr. Speaker, a rally that attracts 

competition and spectators and fans from all over 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan is a good place to live, work, and visit, Mr. 

Speaker. I have the same pride in my constituency that all 

members have because there are things happening. The people 

are hard-working and they are optimistic. Unlike the member of 

the two and a half opposition parties, they are optimistic. They 

are positive about the future, not because of the government is 

doing . . . what it’s doing, but what the people are doing with 

the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All over the province, Mr. Speaker, businesses, workers, 

industry, cooperatives, communities, and individuals are getting 

together to take our society into the next century. We see the 

cooperation in the foundation of REDAs across the province. 

We see it in the building of exciting new industries in 

agriculture and telecommunications. We see it in the way 

people are working together to modernize our health, social 

assistance, and education and training programs. 

 

We are not staying put; we are moving ahead. At least some of 

us are. All we hear from across the floor is fear and whining. 

Don’t change this, don’t do that, don’t take us ahead; we want 

to go back. 

 



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 90 

I look across the floor, Mr. Speaker, and I see well-dressed, 

well-fed, well-groomed people. People who are working, who 

were working before they came here. I don’t think any of them 

have missed a meal in a while, any more than I have, and all I 

hear from this well-fed bunch is complaining. 

 

Nothing is good enough for them. They either want 

Saskatchewan to be like Alberta, Alabama, or any place else. 

They do not want Saskatchewan to be like Saskatchewan. The 

only way they will be happy is when Saskatchewan people 

betray their roots. 

 

I don’t think this is going to happen, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

members of the Liberal Party, I can say this. There might be a 

few things wrong with Saskatchewan, but 90 per cent of the 

trouble we have now are caused by your brothers and sisters in 

Ottawa, the federal Liberals. 

 

(1600) 

 

The member from Thunder Creek and Ottawa spends all their 

time defending poor Paul Martin and says Ottawa . . . they say 

nothing, not a word for Saskatchewan. And the same goes for 

rest of them. 

 

What did they say when the Crow rate was finished by the 

Liberals after the Mulroney Tories crippled it? They said 

nothing. What did they say when freight rates were increased by 

Ottawa? They said nothing. What did they say when Ottawa 

dumped hundreds of off-reserve welfare recipients onto the 

province, betraying its responsibilities? They said nothing. 

 

What did they say when Paul Martin cut $100 million from the 

transfer payments? What did they say when Martin said he 

would take another $100 million out next year? 

 

An Hon. Member:  Nothing. 

 

Mr. Langford:  Right. When Saskatchewan acts, they 

complain. When Ottawa retreats, they say nothing. What a great 

bunch of representatives of the people of Saskatchewan. The 

Tories want Saskatchewan to be some place else. The Liberals 

want to pay for someone else. New Democrats are perfectly 

happy with where we are, and we’re excited about what is 

happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, because I believe the future is 

positive for Saskatchewan and because I believe this throne 

speech sets us on the right path for the future, I will support the 

motion and reject the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I stand here before the 

Assembly today as the member for the Athabasca constituency 

and as a proud member of the official opposition. 

 

Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate you on 

being elected Speaker of the Assembly, as I am very confident 

that you will treat the position with dignity and all fairness. I 

would also like to congratulate the Deputy Speaker  

and all members upon their election to the Legislative 

Assembly and for their commitment to the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my favourite number in anything is 99, not for 

Wayne Gretzky but for the year 1999. But, Mr. Speaker, for a 

long, long time I have wished that these words be spoken in this 

hall of this Legislative Assembly. These words are from the 

people of the Athabasca constituency and they are calling for 

economic and social justice for the people of the North. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, there comes a time for every politician of 

every stripe and every colour to take a stand and to draw a line 

in which they fundamentally believe in, Mr. Speaker. And today 

I wish to announce to my own party, and especially to the 

Government of Saskatchewan, that I’ll protect with all my 

energy, commitment and ability, the rights of the people of the 

Athabasca constituency. As well I’ll be continually bringing 

forward their issues and concerns that have for many years not 

been heard in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I will not get into detail, Mr. Speaker, as to 

the background of the Athabasca constituency because my 

friends opposite of me have had a member in here for 20 years. 

And if they don’t know about the Athabasca constituency, then 

I’m afraid they’ll never find out. So, Mr. Speaker, I will not get 

into detail as to the background of my constituency. 

 

As elected members of the Legislative Assembly we must stop 

turning our backs on the northern Saskatchewan people and 

especially the native people. Over the next year and the year 

after and the year after, I will continue to hammer home that 

message and work to establish a cooperative relationship 

between this government and all governments with the northern 

and native people. A message that I hope, Mr. Speaker, will 

stay and will echo throughout these halls for many, many years. 

 

It is time that we take a fresh innovative approach to the plight 

of northern Saskatchewan’s people. An approach that respects 

northern residents. An approach that respects and builds on the 

dreams and aspirations of the people. An approach that respects 

the unique qualities of the entire northern part of this province. 

 

I have no profound message to make, Mr. Speaker, nor do I 

have a dazzling sideshow to highlight the issues of the North. 

What I do have is a message of common concerns and a 

common sense northern approach. 

 

Over time governments have been told time and again what 

needs to be done; and governments, time after time, have not 

listened to northern people. This is not right, Mr. Speaker. 

Politics above all else should be about humanity and should be 

about respect. Mr. Speaker, the people of the North know 

without a doubt that they have been taken for granted for many, 

many years. The northern people have propped up industries, 

huge bureaucratic systems, and generated wealth beyond 

anyone’s wildest dreams, and they have received little respect in 

return. They have received little respect from government and 

in some cases little respect from corporations. This lack of  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

respect has been continued by this government. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne, the government has addressed 

the northern people in three paragraphs  three paragraphs, 

Mr. Speaker. Two deal with mining and the other is an empty 

statement that I assume is supposed to make northern people 

feel better. What a message. And I quote: 

 

My government will also work with First Nations and 

Metis to continue to promote and foster greater 

self-sufficiency, and new economic opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are empty words from a government that has 

continued to ignore the people of the North. The one ray of 

hope I have for the people of the Athabasca constituency, 

although I admit I am sceptical, is that this government will 

include the North if they do double the number of regional 

economic development authorities. I will work with anyone to 

help make this come to pass. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  My message to the government is clear. Stop 

taking advantage of the North. Stop ignoring the North, and 

help the North. And we will work together because, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of my constituency have much to offer  

more than just mining and more than just forestry. They need to 

be encouraged and deserve encouragement to bolster the 

economy from the ground up and to make sure the economy is 

community based and community controlled. They need a 

government that will help them establish a sustainable economy 

based on viable business opportunities and a hope for the 

future. It is time for a new approach for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I am also concerned about other promises as well, in the 

government’s throne speech. For example, they promised to 

alleviate child poverty. But, Mr. Speaker, this is a promise that 

was made in 1991, and still many of my people in my 

constituency are still living below the poverty line. A promise is 

a promise. How can they be expected to have faith in this 

government’s words when they say one thing and do another? 

All the suffering, in spite of all the wealth of the resources that 

northern Saskatchewan has to offer, and they continue to ignore 

that. 

 

When it comes to health, Mr. Speaker, the North is ahead of 

everyone else. No they’re not ahead in services. No they’re not 

ahead in facilities. The North is ahead in per capita cases of 

diabetes, heart disease, cancer, and the list goes on. I fear the 

government may have forgotten northern people in their 

so-called health reforms. 

 

I’d also like to point out that the grave problems with our 

provincial highways were not addressed in the government’s 

throne speech message. People in my constituency have to deal 

with horrendous road conditions, Mr. Speaker. Road conditions 

that could affect the safety and yes, even the lives of these 

people. There are major problems when communities like 

Garson Lake cannot be connected to the rest of the province. 

When large communities like Turnor Lake, Patuanak, Dillon, 

and Pinehouse cannot be accessed in the spring and in the fall  

because of washouts and unacceptable road conditions. 

 

And I guess to summarize the road situation and the many 

frustrations that the people of the North have, one elder from 

my constituency was told over a period of years that the road to 

his community of Turnor Lake was on the list to be fixed up 

and repaired. After a few years, Mr. Speaker, he has found out 

that you can’t travel on a list. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, apparently the government 

doesn’t care. We talk about northern housing, but many 

disabled people live in substandard housing; when people who 

feel the blast of the icy cold of winter have to put insulation in 

their windows to keep their houses warm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not lying to the Assembly here, I’m telling 

the truth. You talk about health services. When one community 

has trailers lumped together to form their hospitals, that’s health 

service, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Education, the last stop effort of trying to solve the northern 

problems, is being ignored. Recreation, problems galore. 

Seniors, they’re struggling. And many times seniors have to 

help raise families because of the lack of income. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems the government does not care about the 

people in the North, especially the far North, who are also 

burdened with extremely high food prices and isolation. 

 

Today is 1996. Way up in the far northern part of my 

constituency is a community called Stony Rapids. Stony Rapids 

hasn’t got water and sewer, Mr. Speaker. How many years and 

how many millions of dollars have been poured out of the 

North? Why hasn’t, in this day and age, 1996, Stony Rapids has 

not got no water and sewer? Black Lake, asking for a road, Mr. 

Speaker  one and a half million dollars this province 

contributed to a road. What kind of a road will one and a half 

dollars build  120 kilometres of road. I don’t think it’s going 

to happen. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about government, talking to 

northern people, I ask them to include them in any plans they 

have; to consult with them and get their permission. Mr. 

Speaker, you have to include people in any aspect of 

community development because people in the North do have 

good ideas. It is an insult to their intelligence when you refuse 

to help them make decisions about their own lives. 

 

I ask the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, what the people of the 

North can pass on to their children. They don’t own land, they 

don’t own the houses that they live in, they can’t control the 

system that operates in their communities, and they’re largely 

ignored and not allowed to become involved in the northern 

economy. It is the provincial government that can establish the 

channels that will take and promote independence and growth 

through business and economic development. 

 

This is what this is all about, Mr. Speaker. It is about the 

children and the future. All the people of my constituency long  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 92 

for is a fair chance to participate in the development and in the 

prosperity of the North. Through you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

members of the Legislative Assembly, I ask that you not judge 

northern people harshly on the actions of a few, but rather on 

the dreams of the many. Perhaps all of us have not been strong 

enough nor supportive enough to really build an understanding 

amongst the people of the North and the people of the South. 

 

However, it is not too late. We can still build respect and 

understanding. We must remember as government that we will 

reap what we sow, and we cannot continue sowing the seeds of 

discontent with any group or any region of this great province. 

We all must be treated fairly. This great province, we all share. 

This land holds many stories of success, Mr. Speaker, and these 

stories come from every region of Saskatchewan including the 

North and including the aboriginal people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to outline 

the philosophy of my caucus. We believe in the free enterprise 

system, but we also have a strong social conscience to protect 

those who need protection. Mr. Speaker, it was not the Liberals 

who dragged this province into debt; it was not the Liberals 

who closed down 40 per cent of rural hospitals; it most 

certainly was not the Liberals who balanced the budget by 

increasing every tax and every conceivable utility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Belanger:  I want to make it completely clear, Mr. 

Speaker, what a Liberal member is. I often hear members 

opposite talk about the Saskatchewan spirit. At this point, I plan 

to write the producer of a TV show that many of you may have 

heard of called Unsolved Mysteries. What I’d like these guys to 

do is to do a show on the . . . do a special on the Saskatchewan 

provincial economy, because it’s a mystery to me why we’re 

missing the economic growth this province both needs and 

want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  But despite this government’s regressive 

policy, I believe the Saskatchewan economy will do well over 

the next few years. The Saskatchewan spirit is alive and well. 

It’s alive and well in the mines of Esterhazy and the forests of 

the North and the wheat fields throughout this province, with 

the Indian bands throughout the province, and especially in the 

North, and also the Metis communities. This is largely thanks to 

these people and the rest of the Saskatchewan people and not 

this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Just imagine for a minute, Mr. Speaker, what 

this province could do with lower fuel costs, lower taxes, lower 

costs of government, lower workmen’s compensation rates, and 

a truly positive climate for business to exist. That, Mr. Speaker, 

is where the Saskatchewan spirit is  it is with the private 

sector. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  If I was in government I would get the 

taxpayers’ money out of businesses and Crown corporations 

because businesses can survive and thrive without government 

interference if the government simply provides the right 

climate, a climate that encourages businesses to seize on all 

opportunities and to build their own successes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the official opposition cares about the working 

people. We understand what a mortgage is; we understand what 

it means to feed and clothe our children. This is why, Mr. 

Speaker, we must also protect the working men and women of 

this province. Not through propping up of an artificial 

economy, not through union-only preference policies, not 

through needless bureaucrats, but through careful and clear 

negotiations with business to ensure that our Crown 

corporations remain viable in this global community. We owe 

respect to the working people and we must protect them by 

ensuring that businesses can survive and thrive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then and only then can we fix our roads, protect 

our health, educate our children, and provide support for the 

needy and elderly. This, Mr. Speaker, is what our caucus is all 

about. It is what government should be all about. And I don’t 

believe we have a choice. I think it is time for aggressiveness 

and I think it’s time for Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Yes we are inexperienced in the rules of this 

House, but we’re not inexperienced in providing options, ideas, 

and solutions for the people of this great province. We know it 

is our responsibility and duty to provide an effective opposition 

to government. This province cannot be governed without an 

effective opposition. 

 

Make no mistake, we will come up with our own ideas of 

governance and we will challenge this government on its 

archaic methods of governing, but we are not about to showboat 

or use silly rules to attract attention. We will not merely try to 

impress the media, Mr. Speaker. Our first priority as a Liberal 

caucus is to hold this government accountable for their actions. 

Our priority is to consult with people and develop innovative 

approaches for this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Let me assure each and every member of this 

Assembly that this is what the Liberals will do. Our message for 

the people of Saskatchewan will be clear from here on in. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, at times and especially these times, it is 

difficult to be a politician, and yes, even a Liberal. But I, like 

everyone else, knows that anything that is easy is not worth the 

battle. 

 

Others in this House know the sacrifice and pain of being a 

politician. However, in our hearts and the hearts of many others 

throughout Saskatchewan, we’ll always believe in what we can 

become and not be limited by our past. 



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger:  In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to offer a 

heartfelt thanks to my own father who should be with me today, 

and also people like Raymond Dion who passed on, also from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, who really had a great influence on my life; and 

people like the former member of the NDP, Lawrence Yew, 

who went through great struggles, health problems galore. And 

also to my mother who passed away at a very young age. When 

I was four years old I lost my mother. And also to my family, to 

my wife and to my children, to my stepmother, and 24 others in 

my family, that I want to personally acknowledge them today, 

as they have shared my downfalls and my achievements, 

including the election to this Assembly. 

 

As well I want to thank the people of Ile-a-la-Crosse for 

supporting me throughout my years as mayor. And certainly 

they know my downfalls and my attributes, and there’s more 

downfalls than attributes, but I wish also to thank them for their 

support. 

 

My victory belongs to them, and a simple thank you is all that I 

can offer. But my victory also belongs to the people of the 

Athabasca constituency, the people who have trusted me to 

come here and start building peace and harmony and begin to 

provide benefits through politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask each and every one of the members of the 

Assembly to start now, to start building on each other’s 

strengths and to leave a legacy of compassion and 

understanding, as well as a future of successful, tolerant, 

independent children of all races, religions, and backgrounds. 

 

This is what my constituency is about, and this is what Buckley 

Belanger is about. It is because of this that I cannot support the 

motion to approve the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know that some of the confusion has to be that the minister 

responsible for Highways and Transportation has just got some 

new spectacles, and I know that you’ve obviously confused him 

a bit with me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and he’s nearly as 

good looking as I am, thank you very much, the member from 

Prince Albert. 

 

I want, at this time, Mr. Speaker, to thank you, and I’m very 

pleased today to enter into the debate. 

 

For the past term, I’ve had the privilege to serve as a private 

member of this Assembly and observe with some interest the 

Speaker’s chair, wondering why people like you, sir, would 

ever be drawn to this type of a job. And after a brief analysis of 

my interests, I’ve drawn a couple of conclusions. 

 

First, I see, Mr. Speaker, as speakers being people who have no 

desire to be inconspicuous, in spite of what you had said in your 

victory address. Otherwise I would wonder why people like you 

would dress in long black robesand by the way, that one is 

still a little long on you, sir  and that you’d wear that  

three-cornered hat that always often leaves one wondering at 

first glance which direction you’re actually proceeding in. And 

you keep jumping up and down in your chair, monopolizing a 

great deal of the time in this Assembly, and I hardly see that as 

being inconspicuous. 

 

And secondly, I think that speakers are people who have never 

experienced an abusive relationship in their lives, and they see 

this as an opportunity where they might have one and get paid 

at the same time. 

 

On a more serious note, speakers and those who aspire to be 

speakers  and unfortunately we can only have one Speaker  

are men and women who serve and demonstrate throughout 

their lifetimes values and principles that exemplify fairness, 

compassion, and respect of the highest order for the people in 

the institutions from which they serve. 

 

And it is with that high regard that I hold both the member from 

Regina Victoria and you, sir, in. I know that this Assembly will 

be well served by you and your desire for the dedication to see 

that those principles and traditions of this institution are 

maintained and strengthened. And throughout your term, you 

can rest assured that my personal support will be there as you 

try to achieve those objectives. And I congratulate you, sir, on 

your position. 

 

I wish, Mr. Speaker, to also congratulate my colleague from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood on his election as Deputy Speaker. 

It appears that this Assembly is beginning to establish a bit of a 

tradition in selecting members for Speaker’s and Deputy 

Speaker’s chair from Last Mountain-Touchwood. And I know 

the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood very well and 

truly appreciate his close friendship and association. He has 

always shown a great respect for the rules and proceedings of 

this Assembly and will do a fine job as the Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also at this time, Mr. Speaker, want to take the opportunity to 

thank the member from Moosomin for seeking the Deputy 

Speaker’s chair and to wish him well in his new term. And I 

admire his respect and sincerity for this institution. I also wish 

to congratulate all of the members, Mr. Speaker, who have been 

elected for the first time, and concur with others who 

acknowledge the honour that is felt by being chosen to 

represent their constituents. 

 

At the same time I wish to acknowledge my disappointment in 

the loss of some of the colleagues in the June election 

campaign. I know they too have worked hard for the betterment 

of their constituencies, as will all of the new elected members. I 

know that their accomplishments will be noted and will be 

recognized as time passes, and I want to wish them well in their 

new lives and expect to see their presence in the near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to recognize our new Sergeant-at-Arms, 

Mr. Pat Shaw, who for many years he and his family have spent 

in the community of Yorkton. Yorkton’s loss is this Assembly’s 

and Regina’s gain. And welcome to the new pages, clerks, and 

the rest of the staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I particularly wish to thank the constituents of  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 94 

Yorkton for bestowing upon me the confidence and honour to 

serve for a second term. Although I feel a little lonely these 

days in red dot . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  My experiences told me that this will not 

be for ever, and with some hard work you can take this red dot 

and make it back into a red square. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  As you know, Mr. Speaker, on many 

occasions that I have a forum like this I always like to talk 

about the significance that Yorkton plays in this provincial 

community. And, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton continues to be the 

fifth largest city in the province of Saskatchewan and it remains 

the third largest trading area, only second to Regina and 

Saskatoon. And we warn them that soon we will be encroaching 

in their area. With the increase of our regional economic 

development authorities, soon we’re going to be incorporating 

either Regina or Saskatoon. We’re not sure yet. 

 

Throughout the period from 1991 to 1995 we have seen steady 

growth in our city population base. However our retail industry 

has grown through major expansions. We have seen, Mr. 

Speaker, growth in two national retail companies and the 

development of a new national company in our city. At the 

same time, our small-business development has remained stable 

with steady growth. 

 

Yorkton is supported by an extremely strong agricultural 

district. Stability and growth of companies like 

Morris-Rod-Weeder, Leon manufacturing, along with record 

sales in our farm machinery sector this year reflect growing 

confidence in our agricultural sector. This, Mr. Speaker, is a 

result of our agricultural diversification over the last four years. 

 

For the period of the last four years, we have seen marginal 

growth in our employment sector particularly in that of our 

retail service industry and small business. Throughout the past 

several years, we have seen the growing relationship and 

partnership with the community and district through the 

economic development commissions, health districts, and 

REDAs all working together. 

 

The results of those partnerships have certainly strengthened 

our region and provided for greater employment opportunities 

for the future. And this exemplifies the kind of work, Mr. 

Speaker, that our government has been working on throughout 

the past term and sets as its target for its new session. 

 

Our citizens of Yorkton continue to be recognized for their 

hospitality and organizational expertise. During the past term 

we’ve had the pleasure of hosting several major sporting events 

in curling, slow pitch, as well as the first national high school 

student rodeo. 

 

In 1994, Yorkton hosted the national student leadership 

conference, the second occasion that we’ve had the opportunity 

to host that where it had its beginning in 1984 in our  

community. In 1995, our city had the pleasure of hosting the 

western premiers’ conference which was exceptionally well 

received and acknowledged by all participants who attended in 

our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to stand here in my place today in this House and 

acknowledge the successes of our community is indeed a great 

honour for me. I am truly humbled by the privilege that has 

been bestowed me by the constituents of Yorkton, and I want to 

thank them for their support and their confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, 1995 has been a particularly 

exceptional, rewarding year for me not only in the fact that my 

constituents have returned me to this House for a second term, 

but that Premier Romanow has looked to the constituency of 

Yorkton to select . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. I will have to remind the 

member, and being a veteran member I know that he does 

realize this, that we are not allowed to use the proper names of 

members in the Assembly. And I’ll bring that to his attention 

and ask him to proceed. 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Premier 

Romanow as he looked to the constituency of Yorkton . . . the 

Premier. I knew that the Premier looked to Yorkton to select me 

as the cabinet minister to serve in his cabinet. My appointment 

in November 1995 is particularly gratifying to me and the 

supporters of the New Democratic Party, because in the history 

of the CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation-New Democratic Party) Party I am the first NDP 

cabinet minister to ever serve the Yorkton constituency and 

only the second cabinet minister to serve the Yorkton 

constituency in the 90-year history of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  I accept this challenge with the support of 

my constituency and my caucus colleagues. I look forward to 

serving the people of Saskatchewan with the convictions and 

the principles of fairness, integrity, and honesty that has guided 

my life in the past and certainly will in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to at this time congratulate the member 

from Battleford-Cut Knife and the member from Regina South 

in moving and seconding the Speech from the Throne. Today I 

want to join them on their vision, about what they talked, as we 

prepare Saskatchewan for the challenges of the new 

millennium. 

 

The next four years, Mr. Speaker, is the blueprint of what 

Saskatchewan people told us they want as we met with them 

and spoke to them in our public consultation process last fall 

and early this winter — public consultations like the one that 

we had in our city where some 70 people attended, unlike the 

meetings that I read about and witnessed the Liberals holding 

across the province where I think five people was considered to  



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

be a crowd. 

 

And I paid some attention to the speech that was given 

yesterday by the member from Wood River who talked about, 

and I quote what he says: “We don’t really have to go out and 

consult much more in groups . . .” Well I don’t think you need 

to consult with groups any more either when you only have one 

to five people who attend some of your meetings. Hardly a 

group meeting. 

 

Then the member from Wood River talked about, what is it that 

the business community actually said to you? And so I say to 

the member from Wood River, these are the kinds of things that 

the business community said to us. They said that they don’t 

want any more taxes. They said that they want the debt reduced. 

And they said that they wanted future tax increase . . . or tax 

rebates targeted. And they wanted jobs for their young people. 

Those are the kinds of things that the public talked to us about. 

And I wanted to share that with the member from Wood River 

because he hadn’t had an opportunity to get that kind of 

reading. 

 

Throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

talk about several themes which are included in this throne 

speech today. Included in this throne speech because New 

Democrats talk to people, because New Democrats work with 

people, and because New Democrats represent people fairly, 

and consequently . . . And we’re given. . . And as a result of 

that, Mr. Speaker, that is why we have a second mandate to 

govern this province. And that is why we only have 10 Liberals 

across the way in this House. 

 

I was somewhat interested in listening to the speech by the 

member from Athabasca because he was about, I thought, to tell 

us what a Liberal is, and I don’t think he quite got around to 

telling us that, Mr. Speaker. But maybe on another occasion and 

another time, we’ll get to learn what a true Liberal is. Because 

I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, that the folks who sit across the way 

from us really understand what true Liberalism is themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our consultations and in our throne speech, 

Saskatchewan people said to us that they wanted our 

government to focus on job creation and to provide a climate 

for economic growth  keeping our young people at home, 

keeping them in Saskatchewan. And we listened to that, Mr. 

Speaker, and in this term we presented our Partnership for 

Growth document, building on our strengths in agriculture, 

forestry, mining, in energy, technology, and telecommunication 

 a plan, Mr. Speaker, that is for the future growth and 

development of this province. 

 

In our consultations, Saskatchewan people said to us that they 

wanted the government to continue on its path of no more tax 

increases and to continue to reduce the debt in this province, the 

principles of understanding and compassion, and not the slash-

and-burn approach that our member from Kindersley talks 

about when he talks about the Tory Alberta and Ontario 

governments that he supports. 

 

In our consultations, Saskatchewan people told us that they  

wanted our government to reduce the size of our government, 

services and programs, and at the same time to work closely 

with municipalities, universities, school boards, in partnership, 

to begin to restructure the delivery of the services in 

Saskatchewan; examining new approaches, looking at the old 

systems that are in place and designing new ways of doing 

things in Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, Saskatchewan people told us that they wanted their 

government to move to the next phase of health renewal and 

ensure that there is sufficient resources available to improve the 

way in which health services are provided in spite of the huge 

reductions in funding by the federal Liberals and the apparent 

acceptance by them of the reductions by the federal 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $106 million less in transfer payments to the 

province of Saskatchewan this year in health, social services 

and education. And what’s the Liberal line, the provincial 

Liberal line? It’s that you knew it was coming. 

 

Well this week I read the member from Saltcoats saying, and I 

quote, that people on the health board, and here he’s talking 

about the health board in Yorkton, I believe, are caught in the 

middle. And he goes on to blame the Saskatchewan Health for 

their difficulties, blame Saskatchewan Health. Rather than 

focusing his sights on the cuts from Ottawa, the $106 million 

cuts from Ottawa, he says that it’s the Saskatchewan 

Department of Health to blame. And I say shame to the member 

from Saltcoats. 

 

First you say that we knew that the federal cuts were coming, 

and then you say that Saskatchewan Health is to blame. Make 

no mistake that, this member from Saltcoats, that federal 

Liberals are responsible for these cuts, federal Liberals are 

responsible for these cuts, and you’re encouraging that and 

supporting that. 

 

Well this Saskatchewan New Democratic government is going 

to ensure that Saskatchewan people receive sustainable, 

effective health services  health services that are universal, 

accessible, and publicly funded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Not the Ralph Klein two-tiered health 

system, where the member of Kindersley supports and 

advocates for, and not the federal and provincial Liberals who 

do not believe in universally, publicly funded health care, who 

are working currently in partnership with their federal friends to 

dismantle medicare in this province, not to build it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session we will see enhancements to ensure 

that we improve and expand our health renewal in 

Saskatchewan: expand the use of nurses, therapists and 

counsellors; new legislation to improve the framework 

permitting health professionals to expand their mandate; 

chiropractors practising in health institutions; optometrists 

treating and prescribing; new methods in health delivery in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Furthermore, through additional 

funding from Crown corporation of SGI (Saskatchewan  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 96 

Government Insurance), for which I am responsible for, $25 

million will be directed to research, assessment, and treatment 

in partnership with the World Health Organization, health 

district boards, and the Department of Health, implementing 

primary, secondary and tertiary services across the province and 

assisting in the rehabilitation and approach of 

neuro-musculoskeletal services in this province. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is how our government intends to ensure 

sustainable health services in the new millennium. Throughout 

our consultation process, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

talked to us about a more frugal government. Today we know 

that in Saskatchewan our provincial government is the most 

effective government per capita compared to any other 

government in Canada. But we want to do more. In 1993, I 

believe, we began on a course of restructuring government 

through the wellness health reform. The focus of this 

administration is to give communities broader-ranging 

decision-making powers, because no one knows better about 

the needs of communities than the people who live within them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having been born and raised and educated in small 

rural town Saskatchewan and currently operate a small farming 

enterprise there, I have seen the population shift from rural to 

urban Saskatchewan. As our farms have become larger and my 

generation and yours have sought livelihoods off the farm, we 

have witnessed the steady shrinking of our smaller communities 

in spite of the fact that governments of the past have pumped 

money into sustaining the infrastructures of schools, recreation 

complexes and hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. Our 

populations are continually moving to larger centres. Better 

roadways, better communication networks, enhanced central 

systems, municipal and regional hospitals, comprehensive high 

schools, and the larger retail shopping centres have moved all 

of our populations into larger, urbanized centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a fault of government’s, but that is a 

reality of the times, a reality that doesn’t just affect 

Saskatchewan, but affects all jurisdictions across North 

America. Today, Mr. Speaker, we’re confronted as governments 

and as decision makers with the question of how do we 

continue to provide the vital services to people when we have 

limited financial resources and with a large geographic 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech challenges our government and 

calls on the people of Saskatchewan to look at how we can 

remodel and reshape our Saskatchewan way. This will require 

us to look at how we have been accustomed to see things done 

in the past and move to a new way of doing things in the future 

in the new century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we have in Saskatchewan 847 municipal 

councils and 119 school divisions  an abundance of 

under-utilized facilities that were constructed in the past three 

decades that our tax base can no longer support. Today, Mr. 

Speaker, my department of Saskatchewan Property 

Management today examines closely its surplus facilities across 

the province, and we need to redraft how we support the 

operations of government in future. 

 

At the end of the day, it will be my expectation, Mr. Speaker, to 

achieve a lower cost for common services through coordination, 

centralization and administration and reduction of duplicate 

efforts. These decisions, Mr. Speaker, won’t be easy and will 

create hardship, and I know that in the short term these will be 

accomplished to the benefit of all in this province. 

 

Last week my colleague, the minister of Crown Investments 

Corporation, spoke about the Crown corporations review  yet 

another example, Mr. Speaker, of our government’s 

commitment to provide leadership in our search to ensure that 

as we prepare for the new century, Saskatchewan is well poised 

to be an active participant in the global world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout our consultation process, people talked 

to us mainly about jobs and forming new partnerships for 

growth in our province. Examining our training institutions’ 

roles and mandates will ensure that we are training and 

educating young people for jobs in the future, being smarter 

about what we train people for. 

 

I have a young daughter, Mr. Speaker, who will be graduating 

next year from a high school institution in my community who 

is going to be looking at new opportunities for herself. We need 

to bring educational opportunities closer to students. With the 

cost of education, being away from home these days, and 

attending larger university systems outside the province, we 

want to ensure that we can make those opportunities available 

to our students closer to home. 

 

Marketing our technology base and expanding our research 

initiatives will see us move further into the world markets of 

opportunities and at the same time attract new initiatives in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’m excited about the redesign of 

our social programs, investing in our children, and removing 

families from the cycle of poverty; expanding our work and 

partnership with first nations and Metis people to foster greater 

self-sufficiency and new economic opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the weeks and months ahead we will hear the 

opposition criticize our plan, but yet there will be very few 

solutions from our friends across the way. But those of us who 

sit on this side of the House know that in Saskatchewan we 

have built a very strong foundation and we have returned this 

province to a solid financial footing. 

 

(1645) 

 

And we have a dream, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan which 

includes some tough challenges. But at the end of the day we 

will see a Saskatchewan community with hope, with 

opportunity, and a community that will be a national leader. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I wish to close. And it’s my 

pleasure to join with the member from Battleford-Cut Knife and 

Regina South in supporting the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



March 5, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

Mr. Koenker:  I want to begin this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 

by congratulating you on the assumption of your new 

responsibilities as Speaker. I listened very carefully to the 

remarks that you had made when you assumed your 

responsibilities last Thursday. And I think if they’re any 

indication of what we can expect in the weeks and the months 

and the years to come, then we have indeed made a very fine 

choice. And that bodes very well for this Assembly, both for 

government members and for all opposition members. 

 

And so I commend you on those remarks. 

 

I also want to address a few remarks in opening to the new 

members who are here. Over the course of the last nine months 

or so I thought often of your experience, having been elected 

but not actually seated in the legislature. And I think in some 

respects it’s a shame that you weren’t able to assume your 

responsibilities earlier in that you have almost a sort of half-life 

politically. Certainly half of your life is in your constituency but 

it’s hard to feel as an elected member unless and until you stand 

up in this Assembly and speak. And so I very much enjoyed the 

remarks of all members on all sides of the House and I’d 

certainly like to welcome the new members here. 

 

As a veteran of the House for a number of years I’ve already 

detected a change in demeanour of the House that I think bodes 

well  not for this place  but for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I hope that we can keep that tenor and tone 

through this session and for the next years to come as well. 

 

The new staff we have here  the Sergeant-at-Arms and the 

pages — I’d certainly like to welcome all the new staff to the 

Assembly and express the appreciation of all members for the 

services that you will be providing to us. In many respects 

we’re lost causes when it comes to tracking down paper or 

paper clips and for you pages that help shuffle the paper for us 

and do our bidding and fill our water glasses, we very much 

appreciate those little things that you do for us because they 

really are very big things in many respects. 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Thomson:  With leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Thomson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The comments 

from the member from Meadow Lake have reminded me that 

two constituents of mine have entered your gallery: Mr. Grant 

Gibson and his daughter Adrienne. Adrienne is, in fact 

tomorrow I understand, having an interview to become a page 

in the House of Commons, and today joins us to watch our 

parliamentary proceedings here. And later on today I’ll be 

having an opportunity to meet with her and talk a little bit about 

what goes on in this House. 

 

So I’d like to ask you to join with me in welcoming her. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Koenker:  Finally, I want to acknowledge the role that 

the good people of Saskatoon Sutherland have had in bringing 

me to this place again. Not all of the people though, in 

Saskatoon Sutherland constituency. I think particularly of those 

people who voted in this last election. 

 

I went to a goodly number of homes where people expressed no 

interest in the democratic process, expressed not only that, but 

no interest in voting. And that distressed me a bit. I think that 

we . . . I happen to believe that we have a luxury here in 

Saskatchewan and in Canada, having a parliamentary 

democratic tradition, and that for members of our society who 

are franchised not to exercise that franchise is a really serious 

matter. 

 

And so I’d like to say to those members of the . . . those 

individuals in the Sutherland constituency who voted in the last 

election, both for me and against me, I want to commend you 

because I think that is what makes the democratic process work. 

And I might add that in the Sutherland constituency it was a 

very tough fight; it was a very close race from the beginning to 

the end. And the outcome was anything but certain, certainly 

from my perspective. 

 

Those individuals who voted against me in that election, I have 

great respect for your opinion and for your participation in the 

democratic process. And I say this because as we look at the 

world stage nowadays, we see, for example, in Israel some 57 

people who have lost their lives in the last number of days in 

four separate terrorist attacks by Hamas extremists. That’s their 

attempt to influence decision making and public policy, an 

attempt to wreck the peace-making process in Israel and to de-

stabilize legitimately elected government. 

 

Here in Canada and in Saskatchewan we have a different 

tradition, one where we believe that individuals can make a 

difference on the strength of their convictions. And as you said 

in your opening remarks, we have a luxury here that we don’t 

make decisions by guns, or the decisions in Saskatchewan 

aren’t made simply on the basis of who has the most money or 

the biggest thugs. But decision making is made in public, with 

cut and thrust of debate, with an opposition that doesn’t use 

guns or big money. And I say how different here in 

Saskatchewan from so many places in the world. And what a 

wonderful, wonderful luxury we have in that regard. 

 

This brings me to the subject of the Speech from the Throne. 

The last five years have certainly seen many changes in 

Saskatchewan and lots of controversy. There have been many 

troubling developments, many troubling decisions that have 

been made by government in the last four or five years. I must 

admit I myself have been troubled by some of the decisions my 

own government has made. And it is often very difficult to put 

these decisions into a perspective because the pace of change  



 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 1996 98 

and the scope of change is just so fast and so inexorable that it’s 

hard for any of us to really know where things are going and at 

many junctures whether the decisions we make are right or 

wrong. In some respects we’re darned if we do, we’re darned if 

we don’t. We’re between the devil and the deep blue sea in 

decision making. Not just here in Saskatchewan but for any 

government today, the scope and the scale of the problems that 

we face are just overwhelming, and the speed with which 

decision making needs to take place, in some respects, I view as 

a real threat to the democratic process because it doesn’t allow 

for full-scale public consultation, and the kind of public debate 

that should take place. 

 

And that’s why I’m very pleased that there was some 

consultation, public consultation, before this Speech from the 

Throne, that the government saw fit to engage in a public 

consultation process, Making Choices, preparing Saskatchewan 

for the new century, in which a questionnaire was sent out 

along with accompanying documentation to sort of explain 

some of the challenges facing Saskatchewan people in the next 

four years and moving into the new century. 

 

And I might say, in some respects this public consultation 

exercise almost makes the Speech from the Throne less of an 

occasion than it might be because so much of what we are 

really facing was contained in the Speech from the Throne . . . 

contained in the MAKING CHOICES document. 

 

The need for a new partnership in the economy if we are to 

have economic growth. The need for more diversification in 

agriculture, the challenge for quality education and social 

services, the formidable challenge of not just resting on our 

laurels with health reform but completing health renewal in our 

province. And engaging in training and preparing young people 

for jobs into the new century. Working with social services and 

making government itself work. 

 

I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan, in some respects 

this MAKING CHOICES document is at least as important as 

the Speech from the Throne in as much as it signals some of the 

huge challenges and opportunities that we face here in 

Saskatchewan as we prepare for the next century. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those introductory remarks, I would like 

to adjourn debate in as much as I have much more to say on 

another occasion. Thank you very much. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 


