
















































March 7, 1996 Hansard


   LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 131 

   March 7, 1996 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Osika:  I rise today, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions of 

names from responsible firearm owners from across the 

province. And I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly will be pleased to challenge Bill C-68 in court, 

refuse to allow the federal government to take over 

enforcement in Saskatchewan, and not allow the 

implementation of Bill C-68 in Saskatchewan while the 

Bill is being challenged in court. 

 

Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 

regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petitions that 

I have here today are from White City; many from Regina. In 

fact I see many from the constituency of Regina South and 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased as well this afternoon to present a petition on behalf of 

people regarding the SaskPower issue. I’ll just quickly read the 

prayer for you: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until an 

all-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from all across 

Saskatchewan, and they are too numerous to count. And I am 

pleased to present it on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Belanger:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Simpson, from Craven, from Saskatchewan Beach. They are 

from all over Saskatchewan  Piapot Reserve. And I ask that 

you accept this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ms. Julé:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 

names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Lumsden, Sedley, and throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 

petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the 

Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

such places as Bulyea, Silton, Regina, and many other 

communities. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

of names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petitions are 

primarily from Vibank, but they are also from Moose Jaw, 

Regina, White City. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions of names throughout Saskatchewan regarding 

the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

the Regina area. 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions of 

names from throughout Saskatchewan regarding the Plains 

Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 



132  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

The people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, from Watrous, from Lumsden, from Saskatoon, and 

from Moose Jaw. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also 

rise today to present petitions of names from throughout 

Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 

Plains Health Centre. 

 

The people that have signed these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are 

from Kipling, Holdfast, Chamberlain, just to name a few; 

Moose Jaw as well. Thank you. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

petition to present today: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from Carievale, Manor, Carnduff area of 

my constituency and also from the North Battleford area, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d like to present them today. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 

a petition I wish to present to this Assembly. And I will read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and freeze any further utility rates until a 

three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitions are signed by individuals from the Kelliher, 

Leross area of the province. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Heppner:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition I’d 

like to present and I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to reverse the decision to raise 

SaskPower rates and to freeze any further utility rates until 

a three-party utility review committee is in place in order to 

debate, review, and revise any utility rate increases in the 

future in order to restore fairness to the utility rate process 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And a number of pages here and they basically all come from 

the town of Kelliher. 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy today to 

present several pages of petitions signed by people, that are 

jammed full of names, who are considering the need for the 

prayer as follows to be considered: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to immediately repeal the Crown 

Construction Tendering Agreement and replace it with a 

fair tendering policy which awards all government 

contracts to the lowest qualified bidder, union or 

non-union, with no union hiring quotas. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mostly from the Kindersley area of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 

received. 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reconsider closure of the Plains Health Centre; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

cause the government to reverse its decision to route 

Highway No. 16 through the village of Borden; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

reverse the decision to raise SaskPower rates; and 

 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 

immediately repeal the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 

notice that I shall on day 11 ask the government the following 

questions: 

 

To the ministers in charge of Social Services and the 

Office of the Rentalsman: (1) is there any limit to the 

number of security deposits issued to social assistance 

recipients; and (2) how much money is owed to the 

Department of Social Services for reissued security deposit 

overpayments? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: . Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

To the minister responsible for SaskTel: have the pay 

telephones that have been removed from rural south-west 

areas such as Robsart, Vidora, and Govenlock been 

replaced; what is the reason for removing the only pay 

telephones available in the aforementioned areas that have  



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  133 

no cell coverage and are located in the heart of the oil and 

gas industry; how many pay telephones have been removed 

from rural Saskatchewan over the past six months, and 

what was the reason for the removal of these pay 

telephones? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to all of the members of the legislature, the 

members of the Saskatchewan Landlords Association who Mr. 

Calvert and I met with and Ms. Lorje this morning: Bonnye 

Moncrief, who is the president, and Wilf Hample and Orest 

Rebryna and Al Kostyna, and our two friends from Moose Jaw, 

and I don’t know their names. Welcome to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  I would like to add my welcome to the 

individuals in your gallery today and outline the names of all of 

the guests visiting our legislature. Yes indeed, Bonnye 

Moncrief is the president of the Saskatchewan Landlords 

Association; she’s from Saskatoon. Wilf Hample is a director 

from Saskatoon, as is Jim Wolfe from Saskatoon. Orest 

Rebryna has travelled all the way from Prince Albert today to 

visit with the hon. ministers on this important issue. Shirley 

Barnsley and Violet Paré have joined us from Moose Jaw, and 

Al Kostyna is from Saskatoon. 

 

I would very much appreciate everyone welcoming them once 

again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members of the 

official opposition would too like to welcome the members 

from the Saskatchewan Landlords Association. Bonnye 

Moncrief, the president of the Saskatchewan Landlords 

Association; please stand, Bonnie. Al Kostyna, director of 

landlords association, Saskatoon. Wilf Hample, director, and 

Jim Wolfe, director of the landlords association, Saskatoon. 

Orest Rebryna from Prince Albert; Violet Paré, member from 

Moose Jaw; and Shirley Barnsley, member from Moose Jaw. 

 

We welcome you and we appreciate having you here with us 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We too, through 

you, would like to take the opportunity to welcome Bonnye 

Moncrief and her delegation to the Assembly. We’re happy to 

have met with these folks a couple of weeks ago and we 

sincerely hope that your journey here will help you in your 

quest seeking fairness from our democratic process. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje:  Not to belabour too fine a point, but I would also 

like to welcome the members from the Saskatchewan Landlords 

Association. I won’t introduce them individually since they’ve  

already been introduced two or three times. I do want to 

welcome you to Regina. I was very pleased to have met with 

you this morning. I apologize that I had to leave the meeting 

early, but I did notice that there was a good, fair, and frank 

exchange of points of view and I hope that we can find a 

resolution to this difficult situation soon. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 

through you to this Assembly, I would like to welcome a past 

member of this Assembly, a member who really worked hard 

for his constituents, Mr. Joe Saxinger, behind the bar. The 

member from Kinistino and I’d like to invite the members to 

welcome Joe. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 

to the Assembly I would like to introduce Gerry Sherman in the 

Speaker’s gallery. Gerry is with the Christian Embassy 

International and is visiting our legislature from Edmonton, and 

I’d ask all members to welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Farm Safety Week 

 

Mr. Bjornerud:  With the frigid temperatures outside today, 

it’s hard to believe that spring seeding is only a week away or 

. . . weeks away. Farmers across Saskatchewan, including 

myself, will be in high gear preparing equipment to return to the 

field. That’s why it is appropriate we take time to acknowledge 

that today is the start of Farm Safety Week. 

 

Sadly, 15 people died in farm-related accidents across 

Saskatchewan last year. For every one of those unnecessary 

deaths there were approximately 30 serious injuries. Over the 

years several of my own friends have been seriously injured in 

farm-related accidents, but while farming can be a dangerous 

job, many of these accidents can be avoided. Just a little extra 

time and preparation could save a life or prevent serious injury. 

 

My heart goes out to the families of those who have lost 

members in farming accidents and to those who are recovering 

from injuries. I ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 

wishing all Saskatchewan farmers and their families a safe year 

ahead. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Power Cable Plant Expansion in Weyburn 

 

Ms. Bradley:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The city of Weyburn 

in my constituency received some very good new recently  

good news for the province as well. Alcatel Canada Wire 

announced a major restructuring to the Weyburn plant that will 

result in significant growth and job creation. The plant has been 

in Weyburn since 1956 and manufactures a variety of power 

cable products. The restructuring will involve the installation of  



134  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

new production equipment which will allow Alcatel to explore 

new markets in Canada, the United States, and offshore. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the expansion will result in 35 new jobs. 

When the project is completed by early summer, Alcatel in 

Weyburn will be employing approximately 110 people. As well, 

Alcatel plans to use local and provincially based engineering 

and construction firms to complete this project. I believe this is 

what people mean when they talk about the multiplier effect 

Whatever they call it, Mr. Speaker, this announcement is one 

more indication that Saskatchewan  every part of 

Saskatchewan  is a good place to establish and operate a 

business. 

 

The successful record of Alcatel in Weyburn can be credited to 

its good management and excellent workers. I congratulate 

Alcatel Canada Wire for its long time association with the city 

of Weyburn. I appreciate and understand its confidence in the 

working people of Weyburn and wish it well in its expansion 

plans. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

REACT Waste Management Program 

 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to commend 

several town councils and other citizens of Humboldt and 

district who have with their great vision made a commitment to 

environmental responsibility by developing the REACT 

(Regional Authority of Carlton Trail) waste management 

program. Not only is the REACT program aiming to improve 

the environment, but it is also creating much needed economic 

development and jobs for people in the area. 

 

The proponents of the REACT waste management program 

have been on a roller-coaster ride these past few months after 

the provincial government put the project on hold in December. 

But several groups and individuals committed to the project 

lobbied hard and eventually convinced the Department of 

Environment to reaffirm its commitment. 

 

This is just an example of the spirit of determination and 

perseverance at the hearts of residents in rural Saskatchewan, 

and I commend them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Northern Saskatchewan Debating Tournament 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had the 

recent pleasure of attending a debating tournament in Saskatoon 

involving high school students from all over northern 

Saskatchewan. The debates featured over 200 students debating 

the important and topical issue of welfare reform, using 

parliamentary rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The debates were very informative, well researched, and 

passionate, and overall of very high quality. The nature and tone 

was one of compassion, of concern, and hopeful, Mr. Speaker. 

And I am very proud of our young people and comforted 

knowing that our future is in their hands. 

Last week for the opening, two of the outstanding debaters, 

Jennifer Phillips and Rachel Stiglich, were present, and I was 

honoured to be their host. I wish to thank all members who took 

the interest and gave them time, and it meant a great deal to 

these young women. 

 

I raise this today, Mr. Speaker, because young people are ready, 

willing and able to take on the tough issues of their day. I 

commend all of the young participants in the debate from 

northern Saskatchewan; Mr. Goranson, Holy Cross Collegiate, 

for hosting the event; the northern area teachers, parents, and 

volunteers for their active encouragement and support. 

 

I know that all members will agree that these forums are 

wonderful educational and leadership opportunities for our 

young people. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, Hear! 

 

Husqvarna Sled Dog Challenge and Winter Festival 

 

Ms. Draude:  Mr. Speaker, today I would like to recognize 

the town of Porcupine Plain, the Porcupine Plain Lions Club, 

the Porcupine Plain economic development committee and the 

Porcupine Plain Chamber of Commerce who have sponsored 

day two of Husqvarna challenge sled dog races and winter 

festival. 

 

Over 600 residents of Porcupine Plain and area gathered for the 

63 kilometre race. Local teams from Star City and Hudson Bay 

competed against teams from Saskatchewan, Alberta, and the 

United States. The first team was back in Porcupine Plain in 5 

hours and 38 minutes and 52 seconds. To keep with the spirit, 

the first mutt race was held. Seven kids aged 5 to 13 raced with 

one dog harnessed to any form of transportation, including a 

garbage can lid. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Husqvarna challenge is another example of 

rural Saskatchewan communities at work and at play. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Special Olympic Winter Games Medal Winners 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby:  Mr. Speaker, this afternoon I would like to 

recognize the accomplishments of three special individuals in 

my riding who participated in the Canadian Special Olympics 

Winter Games in Calgary in mid-February. And all of them won 

medals in their respective competitions in cross country skiing 

 something our entire city is very proud of. 

 

Mr. Rodney Correll won the gold medal in the 100 metre race, 

8 to 29 age group, and a silver in the 2.5 kilometre Nordic 

event. Billy Kowbel picked up a bronze medal in the 100 metre 

and 2.5 kilometre event in the 30 to 99 age category. His 

brother Larry won the silver medal in the 500 metre, 22 to 99 

age category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their achievements are impressive given the unfair 

track . . . unfamiliar track conditions they faced and they really 

didn’t have a lot of time to train before the games were held. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  135 

I would also like to congratulate their coach, Shirley Gaitens, 

who pointed out that the goal of the games is to have fun and 

winning medals is a real plus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I extend my congratulations to these athletes 

and their coaches, I would also like to wish them well and bid 

them good luck in their bid to be selected to compete in the 

World Special Olympic Winter Games in Toronto next 

February. Again, congratulations and a job well done for 

representing the city of Yorkton, and congratulations in your 

games in Calgary. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Cut Knife Wildlife Federation Wins Conservation Trophy 

 

Ms. Murrell:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to call to 

this House’s attention an award recently won by the Cut Knife 

Wildlife Federation in my constituency. The award is a 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation conservation trophy. This 

award is given once a year and to one project only. The Cut 

Knife group won the award for its wildlife trout pond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 90 seconds I can only mention a few significant 

points about this project, a project which improves wildlife 

habitat in our province and at the same time improves the 

quality of life in the town of Cut Knife. 

 

First, of course, the finished channel and reservoir provides 

necessary habitat for wildlife including blue herons, 

cormorants, wild ducks, and some domesticated ducks. And 

before I forget, for fish. A senior caught a four and one-half 

pound trout this year. 

 

But this valuable wildlife habitat is also designed as a people’s 

park on the west side of Cut Knife. The local hospital and 

nursing home is on one side and a 20-unit seniors’ housing area 

on another. For them, and for the town as a whole, there is a 

tree nursery, a fountain, and a pathway through the park to the 

pond. 

 

So this project combines recreation, urban green space, wildlife 

habitat conservation, and a source for stories about the ones that 

got away. As is so often the case, this project was created, 

designed, and built through the cooperation of the federation, 

the town, and hundreds of hours of volunteer work. It is a 

project worthy of the trophy and I congratulate the Cut Knife 

Wildlife Federation for winning it. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Crown Corporation Tendering 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan believe in common sense, compassion, 

and fairness. Yet this government once again feels it must 

interfere in what should be a common-sense business approach 

 to tendering work done by our publicly owned Crown 

corporations. 

 

The March 6 edition of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix contains an 

article, and I wish to table a copy of this article, that indicates 

this government is now initiating, not only union preference but 

in fact native preference, to Crown construction projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the aboriginal people of Saskatchewan do not 

want a government crutch. What they do want is this 

government to provide policies that reflect their true needs, 

such as a long-term economic and job strategy. 

 

Will the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) commit today to quit playing politics and make 

the kind of choices aboriginal people need and deserve? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

respond to that question as the minister responsible for 

Saskatchewan Energy. I want to say that I think that this 

government has taken a responsible approach. 

 

The tender was based on low bid, and the fact that we required 

in that particular tender an aboriginal content, I think speaks 

something to looking to the future of this province. Members 

opposite may not understand, nor may not want to believe it, 

but the aboriginal community is a growing part of this economy 

and is going to continue to grow, and we want to see them 

actively involved in developing our economy. And I say to the 

members opposite, that is a responsible approach to take; we'll 

continue to do it in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Indian and Metis people of Saskatchewan have been asking that 

this government treat them fairly. The aboriginal people, 

particularly those in the North, are in need of proper roads. 

They’re in need of health care, which means more than a few 

trailers pushed together. And they’re in need of real job 

opportunities, the same as all Saskatchewan residents are. The 

real needs of Indian and Metis people are being ignored while 

this government uses Crown tendering preference to skirt the 

real issues. Will the minister take action today to ensure fair and 

open tendering? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me say to the 

member that this was a fair and open tender. There was an 

aboriginal content clause in it, and it was based . . . and it was 

in fact awarded to the low bidder. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that member may want to lean 

across and ask the member from Athabasca whether or not he 

believes in affirmative action programs; whether he believes 

that aboriginal people should be involved in doing business 

with this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member that I attended last 

night to the opening of a casino in Prince Albert, a business  



136  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

owned by the Saskatchewan Federation of Indian Nations. That 

is affirmative action  120 jobs for aboriginal people. And I 

say to the member that the member from Athabasca should be 

proud of it and he should be chastising his colleague for raising 

it in this light. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at a 

time when this government is closing hospitals, eliminating 

services to rural families, children are going hungry and 

line-ups at food banks are growing longer, choices must be 

made with the best interest of the taxpayers of all of 

Saskatchewan. Clearly the Crown Tendering Agreement, which 

costs the taxpayers of this province $115 million annually, is 

not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain where this policy of 

showing preference for one select group or another is going to 

end, and will he commit today to eliminate the unfair and 

wasteful Crown Tendering Construction Agreement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, once again I want to 

say that I am pleased to answer. What will not end is this 

government’s commitment to create job opportunities for 

aboriginal people, whether that member likes it or whether he 

doesn’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  And I say to that member again, 

this tender was awarded to the low bid. The low bid included 

aboriginal people working within that contract. And I ask that 

member to once again lean across, ask his colleague from 

Athabasca whether or not he agrees with aboriginal job 

opportunities awarded by Crown corporation tenders. Does he 

agree with that policy or does he not; or does he disagree with 

that member in the back row? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know I’m new 

and it also is obvious to me already why this is called question 

period, because you don’t really get answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has spoken often about not 

having the funds to meet certain campaign promises. Again at 

issue is the choices of this government. They cannot cry poor at 

the same time they refuse to eliminate the Crown construction 

tendering policy, which costs the taxpayers of Saskatchewan an 

estimated $115 million each and every year. 

 

Does the minister agree that this would be the very definition of 

hypocrisy? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, let me respond again 

to the member. The tender that he refers to was awarded to the 

low bidder. And I want to say that a partnership with aboriginal 

people in terms of involving themselves in tendering, whether it  

be construction of a SaskEnergy office building in Saskatoon or 

whether it be the development of a casino in Prince Albert, a 

job for aboriginal people is a job for aboriginal people. And it is 

something that this province and the government of this 

province focuses on and will continue to focus on. 

 

Now you may take, you make take the approach of exclusion. 

And that might be the Liberal Party’s position and that might be 

your caucus’s position, but I want to say to the member that this 

government believes in partnership, we believe in jobs for 

aboriginal and Saskatchewan people, and we will continue to 

base our policy on that particular premiss. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gantefoer:  Mr. Speaker, the Premier and his 

government introduced a Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement. They are solely responsible for this fiasco  not 

the federal government, not past provincial governments. It is 

they and they alone who are costing the taxpayers of this 

province $115 million annually — and needlessly — in an 

effort to appease their friends in the labour movement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before this government can move into the future, 

they must correct their own mistakes and they must start by 

putting an end to the Crown Construction Tendering 

Agreement. Will the minister make that commitment to this 

House today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, what I will give the 

member a commitment for is a fair tendering process, which is 

what we’ve developed in this province. And I will also give the 

member that low bid is the accepted way of accepting a tender. 

 

But I want to ask the member opposite, he banters around a 

figure of $115 million and I challenge that member to table 

documents that would substantiate his allegation. You’ve got to 

have a little bit of credibility if you’re going to stand up and 

throw figures around. So I ask the member, table the documents 

that concluded you to come up with that figure. Table them in 

the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Federal Budget Implications 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 

afternoon are for the Premier. Yesterday, Mr. Premier, there 

was a federal budget, and there were a lot of things missing in 

the federal budget. There was no elimination of the GST (goods 

and services tax) as promised. There was no new job creation 

strategy or job strategy at all. There was no target for a balanced 

budget, and there was also no change in transfer payments 

which were announced in last year’s budget. 

 

That means, Mr. Premier, that you knew exactly what you could 

expect to federal cut-backs prior to the election. And there was 

. . . nothing has changed since then. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  137 

Mr. Premier, why are you using the federal budget as an excuse 

to break every one of your election promises? Why were you 

less than honest with the voters during last year’s election? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I thank the Leader of the 

Conservative Party for that question. And my answer would be 

that he might very well begin by asking his counterparts, the 

Conservative Party in Ontario, Premier Mike Harris, why it is 

that Premier Mike Harris takes the position that there were new 

numbers of reduction, as he did, as Ernie Eves, the Minister of 

Finance did, as has all the . . . Yes. The Leader of the 

Conservative Party shakes his head in disbelief, but he either 

doesn’t know or he is faking that he doesn’t know. 

 

The reality is that this budget in fact has had an additional 

reduction. And not only that, but the floor that the Liberal Party 

has promised us, which now will kick in in the year 2000 with 

additional reductions and a hard attack on education and health 

care and social services, your argument should not be with us; 

your argument should be to join us against the Liberal Party of 

Canada, and Saskatchewan, which has perpetrated this kind of a 

massive assault on the very heart and soul of social programs in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, you knew 

exactly how much federal cuts were going to be coming in last 

year before the election campaign, yet you didn’t want to talk 

about those cuts during the election campaign. In fact there 

were a whole lot of things you didn’t want to talk about in the 

election campaign. 

 

You knew 12,000 farmers were going to get GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) bills, but you didn’t want to talk 

about that. You knew there was a 12 per cent increase coming 

from SaskPower, but you didn’t want to talk about that. You 

knew you had a major review of Crown corporations coming, 

but you didn’t want to talk about that. And you knew there were 

cuts in federal transfers coming, but you didn’t want to talk 

about that. 

 

Instead, you promised increases in health and education funding 

 a promise you knew you couldn’t keep. Instead, you 

promised everything as well to farmers. You promised that they 

wouldn’t get a GRIP bill, but they did get a GRIP bill. 

 

Mr. Premier, why won’t you have the courage to stand in the 

legislature here and discuss the things you promised during the 

election campaign? Why don’t you have the courage to tell the 

voters of Saskatchewan about the things you don’t want to talk 

about any longer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I have no problem in 

discussing the issues that we have raised  the issues of 

building and preparing for the 21st century and our program of 

change, whether it is in social services or education or local 

governance or in job creation or in the health care system. I 

have no problem in doing that at all. 

 

We do have your idea, of course, which is to take us back to 

some 1930s or even earlier period. We do have your approach, 

the Conservative approach, which is to make us kind of an 

Alabama North, and we know that to be the case. 

 

But if I knew, as you say I did know, then you, too, did know. 

And the question is: why didn’t you raise that during the 

election campaign? And the fact of the matter is you did not 

raise it because you didn’t know either. 

 

And the fact of the matter is as well that as the Globe and Mail 

today says, as apart from any official documents given by the 

federal government and by the provincial government, these are 

a brand-new series of reductions which the federal government 

has imposed on all Canadians. Premier Mike Harris says so; 

Premier Ralph Klein says so; all the premiers, regardless of 

political stripe, have been hit hardest. So don’t tell me that I 

knew and didn’t talk about it. Because if I knew, you did, and 

you didn’t talk about it either. And you didn’t know either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crown Corporation Tendering 

 

Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 

the minister responsible for CIC. This union-preference 

tendering policy and this new policy, Mr. Minister, are far too 

important for us to leave strictly in the hands of the Liberals, 

and so we want to pursue that just a little further. 

 

I guess your union-preference tendering policy wasn’t 

discriminatory enough, Mr. Minister; you’ve now developed a 

racial-preference tendering policy. Now the minister says that 

the tender was based on the low bid, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

truth of the matter is that the tender specified that only 

companies owned by aboriginal people would be allowed to 

tender. That’s the important point. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we have a couple of questions here. Are 

you going to combine this unfair policy with your union 

tendering preference policy? And on what basis did you 

develop this particular, blatant discriminatory policy for the 

province of Saskatchewan? When was the policy developed? 

And why was it never announced to the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I think it is only fair 

that I begin by correcting the member with respect to his 

comment that it was only open to aboriginal businesses. That’s 

false. It was open to businesses who would joint venture with 

aboriginal people, and our goal was to include aboriginal 

people in employment opportunities for the construction of this 

facility in Saskatoon. It was awarded to the low bid joint 

venture. There will be a 25 per cent aboriginal employment 

component. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that a party that will refer 

to the first nations of this province as a cultural lobby group, as 



138  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

was done a few days ago, this is the reason you get these kinds 

of questions from this member. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, as I said to the Liberal member 

previously, this government will continue to work with first 

nations, with aboriginal people, to create job opportunities for 

them and for their kids. And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s going 

to be a partnership that will be ongoing for many, many years to 

come. And I’m proud of what this government has done and 

I’m proud of what we’re going to do in the future as well. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rental Property Damage Deposits 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan landlords provide over 100,000 rental units 

across the province. When their properties are damaged by 

irresponsible tenants, it costs just as much to replace a carpet or 

a window or repair damage in Saskatchewan, where the damage 

deposit is $125, as it does anywhere else in Canada, where the 

average damage deposit is $530 and the average damage claim 

is 600. 

 

Does the minister responsible agree that the damage deposit is 

not simply there to assist landlords to repair their properties 

after damage is done, nor does it serve to deter those who 

wilfully damage rental properties? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the hon. 

member for the question. This issue of security deposits and 

how they are dealt with is a delicate one, and is one that we 

have been reviewing very carefully. And the whole issue is one 

where we have to divine the line between the landlords, who 

have some very legitimate concerns — and I’ve met with them 

this morning and we’ve looked at those possibilities — and also 

many of the renters, who are lower income  seniors, students 

 and those people have many concerns about this as well. 

 

It hasn’t been an easy question, and I’ve told the landlords that. 

And we are going to try and come up with a decision at the time 

of our budget, and we’ll do it at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Minister, you can understand, sir, the enormous frustration 

of the landlords association. They have been dealt with as 

though they’re in a volleyball game. They dealt with the 

minister who was previously in charge, Saskatoon Fairview, 

then went to the member from Regina Northeast. It then went 

back to the minister who was from Saskatoon Fairview. It then 

went to the minister who is from Saskatoon Eastview. It then in 

turn went to you, sir, from Regina Lakeview and then to Regina 

Wakamow. 

 

And people have been stalled over the years, not simply months 

but years, sir. In Saskatchewan social assistance recipients who 

wreak havoc on rental units can apply for second damage 

deposits at taxpayers’ expense, while the working poor and  

responsible Social Service assistance tenants have absolutely no 

incentive to respect their rented homes. 

 

Your failure to deal with this issue — and it’s your 

government’s failure to deal with this issue — has now forced 

landlords to withdraw . . . 

 

The Speaker:  Order, order, order. I’ll ask the member to 

proceed directly to her question, please. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Yes, sir. There is a rental strike making it 

very tough for responsible tenants looking for homes. How long 

do landlords have to keep their properties off the market until 

you resolve this issue? 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the hon. 

member for the second question. The issue here is surely 

responsibility. There are many ways to talk other than strikes, 

and that’s what we did today. We had a very good discussion 

and I’d like to thank the people who were involved in the 

discussion. 

 

I think one of the things that should be remembered in this 

legislature is that the present government, when they came to 

power in 1992, did a careful review of the rental legislation. 

They reviewed the whole aspect of the rent restrictions, 

removed that. They added in a streamlining of the disputes. 

They made some arrangements so that landlords could have 

better access to the use of the security deposits. There are many 

things that have been done. 

 

As I said before, this is a very difficult question. There are very 

good arguments on both sides. There are many people of all 

parties who are involved in this and they all are looking for a 

fair decision and we will give that to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the landlord’s 

association has not been unreasonable in its requests. They’ve 

offered a host of alternatives to the current impasse, but it is 

your government, sir, that has been giving these people and 

responsible tenants the run-around for years and years. If this 

situation continues, the social assistance recipients unable to 

find rental accommodation are going to have to continue to be 

put up in hotels at taxpayers’ expense. I’m sure, sir, that you 

have estimated how much this is going to cost the taxpayers 

before this issue is resolved and I would like you to tell this 

House how much that really is going to add up to as a bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson:  Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the member 

for the further question about this matter. I would like to remind 

this legislature that Saskatchewan has one of the highest shelter 

allowances in western Canada, higher than in our neighbours to 

the west  Alberta  and that this is a very important factor 

for landlords. Approximately 20 per cent of the business are 

tenants that are supported by Social Services, and we in fact as 

a government, or as the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers,  



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  139 

contribute approximately $100 million to the landlords of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that should be kept in mind, that it’s a large amount 

of money that’s involved here, but on the other hand we have 

many people who are of lower income and they need to be 

protected as well. It’s a difficult question. We’re going to deal 

with it fairly and that’s our position. It’s going to be a fair 

decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

K to 12 Funding 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question today is to the Minister of Education. Over the last 

four years this NDP (New Democratic Party ) government has 

offloaded funding to school boards by cutting grants some $26 

million. If school boards are to continue providing quality 

programs they must have adequate funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the minister of a comment 

her Premier made while sitting on this side of the House as 

leader of the opposition. He said, and I quote: 

 

Don’t let any government tell you that they don’t have 

enough funds for education. The money is there. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously education is not a top priority for 

this NDP government. Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister 

is, will she stand up today and assure this Assembly that K to 

12 education is her responsibility and that her party’s education 

promise to increase grants by 2 per cent is exactly what the 

school boards can look forward to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for the question. As the member probably knows, our 

province was faced with a significant debt when we came to 

government in 1991. We were also faced with a significant 

deficit when we came to government in 1991, and through 

consultation with all of the various stakeholders in this 

province, we devised a four-year plan that got us to a balanced 

budget. 

 

Last year we indicated in our budget that, barring some 

unforeseen circumstances, that there would be increases to 

third-party funding, particularly education. Well unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, the member’s Liberal counterparts in Ottawa 

indicated to the province that we would be losing federal 

transfer payments to Health, Education, and Social Services. 

The member wants me to announce the numbers for our 1996 

budget and I believe I will leave that up to the Minister of 

Finance, who will bring the budget down shortly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This NDP 

government cowardly sits back and blames Ottawa for 

everything. Well I can assure you that the people of  

Saskatchewan are getting very tired of this song and dance. Mr. 

Speaker, the parents, the students, and thousands of teachers in 

this province are afraid of what this government has in store for 

our education system. They fear that this government will 

approach educational reform with the same reckless abandon 

that they used in their health care reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister guarantee this House and the 

people of Saskatchewan that school closures and teacher 

dismissals won’t be on the agenda of these new, large 

educational authorities she proposes? 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Mr. Speaker, really what the people of 

this province are tired of is the official opposition being 

apologists for their Liberal counterparts in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson:  Now the member talks about school 

closures, and I just want to say to him that I have a headline 

here dated January 20, 1996, Yorkton This Week & Enterprise: 

“Liberals meet with school board.” And I want to quote: 

 

 Beyond that though, Krawetz said school divisions face 

challenges. 

 

And I quote: 

 

 “The problem is we’ve had an enrolment shift,” he said, 

adding because of that “there’s no way in the world we’re 

going to keep all the schools open.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the Liberal member that if 

he’s going to ask questions in this House, he should remember 

his own rhetoric that he gives back home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murrell, seconded by Mr. 

Thomson, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 

Boyd. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Well I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to 

stand today in this House and speak in support of the motion 

that was presented by the member from Battleford-Cut Knife. I 

would like to congratulate her, first of all, for an excellent, 

thorough speech. It was really great to listen to and had 

excellent content. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 



140  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  The speech certainly is a credit to the 

member, but there should be more credit, I believe, given to the 

wise people of Battleford-Cut Knife who sent her to this 

legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  And I would like to congratulate the 

member from Regina South for his speech seconding the 

motion before us. As the youngest of all the members in this 

House  although, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite close  he brings a 

fresh perspective to our discussions, the voice of the next 

generation, and that message will be very much appreciated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  I would also like to congratulate 

yourself, Mr. Speaker, on your election to your post. It was a 

historical event for this Assembly. And you, Mr. Speaker, and 

the hon. member from Regina Victoria, are at the centre of this 

historic event. And while I’m on the congratulations, I would 

like to congratulate the new Deputy Speaker, the member for 

Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

And as many of the members will know, the member raises 

sheep on his farming operation and I know that he will be able 

to look after his flock. Now I’m not suggesting, Mr. Speaker, 

that you have to do that, and don’t take the meaning that you 

should get into the farming business. 

 

I would also like to congratulate all the new members who are 

speaking in the House for the first time in this debate. I have 

enjoyed the quality and the sincerity of their speeches, and the 

delivery of the same. 

 

And I would like to take this opportunity to thank the people of 

Carrot River Valley for their trust and for their support and the 

chance to serve them in this House. 

 

The main message in the Speech from the Throne for this 

session is the importance of building for the future and of 

managing the changes and challenges that we face. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  From this vantage point, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan’s future looks very promising. 

 

We can manage the challenges because Saskatchewan is in a 

position to do so. Why? Because of the decisions made in our 

first term of office. We have a balanced budget; our debt is 

being reduced; our population is increasing, now at l.017 

million people  unlike, Mr. Speaker, the time when the 

premier of the day was giving her snoose, Bruce, and never 

saying whoa in a mud hole. That was the time of million-dollar 

give-aways, Mr. Speaker, and that was the time of population 

decline in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Crop prices are better than they have been in many years, and 

future markets for our farm products are promising. Things are 

certainly not perfect on the farm, but they are improving, even  

given the staggering input costs, Mr. Speaker, that get no or 

very little attention from the federal Liberal government. We 

have seen large investments in ag biotech and the value added 

area of agriculture. We have seen major growth in 

manufacturing and processing in those sectors of our economy. 

 

There is great interest and activity in our resource sector — in 

mining, oil and gas, and forestry. Just ask the folks in Estevan 

or Eastend or Lloydminster or Hudson Bay or La Ronge or 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Perhaps most importantly, we have seen a willingness among 

our people, the greatest resource that we have, to take hold of 

these opportunities and to make the most of them; not relying 

on government financial support but relying on community, Mr. 

Speaker, and on partnerships. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we continue to face challenges and the 

impact of change. We face a constantly changing world where 

technology causes a speed of change like we have never, ever 

seen before. As individuals, we face constant change in our 

workplace, the budgets of government are restricted by debt, 

and we are challenged by reductions in funding from the federal 

government. We heard a lot about that yesterday. 

 

In my own area of transportation, the people of Saskatchewan 

are challenged by the loss of the Crow, by rail line 

abandonment, and the federal government’s approach to 

deregulation of railways, of airports, and of ports. These are 

unilateral decisions made by the federal Liberal government 

without a plan, without any consideration to the impact on 

farmers, municipalities, or the provincial government. 

 

And in Saskatchewan we are familiar with the uncertainty of 

elements, Mr. Speaker  events like last year’s forest fires. 

They were terrible and remind us of the power of nature. As 

government and as legislatures, it is our responsibility and duty 

to manage change as best we can, to adapt our policies and our 

legislation and our programing to meet the moving target of 

constant change; to work with farmers, with workers, with 

business and industry, and the resource sector, to make the most 

of the opportunities that are waiting for us, waiting for us to 

take up that challenge. 

 

We live in very cynical times, Mr. Speaker, not just about 

politics but about every institution in our society, from churches 

to schools, from business to the professions. With the rapid 

change that we see every day, we risk a backlash from people 

who feel threatened, who see no hope. The rise of candidates 

like Pat Buchanan in the presidential election in the United 

States points to the power of negative message of hatred and 

fear. This is a threat to our democracy. 

 

The most dangerous thing we can do to this is to foster the 

cynicism that is growing in western society. And the best way 

we can do this is to act responsibly. 

 

I did not want to get overly partisan in this debate, but I have 

been listening to the members of the official opposition, and I 

think there has been a few times in this session and before this 

session that they have started to cross the line of responsibility. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  141 

A few days ago the member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, was 

very negative about roads in the North. Always dealing with the 

negative; never giving credit to the government on the positives. 

 

Since I became Minister of Highways and Transportation and 

since this government has been in power, Mr. Speaker, the 

Cumberland House bridge is now being built. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Highway 965 — in partnership with the 

northern communities will have a new road in the Canoe Lake 

area. We signed an agreement with the mining industry, and 

now that industry is contributing to the highway structure in 

Saskatchewan, some $2 million a year for the next 15 years to 

upgrade Highways 102 and 905 from La Ronge to Wollaston 

Lake. 

 

And you know that the community of Grandmother’s Bay, Mr. 

Speaker, who has no access by road, will soon have access by 

road. 

 

(1430) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  And the Black Lake road, Mr. Speaker, 

the road to Lake Athabasca will soon be a reality. 

 

Now I know the member talks about the negatives and that 

things are bad in the North. And I agree that there needs to be 

more done. But I wished, I just wished that he would look at the 

good things that have been done and give credit where credit is 

due. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  It is essential to our democratic process 

for the members of the opposition to hold the government to 

account. And I agree with that. But one of the strongest 

messages from the public in recent years has been that they are 

sick and tired of some of the more partisan grandstanding in 

this House, which they find destructive and disillusioning. 

 

I prefer to look at the positive and to look at the future, and the 

Saskatchewan people prefer that as well. 

 

The plan laid out in the Speech from the Throne does just that. 

It prepares us for the future and for the opportunities and 

challenges that we face. 

 

Earlier this year I was pleased to hold a series of meetings in 

almost every community in the constituency of Carrot River 

Valley; informal events where we sat around the table, coffee 

and doughnuts in hand, and had a really good discussion about 

the issues, about the concerns, and about their ideas for the 

province of Saskatchewan. The objective of these meetings was 

to get some input in the direction this province should take over 

the next few years. 

 

And I’m happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that the address from His 

Honour deals directly with most of those basic concerns that 

were raised by my constituents. And when they have the 

opportunity to read the copies that I shall send them, they will 

wonder why the Liberals and the Conservatives opposite do not 

support it, and are supporting an amendment that would set this 

province back to the Devine era. 

 

The people of the Carrot River Valley are builders. They look to 

the future and not the past. The north-east of our province is a 

place with a history of pioneers, of the building of farms and 

towns and businesses and schools and roads still part of living 

memory. Many of the people of my constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

came from other areas to rebuild their lives during the great 

droughts of the 1930s. They were looking for greener pastures. 

Others came as veterans after the Second World War to start a 

new life as farmers or forestry workers or small-business 

people. 

 

Some of the buzz words of the 1990s are diversification and 

value added and innovation. The people of Carrot River Valley 

are very familiar with these concepts because they have been a 

way of life for them for decades. You only have to look at the 

history of the economic development of north-east 

Saskatchewan to see how innovation and diversification have 

built the local economy. 

 

My constituents are leaders in honey production, alfalfa, and 

forages, the seed industry, leafcutter bees, and the nursery 

industry. North-east producers were pioneers in the 

development of canola and field peas and had game farming to 

their very developed . . . their great, I think just excellent, 

development of the livestock industry. And they are looking 

with enthusiasm for new ventures like potatoes and vegetable 

production, small fruit production. Add this solid agricultural 

innovation to the growing forest and tourism industry, and 

things look very positive in our area because strong, innovative 

people are building on our strengths. 

 

An Hon. Member:  And a good MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) too. 

 

Hon. Mr. Renaud:  Absolutely. 

 

Just to note the value of the tourism industry, Mr. Speaker, the 

town of Nipawin and its business people have made a priority 

of marketing the area as a prime fishing destination. You only 

have to drive down the streets of Nipawin, take a look at the 

vehicles, take a look at the licence plates  the majority are 

from the United States of America and other provinces. 

 

And just try to get a hotel room in the summertime in the town 

of Nipawin. 

 

I would like to mention the efforts of Hudson Bay and other 

communities in the north-east at developing themselves as a 

winter destination, particularly, snowmobiling. 

 

As I said earlier, the people of Carrot River are optimistic and 

forward-looking, as is the Speech from the Throne. A realistic 

and well-thought-out plan for economic development is a high  



142  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

priority for the people of Carrot River, and I know that they will 

be very disappointed in the federal Liberals’ budget yesterday 

because there is no plan for economic development. There is no 

high priority for jobs. And they will be very concerned, as I am, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Partnership for Growth document released earlier this year 

shows a great deal of work by a team, a partnership of business, 

communities, and public servants. I would like to thank the 

Minister of Economic Development for his continued 

leadership in this effort. 

 

The development of Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership as announced in the throne speech is a very positive 

development. A few years ago some farmers in Zenon Park 

started a small lumber company located in the middle of a 

quarter section. Now they are building houses for the Japanese 

market. Companies like this, Mr. Speaker, understand the need 

and the benefit of this initiative. 

 

I would like to point out the success of NewField Seeds in 

Nipawin whose excellence in developing and producing seed 

has resulted in exports all over the world. Of course, the 

economy of Carrot River depends greatly on the wise use of 

forest resource and there is a great interest in the forest 

management legislation announced in the Speech from the 

Throne. The legislation will promote the development and 

sustainability for our future generations. 

 

Education, Mr. Speaker, is also very important to the people of 

the north-east, the home of Cumberland Regional College. 

There is a great deal of interest in the reform of our education 

system. If we are going to take advantage of future 

opportunities we have to improve our education and training 

system. Cory Exner, president of the students’ union at the U of 

S (University of Saskatchewan), described to me what really 

needs to be done in education. He stated that we have to 

de-invent and then reinvent the education system so that the 

best sustainable education and training can be delivered to our 

young people. And I agree. 

 

My constituents are also very concerned about the future of our 

social assistance program, and they look forward to the new 

initiatives to help foster independence, and support of our 

children. Welfare recipients, Mr. Speaker, want to be 

independent. They want a job. They want training. And they 

want a government like the New Democratic government that 

has responded to that. 

 

This government believes in responding to people’s needs in an 

appropriate, affordable manner. That has become our trade 

mark, and people have come to expect this from the New 

Democrats. 

 

As one of the great winter sport regions of North America, there 

has been great concern in our area about snowmobile safety, 

and I will be introducing legislation to deal with this problem 

later this session. It will be sensible legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that has been suggested by the stakeholders like the 

Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association, the RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police), the Saskatchewan Safety Council,  

industry, and other stakeholders. Hopefully it will help to 

reduce fatalities and promote safety while allowing us to enjoy 

this wonderful family sport. 

 

There has also been a great deal of concern and interest around 

the issue of impaired driving. And I am pleased that we will be 

considering new measures to deal with this very serious 

problem. And most of the ideas, Mr. Speaker, contained in this 

legislation were contributed by students, in particular by 

Students Against Drinking and Driving. 

 

Another great concern among my constituents is the reinventing 

of government. Each level of government is faced with a great 

challenge. How do we offer essential and necessary services 

with greater efficiency? People have told us that government 

must put less into administration and more into front-line 

services. I am proud that we will be introducing a budget soon 

which focuses on working smarter and better to find the 

resources we need to offer the services expected by the 

Saskatchewan people  something that is expected from an 

NDP government. 

 

Overall, the message of the Speech from the Throne is one of 

hope and a positive approach to dealing with the challenges of 

the future. It is not some throw-back to the past, unlike the 

amendments offered by the member for Kindersley, which if 

adopted would send this province back to the dark days of the 

1980s. 

 

I am happy to support the motion of the member for 

Battleford-Cut Knife in support of the address of His Honour 

 a direction and a plan that will move Saskatchewan into the 

21st century. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

indeed a great honour for me to rise before the Assembly and 

respond to the Honourable Lieutenant Governor’s Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

I would first like to congratulate you and the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood for your selections to these very 

important positions in the legislature. There are many people 

here this session who are occupying various posts for the first 

time. You two gentlemen certainly fit this category as you are 

each enjoying your inaugural terms fulfilling the roles of 

Speaker and Deputy Speaker. However, I’m positive your 

professionalism and experience on both sides of the House will 

serve you well in this capacity. 

 

I would like to acknowledge Mr. Pat Shaw, our 

Sergeant-at-Arms, as he is also a new member to the legislative 

team. Despite the fact that this is Mr. Shaw’s first session in 

this security position, I don’t feel threatened at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I must thank our Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, and the other legislative 

staff members who have helped to educate and inform all newly 

elected MLAs, including myself. Their patience and 

understanding is greatly appreciated. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  143 

Mr. Speaker, my heartiest congratulations go out to my fellow 

members, from all corners of the province who now sit as 

MLAs, for their recent electoral victories. I believe we are in for 

quite an interesting and eventful session. For the first time in 

years in the province of Saskatchewan, we will be represented 

in the Assembly by significant numbers from each of the three 

parties. And I look forward to working with all members as 

Saskatchewan nears a new millennium. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a tremendous privilege for me to represent the 

people of the Canora-Pelly constituency in the Legislative 

Assembly. Canora-Pelly is a newly created riding and I am 

especially honoured to be its first elected MLA. The 

Canora-Pelly constituency covers a large, diversified rural area 

in east-central Saskatchewan. It is comprised of 35 towns, 

villages and hamlets, and 12 rural municipalities. There are no 

large centres in our constituency, Mr. Speaker, with the most 

populous community holding 2,381 people. There are only 

small towns filled with good, honest, small-town folk, and 

farmers who understand the value of hard work and the strength 

of the rural way of life. 

 

I’m proud to have been selected to speak on their behalf. They 

placed their confidence in me and I will do my best to represent 

their concerns and interests, Mr. Speaker. From Whitebeech in 

the north-east to West Bend in the south-west my constituents 

will have a voice. 

 

The people of Canora-Pelly know how special the traditional 

values of family and community are, Mr. Speaker, and that is 

something often forgotten in our society nowadays. They know 

that rural Saskatchewan is a great place to live, work, and raise 

children. In fact I recently had the pleasure of participating in 

an event called the largest family reunion in history. This was a 

cooperative effort among the communities of Norquay, Pelly, 

Stenen, and Hyas, to organize home-coming festivities for the 

area. I can tell you that anyone who joined in these celebrations 

left with a renewed faith in the rural community spirit. I am 

very proud to have participated in this event. 

 

I am also proud of the tremendous effort put forth each year by 

the town of Sturgis and its Kinsmen Club in organizing a 

mini-miracle in support of Telemiracle . This mini-miracle 

draws performers from all through the region, allowing local 

folk to showcase their talent for a good cause. It is a large and 

popular event for the people of Sturgis and the entire area. And 

I can tell you that through their community spirit the Kinsmen 

Club raised $24,509.04 for Telemiracle 20 this past Thursday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  What an accomplishment for a town of 701 

citizens! These are merely two examples which typify the kind 

of good people I have been sent here to represent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Canora-Pelly had a hotly contested election on June 21, 1995, 

and this is shown by the narrow margin of victory. I took this 

seat by a total of 50 votes. Call me Landslide Krawetz. This 

tight race was due to a number of factors, primarily the strong  

campaigns waged by my two running mates, Mr. Ron Harper of 

the New Democrats, and Mr. David Sawkiw of the Progressive 

Conservatives. I would like to commend these gentlemen for 

their great efforts. They were gracious in defeat and proved that 

our constituency is one worth striving to represent. 

 

But when the smoke cleared, Mr. Speaker, a Liberal was left 

standing, and when that Liberal looked around he saw a number 

of fellow Liberals who were also victorious in an area of the 

province once known as red square for its continual string of 

NDP election victories. New Democratic incumbents fell to the 

Liberals not only in Canora-Pelly, but to June Draude in 

Kelvington-Wadena; to Bob Bjornerud in Saltcoats; and to Ron 

Osika in Melville. Indeed the region may still be called red 

square, but it is now painted Liberal red. And trust me, Mr. 

Speaker, when we pull out our paint cans to colour the map 

after the next provincial election, we will not stay inside the 

lines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I’m very proud of our Saskatchewan Liberal 

Party and what it represents, Mr. Speaker. That is why I chose 

to run as a Liberal candidate in my constituency. It represents a 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan, not to special 

interest groups who grease your palms. The Liberals have long 

held the desire to return Saskatchewan back to its rightful 

owners, the average citizens. We want to empower the people, 

to give them back the controls and to remove the oppressive 

shackles of over-regulation and over-governance imposed by a 

New Democratic administration, seemingly hell-bent on 

controlling their every move. These values certainly appeal to 

me and to many other Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also chose to run as a Liberal candidate to defend our 

education system. I’ve been involved nearly all my life in 

education  first as a student at the Invermay School, then at 

the University of Saskatchewan; as a teacher in Invermay for 11 

years; as a school principal; as a school trustee and chairman of 

the Canora School Division Board for nine years; and as a 

member of the provincial trustee executive for six years; as the 

president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association for 

two terms; as a member of the University of Regina senate; and 

now as the official critic for Education and Post-Secondary 

Education, Skills and Training. 

 

I felt that we in Saskatchewan had and still have a good system 

of education, with quality programs, a solid curriculum, and 

very competent teachers and professors. However, I was 

concerned that many issues were being addressed in a 

haphazard manner and I feared that education was no longer a 

priority of this government. For example, Mr. Speaker, in 

1991-92 there was a total commitment of $901 million to 

education in Saskatchewan. This funding was for K to 12 

schooling, grants for universities and technical institutes, 

distance education programs, and teachers’ pensions. By 

1994-95, three years later, that figure had only risen by 

one-tenth of a percentage point to $902 million. When you take 

into account the inflation rate over that same period of time, 

Mr. Speaker, one comes to realize just how much the education  



144  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

system has sacrificed during the NDP’s term in government 

thus far. 

 

Both SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) 

president, Al Klassen, and STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation) president, Dwain Drew, have stated that further to 

cuts to education funding will certainly jeopardize the quality of 

our K-12 education system. U of S president George Ivany and 

U of R president Donald Wells have echoed this sentiment at 

the post-secondary level with the backing of faculty 

associations and student unions alike. 

 

Yet the throne speech alluded to drastic and wide-ranging 

reforms to the education system, and that will generally mean 

more sacrifices have been planned at our children’s expense. I 

am like every other parent in that I pray for my children to be 

able to enjoy a more comfortable lifestyle than I did, and for 

them to have all the opportunities in life that I had, and then 

some. But I am deeply concerned, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government will try to reform the education system much like it 

did the health care system, and that my children’s future will 

suffer because of it. 

 

As an SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) insurance 

agent, I also saw great injustice in the government’s new 

no-fault insurance scheme. And I wanted to make sure that my 

voice was heard on this issue. Now as the official opposition 

critic for SGI, I have received calls and letters from dozens of 

Saskatchewan citizens who have been victimized by certain 

aspects of this policy. And I am committed to representing them 

here in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Over the next few weeks you will be hearing from me a great 

deal on this topic, Mr. Speaker, as will the minister in charge of 

SGI. In due time I will also have much to say regarding 

proposed new legislation aimed at allowing banks and credit 

unions to sell insurance to Saskatchewan clients, as this is a 

serious matter in the province. 

 

These grave concerns, and the knowledge that Saskatchewan 

could do better, influenced me to declare my candidacy for the 

Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker. And I have found this decision to be 

very gratifying. 

 

After the electoral victories of myself and my colleagues in red 

square, many New Democrats were left shaking their heads, 

wondering what the Liberals did to break their stronghold in the 

region. Well, Mr. Speaker, I cannot speak for my associates, but 

I can tell you that in Canora-Pelly it was not only what the 

Liberals did but what the NDP and the Conservatives did as 

well. 

 

When citizens looked at the strong platform and values of the 

Liberal Party and then considered what the alternatives had to 

offer, the choice became crystal clear. Many area residents who 

had never voted Liberal in their lives threw their support behind 

our party. And that is why I am in the Assembly today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker:  Order. 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Conservative campaign asked the people to give them back 

the reins of the province and to trust them once again with 

Saskatchewan finances. Meanwhile, a steady stream of their 

former members were about to appear in court on charges of 

fraud and theft from the taxpayers from their days in 

government. This request was both sad and confusing to many 

people who remembered the sorry condition in which the last 

PC (Progressive Conservative) administration had left the 

province. 

 

The New Democrats grew overconfident and pompous, 

believing that they would always be able to win in 

Canora-Pelly. Well, Mr. Speaker, ours are a very proud people, 

but they are by no means the wealthiest folks in the province, 

and if there is one thing they don’t need it is to be knocked 

down by tougher economic times and tighter budgets while 

having the Premier rub their noses in it by squandering tax 

dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  In a region where family and communities 

still take precedence above all, the destruction of the health care 

system also loomed large. Throughout our rural areas, where 

the traditional values of honesty, integrity, and humility are still 

sacred, the outright arrogance, deceit, and broken promises of 

the NDP offended many people. Here was a party where ideas 

and policy flowed from the top down, not from the bottom up. 

 

Canora-Pelly constituents remembered the election campaign of 

1991 when the NDP decried the idea of government-sponsored 

gambling as an outrage. They said that even the modest 

introduction of small-scale gambling into Saskatchewan would 

result in the ruination of all we hold near and dear in our 

society. They also said that any party that would support such 

an initiative had to be stopped. 

 

However, shortly after winning that election, one of the first 

actions of the new NDP Premier was to introduce video lottery 

terminals into Saskatchewan. From there, casinos began to pop 

up in every corner of the province. Now it seems that the only 

industry in which the New Democratic government has 

managed to spur any growth at all is the gaming sector. We 

have presently reached the point where we must have two 

government bureaus to administrate over gambling  the 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority and the 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation. 

 

This was all done with nary a peep of protest from the NDP 

supporters and MLAs who had so vehemently opposed 

gambling a short time before. Mr. Speaker, this arrogance was 

not forgotten by the voters in Canora-Pelly. 

 

Each election, New Democrats like to spur on their disciples 

with the rally cry, let’s do it for Tommy. But I wonder what 

Tommy Douglas would have to say about his New Democrats’ 

rampant and haphazard expansion of gambling throughout this 

province. I have a feeling he would not be very impressed, Mr. 

Speaker. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  145 

Mr. Douglas would also be sorely disappointed with what his 

party has done to the once proud health care system that he 

helped build for all the residents of Saskatchewan. A total of 52 

hospitals, including two in Invermay and Norquay of my 

constituency, have thus far received the axe due to NDP 

funding cuts. Severe cuts are still to come in this sector and 

several more institutions may soon join Regina’s Plains hospital 

in the next round on the chopping block. Yet the members 

opposite still refer to themselves as the protectors of the health 

care system. What a sad joke, Mr. Speaker. 

 

However I must commend the government for its efforts to 

establish a 9-1-1 exchange for rural Saskatchewan. This service 

is needed now more than ever, because after 52 hospital 

closures, most rural residents will no longer be able to make 

short trips for serious medical attention. And as those 

ambulances race across Saskatchewan to transport patients to 

distant hospitals, Mr. Speaker, they will be driving on some of 

the poorest surfaces since the wagon trails. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  The deplorable conditions of this province’s 

highways and roads were not even mentioned in the throne 

speech, and this omission will certainly disappoint my 

constituents. One item that was discussed in the throne speech 

however was the government’s blueprint for economic renewal, 

which promises to decrease bureaucratic red tape for small 

businesses by 25 per cent over 10 years. This is akin to a store 

having a half price sale after first doubling its prices, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Oppressive new labour standards regulations, unfriendly 

contracting and hiring policies, and impending changes to 

occupational health and safety which will hike rates and punish 

not only those who do break the rules but also those who do not 

 these have all been common themes of the NDP government, 

which claims to be business-friendly while it hammers away at 

private corporations and small-town corner stores alike. 

 

One must also consider how business-friendly the New 

Democrats are after the recent attempts to gouge employers 

with large hikes to Workers’ Compensation Board rates. A debt 

reduction charge was also planned for business owners, 

regardless of whether they had ever used the system, abused the 

system, or never made a WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) 

claim. 

(1500) 

Only public outcry forced the New Democrats to rethink their 

faulty strategy. Even so, their revised WCB rates will certainly 

be severe enough to force more than a few business owners to 

lay off staff or close down altogether. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I recently had the pleasure of speaking 

with a gentleman named Leonard Sebulsky from Sheho, in the 

south-west corner of my constituency. He owns Sebulsky’s 

General Store, a business established in that town back in 1906.  

In 1945 Leonard’s grandfather purchased the operation and it 

has been a family business ever since. 

 

The store has been an institution in Sheho for nine decades, Mr. 

Speaker. But like so many other businesses in Saskatchewan, it 

is now in jeopardy of shutting down. Understanding the 

necessity of diversifying a business, Leonard had set up a 

number of subsidiary divisions within the shop. However, it 

seemed that each time the store began to show signs of 

economic stability, the NDP government would enact some new 

policy that would knock the business back down again. 

Increased red tape and business levies forced the store to lay off 

workers to trim payroll, and also left its owners devoting more 

time to bureaucratic paperwork rather than the day-to-day 

operation of the shop. 

 

Stifling power rate increases took their toll on the business as 

well. A meat-cutting division, once very profitable, soon fell as 

the cost of operating a meat saw and running large coolers 24 

hours a day sky-rocketed so high that the shop could no longer 

sell enough meat to cover these expenses. A Canada Post outlet 

and an SGI agency remain in that store, but Leonard is now 

concerned about the prospects of government legislation which 

may allow banks and credit unions to sell insurance. This 

competition from much larger and more established institutions 

would effectively shut down the SGI division within his 

business. 

 

Leonard Sebulsky and I spoke about the NDP’s plan for 

economic renewal, and I must say he was disgusted, Mr. 

Speaker. When he heard of their commitment to remove 25 per 

cent of the government red tape over 10 years he scoffed. The 

NDP will spend a decade trying to fix what took them a few 

short months to ruin. Well, Mr. Speaker, this entrepreneur 

would like me to inform the members opposite that a business 

needs a break now, not 10 years down the road. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  The Premier is correct in his statements that 

small business is the engine that drives the Saskatchewan 

economy and that any hope for improvement must begin at this 

level. However, Sebulsky’s General Store is indicative of many 

Canora-Pelly businesses which have been harmed by constant 

government harassment. If the New Democrats kept their nose 

out of small business, Mr. Speaker, the economy would not 

need renewing because it would still be as strong as it ever was. 

 

Small business can handle its own if the government just gets 

out of its face. This is indeed a common theme throughout my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, as business owners cringe each time 

the NDP announces one of its business-friendly initiatives 

which end up causing more problems than they cure. 

 

I alluded to SaskPower rates a few months ago . . . a few 

moments ago, sorry. And this is another sore spot for the people 

I represent. Constituents wonder why a Crown corporation 

which netted approximately $159 million in profit over the past 

three years required a 12 to 14 per cent increase in charges. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly do not have the answer. 



146  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

The New Democrats supporting this rate hike will say a 12 to 

14 per cent rate increase will not have a great impact on the 

average bill. But consider, Mr. Speaker, the devastating effect 

this increase has had on the agricultural sector. Greenhouses, 

dairy, poultry, and hog operations which consume large 

amounts of electricity have just witnessed a massive increase in 

one of their biggest cost factors. Yet this is merely the tip of the 

iceberg when it comes to the blows Saskatchewan farmers have 

taken at the hands of the New Democrats. This province is still 

largely dependent on the success and prosperity of the 

agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker, and this is a fact that the NDP 

government must realize. 

 

I receive calls almost daily from the northern reaches of my 

constituency wondering what is being done to compensate 

farmers for wildlife damage to hay bails and crops that have 

been cut but not yet harvested. I especially hear from 

constituents living along our eastern border with Manitoba who 

see their provincial neighbours being looked after by a 

government which obviously cares for their well-being, while 

they on the Saskatchewan side are forced to shoulder this 

tremendous financial loss themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  I am asked about reductions in services by 

many farmers who must now travel longer distances to see 

personnel about crop insurance concerns. Offices were recently 

closed in Canora and Wynyard, which although not in the 

Canora-Pelly constituency, served ag producers in the Foam 

Lake area of my constituency. 

 

Many now believe the next step in the NDP’s attack on rural 

Saskatchewan will be the closure of rural service centres, which 

would certainly be a terrible blow to the agricultural industry 

and to small towns across Saskatchewan. 

 

But it is the GRIP fiasco which has been most appalling to 

constituency farmers, Mr. Speaker. The broken contracts, the 

broken promises, these are already well documented. Now we 

have the Premier announcing to the media that Saskatchewan 

farmers will have to play by the rules even though his 

government keeps changing them. 

 

I recently received a GRIP statement in the mail from Mr. Daryl 

Strilaeff, a young farmer in my constituency who began 

business in 1993. Although he only joined the program in that 

year and received no benefits, Daryl is being asked to remit 

$837.71 to the government. As he so aptly stated in his letter, 

this bill does not give much incentive for a young person to 

start farming in Saskatchewan. 

 

Recent Saskatchewan out-migration statistics support Daryl’s 

statement and show that young people feel there is not much 

incentive for anyone to begin a career in a province where the 

government detests prosperity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Thousands of young people are choosing to 

leave this province in which they were born and raised to seek  

greener pastures elsewhere, most notably in our neighbouring 

province to the west, which to its credit has never elected an 

NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the disdain of the Premier and his party for rural 

Saskatchewan is well chronicled. In fact one need only consider 

the comments of Dr. Lewis Draper, a former NDP MLA, in a 

letter to the editor which appeared in the Regina Leader-Post a 

few months ago. I quote: 

 

The message was spelled out early in 1992 and I have been 

trying to warn of it ever since. That message is that the 

NDP does not want or need the rural seats. This has been 

spelled out in great detail, starting with the revocation of 

GRIP, the plan to plough up rural highways, the closure of 

52 hospitals simply because they were small and rural, and 

the elimination of eight rural seats in the legislature. So 

rural Saskatchewan is in a double bind. The NDP doesn’t 

need our votes so they will continue to ignore us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one can certainly gather from this statement 

and from the lack of attention devoted to rural Saskatchewan in 

the throne speech that the Premier does not have a very high 

opinion of the rural way of life. It also becomes painfully 

obvious that the Premier has never lived in rural Saskatchewan 

and that his MLAs who have are either not spreading the word 

or he is just not listening. 

 

Now you might catch the Premier in a cowboy hat flipping 

burgers at some small-town party fund raiser saying how much 

he loves rural life, and he will most likely rise in the House over 

the next few weeks and tell of the great deeds he has done for 

rural areas of the province. In fact the Premier will probably 

talk as if he is the best friend rural Saskatchewan ever had. But 

don’t you believe him for a second. Actions speak louder than 

words, Mr. Speaker, and those of us from small towns across 

the province have witnessed the full extent of Roy’s rural 

revenge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Krawetz:  Considering the NDP attacks on rural 

Saskatchewan, one might be led to believe that our larger 

centres are reaping the benefits at our expense, but this is not 

so. Within a few years Regina’s Plains hospital will be closed 

or perhaps converted into another casino. The existence of the 

Providence Place geriatric unit in Moose Jaw is threatened as 

once promised government funding has also dried up. Further 

budget cuts will seriously jeopardize the operation of the 

University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon and the University of 

Regina, while SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology) campuses may be endangered in 

Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw. 

 

So the current state of Saskatchewan begs the obvious question: 

just who is prospering in Roy Romanow’s Saskatchewan? The 

answer, Mr. Premier, is he’s doing it at the expense of each and 

every citizen. 

 

A good analogy would be a parent who gives a child $20 to 

purchase a few groceries and the child instead goes to the  



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  147 

arcade, plays video games, drinks pop, and buys bubble gum 

with the money, then returns home empty-handed and asked for 

more cash. What rational parent would provide more money for 

the child to squander, based on the level of responsibility and 

maturity displayed. 

 

Yet this is what the NDP government is forcing taxpayers to do 

day after day. The New Democrats have shown little 

competence for making choices, setting priorities, or 

reallocating resources. The arrogance, the broken promises, 

playing political games with people’s lives, this is all just a 

normal part of governing to the NDP. They will say whatever it 

takes to get elected and then do nothing positive for the average 

citizen once in office. 

 

The job my Liberal colleagues and I will do, both in the House 

and outside the legislature, is to hold the New Democrats 

responsible and accountable for each of their destructive 

policies and broken promises. 

 

On behalf of the people of the Canora-Pelly constituency and 

the citizens of Saskatchewan, we will remind the members of 

this government that they are the servants of the people, not the 

masters, as they so often think. And we will be very adamant 

about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is for this reason that I cannot, in good conscience, approve 

the motion to accept the Speech from the Throne. As I take my 

seat, I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, as well as my 

fellow members, for the courtesy they have shown me today. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

congratulate the member from Canora-Pelly in his maiden 

address to this legislature and appreciate his thanks that we 

should extend him the courtesy — if I may say, it was quite an 

extended courtesy. 

 

I would also want to say to the member from Canora-Pelly that 

it would appear to many of us on this side of the House that 

today you took some forward steps in advancing towards the 

leadership of the party and the caucus. I do congratulate you 

and I do know that you will make a significant contribution to 

this legislature and to the process of democracy in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is invariably and must be my first task in 

entering this throne speech debate to extend my deep thanks to 

the constituents of Moose Jaw Wakamow for allowing me . . . 

lending me their support and allowing me the privilege to 

participate in this speech and in this legislature. 

 

And as you well know, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw is described as 

the Friendly City and the people of Moose Jaw have been very 

friendly to both yourself and myself for three terms. And I 

deeply, deeply appreciate that and would seek again to serve 

them to the very best of my ability. 

 

(1515) 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I would want to join with every 

other member who has taken their place in this debate in 

extending my personal congratulations in this very public way 

to you, sir, as our new Speaker. Perhaps more than any other 

member in this House, I am cognizant and aware of the deep 

commitment to the democratic process, the passion for the 

democratic process, that you bring to this position. 

 

Perhaps more than any other member in this House, I am aware 

of the love that you have for this institution and for the 

democratic process it represents. And I am confident that as a 

result of your term in that chair that both this legislature and its 

processes, the process of democracy in our province and indeed 

in our nation, will be well served and improved. And my hopes 

and prayers are with you in your task. 

 

But however, Mr. Speaker, there is a caveat and there is a 

concern that has resulted from your election to this position. 

And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and tell members of the 

legislature, that across the province, from Biggar to Bounty to 

Ogema, from Bengough to Beauval, there is one question being 

asked. And the question is this: does the election of the member 

from Moose Jaw North to the position of Speaker mean the end 

of the loose jaw from Moose Jaw? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately when I 

have to say that yes, unfortunately the answer is yes, there is, 

Mr. Speaker, there is deep regret, there is deep regret in the 

land. There seems to be less regret in the caucus, but there is 

deep regret in the land. And with that caveat . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Now the member from Moosomin wants me to 

deliver the white cat, black cat speech. 

 

Well I heard a Liberal member just yesterday in this House 

volunteer they are cats. Well we knew that before they came 

and it is even more true today than before. Now it is really a 

choice between the white cats, black cats, and the people who 

represent the true interests of the people of Saskatchewan, who 

sit on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

congratulates you and wishes you God’s speed. 

 

To turn my attention, Mr. Speaker, to the Speech from the 

Throne, this, Mr. Speaker, is in some ways a throne speech 

which is typical of throne speeches, but in another very 

important way, an atypical throne speech, Mr. Speaker. Because 

this throne speech, not simply introducing a legislative session, 

is a throne speech which has the courage to look to the future 

 it has the courage to look beyond this lean horizon of our 

time to the future 21st century. 

 

This throne speech, Mr. Speaker, has the courage to dream of 

new dreams; to dream of new visions; to look and to pioneer 

again, Mr. Speaker. And this throne speech has that courage 

because that courage is the courage of this Premier and this  



148  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

caucus and this government, Mr. Speaker, but it has more than 

the courage to look to the future. 

 

It equally has the courage to seize the opportunities of today 

that can make that future. Mr. Speaker, you may remember and 

others in the House may remember, a little movie that was 

popular not so long ago. I think it was called the Dead Poets’ 

Society starring Robin Williams. He played an English 

professor with a group of students who’d just as soon not be 

there, and to his group of students this English professor in the 

movie puts a bit of advice on the blackboard, two Latin words. 

The two words: carpe diem, carpe diem. And I’m told, Mr. 

Speaker, by the Legislative Library that the translation from the 

Latin to English of carpe diem is simply: seize the day. Seize 

the opportunity. Seize the moment. Seize the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this throne speech has the courage not only to 

look to the future, but it has the courage to seize the day, to 

seize the opportunities of the day that can build for us a future 

that we desire. 

 

So I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Speech from the 

Throne. We all heard His Honour graciously deliver these 

words in this House, and I quote: 

 

The 21st century holds the promise (for our province) of 

even greater things to come. Now is the time to prepare for 

that new century; to seize the moment with the plans, 

policies, and reforms required to build a better and more 

prosperous future for us all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has the courage to seize the 

opportunities of the day to build a future for our province. And 

you know, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member from Cut 

Knife-Battleford in moving this motion said it best when she 

said to the House, this government, and I quote, she said, this 

government: “We have no intentions of driving into a new 

century on a Red River cart.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has the courage, and this throne 

speech reflects it, to look into the future, the courage to seize 

the moments before us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that we will be opposed. I 

know there will be those who will oppose us. The member from 

Shaunavon points directly at himself. I understand that. There 

will be those who will oppose us. 

 

Ever it was so; ever it was so. When we had the courage to look 

to the future and seize the opportunities of the 1940s, when we 

talked about hospitalization, the Liberals and the Conservatives 

opposed us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When in the 1950s we had the courage to look to the future and 

seize the opportunities when Woodrow Lloyd pioneered 

education reform in this province, what did they do over there? 

They opposed us. 

 

When in 1962 we had the courage to look to the future and give 

to the nation of Canada the dream of medicare, what did they 

do? They opposed us. 

When in the 1970s, when in the 1970s we had the courage to 

look to the future to maximize the benefit of the resources of 

this province for the people of this province, what did they do? 

They opposed us. 

 

And in more recent days, in more recent days when we 

endeavour to improve the working conditions for the working 

people of Saskatchewan, what do they do on a daily basis? They 

oppose us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes their opposition is confusing  is 

confusing. How well I remember when we had the vision and 

the foresight to say that the farming people of Saskatchewan, 

the farming families of Saskatchewan, deserve something better 

than GRIP. How they opposed us. How they opposed us. The 

member from Shaunavon, I recall how he opposed this. He used 

it as one of his main reasons for leaving this government and 

joining the Liberal Party. 

 

How they opposed when we had the foresight to say that the 

farming people of Saskatchewan deserve something better than 

GRIP. They opposed us. 

 

Well now what makes it very confusing, Mr. Speaker, is that 

just in this House a few days earlier I heard the new Liberal 

agricultural critic say, and I quote: we’re happy, as farmers, that 

the GRIP program has wound down. We’re happy as farmers 

that the GRIP program has wound down. 

 

Well this is confusing, Mr. Speaker, except maybe it tells us 

something. Maybe it tells us that we have an opposition caucus 

who will simply oppose for the sake of opposing  that will 

just oppose for the sake of opposing. 

 

I don’t just attribute it to the Liberal caucus; I hear it also from 

the Conservative caucus, and we’ve heard it in speeches in this 

throne speech. Just oppose, just oppose. 

 

The other thing that tells us, Mr. Speaker, and I believe tells the 

people of Saskatchewan, that if all you can do is oppose, that 

tells the people of our province that you have very few, if any, 

new ideas, new visions, new hopes for our province. 

 

If all you can do is oppose, it tells the people of our province 

that there is very little new, by way of thinking, in the Liberal 

and Conservative parties. Which tells me they are stuck, that 

they’re stuck  they’re stuck in the past. I’m mean we’ve 

listened now in this session to the Conservative members and 

that, to their credit, at least they advanced some ideas. They 

advanced some motions. They advanced some proposals. 

 

Now the proposals they advance, of course, are nothing new. 

They talk about Draconian labour legislation. Well that’s not 

new. I mean we’ve been there; we’ve seen that. They talk about 

laissez-faire free enterprise. We’ve been there; we’ve seen that. 

 

We’ve heard the Liberal caucus today express their position 

opposed to affirmative action. We’ve been there; we’ve seen 

that. We see them defending, on a daily basis now, their friends 

in Ottawa. Well we’ve been there; we’ve seen that. That’s not 

new. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  149 

And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps most troublesome in that last two 

days in this House, what we have seen from both caucuses now 

is the old political strategy of seeking to divide; of seeking to 

divide rural and urban; of seeking to divide young and old; of 

seeking to divide aboriginal and non-aboriginal. We see it. The 

people of the province see it. You’re not fooling anybody. It’s 

an old political strategy, and my friends across the way, it won’t 

work  it won’t work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just conclude here before moving again 

back into the throne speech. I remember taking driver training. 

Many of us took driver training. And my instructor was very 

clear that if you want to reach your destination safely, you keep 

your eyes on the road. You keep your eyes focused through the 

windshield where you want to get to and you steer a careful 

course. 

 

Now what you don’t do, what you don’t do is keep your eyes 

glued in the rear-view mirror. And my observation of what’s 

happening in this House is that we’ve got at least one political 

party, represented by the Conservative Party, who’ve got their 

eyes glued in the rear-view mirror. They’d have us go straight 

back. In fact I sometimes think they’ve got their hand on the 

gear shift ready to put the province in reverse if we should ever 

give them the opportunity to govern again. 

 

And then I look, Mr. Speaker, at the Liberal caucus . . . And the 

member from Shaunavon is addressing the House from his seat. 

I look at the members of the Liberal caucus and what I see 

happening over there; they’re not looking out the rear-view 

mirror; they’re not looking out the windshield; they’re looking 

at each other to see who is going to be in the driver’s seat. And 

I tell you, they don’t know whether they’re going forward and 

they don’t know whether they’re going backward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I want to say is this. This government, Mr. Speaker, is not 

prepared, not prepared to miss the opportunities of today which 

can take us down a better future road. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, as you know, this throne speech speaks of 

the need to continue to build upon the foundations of health 

renewal that have been laid over the last four and five years. 

This throne speech continues to speak of our willingness to 

renew the delivery of education and training in our province; 

that we should equip our young people with the very best that 

we can provide, the very best opportunities in all of Canada. 

 

This throne speech speaks of our willingness to tackle the 

challenges of providing strength and services across rural 

Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. It speaks of our 

readiness, our readiness to ensure that public enterprise in 

Saskatchewan will be strong and secure into the next century. It 

speaks of new models of crime prevention, of new models of 

dealing with young offenders. And, Mr. Speaker, I am so 

pleased that it speaks so boldly about this government’s 

commitment to redefine and redesign social assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again let me quote from the speech. His Honour 

read these words: 

 

Over the next two years, my government will work to  

redesign social assistance, replacing traditional welfare as 

we (have known) . . . it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few moments before I sit down to 

speak of what I believe is a very exciting, a very progressive 

proposal towards the redesign of social services. And I want 

you to know, Mr. Speaker, and all members to know, that in our 

proposals for the redesign of social assistance you will not find 

proposals that punish the poor for being poor. We are not taking 

the approach of the Mike Harris government. And you will, Mr. 

Speaker, not find proposals here that seek to export our poor 

with one-way bus tickets. You will not find the Ralph Klein 

approach. 

 

What you will find here, Mr. Speaker, in these proposals is an 

approach which is based on responsibility. I ask you to note the 

word, based on responsibility. Because responsibility means 

just what it says. Responsibility means the ability to respond, 

the ability to respond. As a community, Mr. Speaker, as a 

community we have a responsibility to our neighbours in need. 

We have a responsibility to our neighbours in need and what we 

seek is the ability to respond to our neighbours in need. That’s 

responsibility  the ability to respond to our neighbours in 

need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you should know and all members should know 

that fully 50 per cent of the case-load of Social Services in our 

province, fully 50 per cent and more are people who are there 

because of disability, because of physical or mental or 

emotional disability. In many ways these are the most 

vulnerable people in our province. They do not have powerful 

voices. They do not have a strong lobby. They are our 

neighbours in need. And I believe it is clearly the will of 

Saskatchewan people that we should have the ability to 

respond, the responsibility, to our neighbours in need. 

 

(1530) 

 

When I hear people say — and I do, Mr. Speaker — when I 

hear people say that we should just cut benefits, when I hear 

people say we should just cut benefits and that would be 

welfare reform, I ask them to remember who are the people they 

are speaking of. They are, Mr. Speaker, disabled people, some 

of the most vulnerable in our community. And just by the way, 

there but by the grace of God could go any one of us on any day 

of our lives. 

 

We need not an ability to punish these people; we need the 

ability to respond to their needs. That’s our responsibility. We 

have, Mr. Speaker, of the approximately 80,000 individuals in 

Saskatchewan who receive social assistance, of the approximate 

80,000, Mr. Speaker, 35,000 of them are children; 35,000 of 

them are children. 

 

The current system of social assistance is failing the children of 

our province, and we need the ability to respond to the children. 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the child action plan 

which was pioneered by the former minister of Social Services, 

the member from Eastview, in addition to our child action plan 

which has now created hundreds of projects and programs 

around the province, we are proposing the creation of a 



150  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

Saskatchewan child benefit. It is a benefit that will provide for 

the basic needs of children outside the welfare system. 

 

We do not need to burden our children with the psychological 

weight or the dependency of welfare. We are proposing a 

Saskatchewan child benefit. We’re inviting the federal 

government to participate and join with us as a way, Mr. 

Speaker, of saying in very bold terms  as a way of saying in 

very bold terms — that every child of Saskatchewan is a 

resource of infinite value; that we value every child of this land. 

Mr. Speaker, if one child in our province is diminished, then we 

all are diminished. And if one child is lifted up, then we all are 

lifted up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Speaker, as parents, as neighbours, 

as a community, we have a responsibility to the children of our 

province. We seek to find the ability to respond. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, just as an aside, what we’re 

doing in this regard  the concept of a child benefit  is being 

noted now nationally. I quote here from The Ottawa Citizen, 

January 12, 1996, an editorial which says, “Child poverty can’t 

wait.” And it says in the body of this editorial: 

 

Saskatchewan demonstrated this week that in an age of 

governing by doing less, real steps still can be taken to 

decrease child poverty. As part of proposed welfare 

reforms, Saskatchewan will give a monthly cheque to 

low-income working families as well as those on welfare. 

 

The child-benefit program would be a first in Canada. 

Saskatchewan is prepared to go it alone, but it is talking 

with the federal government about expanding the scheme. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are prepared. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  We are prepared, Mr. Speaker, to accept 

our responsibility to the children. 

 

Now I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, equally that individuals in our 

society and individuals who will be receiving social benefits 

also need to be responsible, to have the ability to respond. And 

we have today on welfare many, many citizens of our province, 

Mr. Speaker, who I can tell you, from personal conversations, 

do not want to be there, do not want to be there. 

 

But what we have crafted over the years, with perhaps good 

intention, what we have crafted over the years is a system that 

has built into its very structures, disincentives to leave the 

system. It has built into its very structures those provisions 

which make it almost impossible for some individuals to 

become independent. 

 

You see the way it currently works, Mr. Speaker, is this. If 

you’re on welfare and you secure employment, you can only 

today earn a maximum of $150. After the first $150 we start 

deducting from the cheque. It makes it very hard to get ahead.  

And if you should start to earn enough to escape welfare limits 

and you’re off welfare, then we will deduct your children’s 

health benefits which can be just enough to force families back 

onto welfare. 

 

Earlier this week in the House, the member from Greystone 

stood in her place and illustrated this with a real life example 

and appropriately said, this should ought to change. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re proposing to do. 

We are proposing to create a working income supplement that 

in fact rewards incentive as opposed to punishing incentive. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we propose to make available supplemental 

health coverage for children of low income families so that the 

health needs of children would not be that factor which puts 

people onto social assistance. Our goal is to support 

independence, to support responsibility, the ability to respond. 

 

We also desire, Mr. Speaker, that our young people be given the 

ability to respond, to be given the ability to be responsible. We 

have too many 18- to 21-year-olds that are starting to receive 

social assistance. And what is troublesome, Mr. Speaker, is that 

many of these young people, young adults, come to social 

assistance having severed connections with family and support, 

neighbourhoods and friends. And perhaps even more 

troublesome, Mr. Speaker, is that of the 18- to 21-year-old 

group now coming to social assistance, fully 50 per cent of 

them do not have a grade 12 education . . . fully 75 per cent do 

not have a grade 12 and fully 50 per cent do not have a grade 

10. 

 

If we expect these young people to have the ability to respond 

to this world and the world of the 21st century, how can we 

expect that if they do not carry the educational skills, if they do 

not carry the family connections to support them? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re proposing a youth futures program 

to encourage family connection and to encourage educational 

and work-related growth. 

 

There are many other proposals, Mr. Speaker, in the paper. I 

shouldn’t go on in much more length. But let me if I may, Mr. 

Speaker, just add one bit of scripture to the discussion. And this 

piece of scripture, Mr. Speaker, seems to me applies not just to 

social assistance but indeed to the theme of the throne speech, 

but I think very much to the redesign of social assistance in our 

province. 

 

It comes from Matthew 9; some members will know it. It says 

at Matthew 9 that no one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an 

old garment for the patch will pull away from the garment and 

the tear is made worse. Nor do people put new wine into old 

wineskins, or else the wineskins break, the wine is spilled, and 

the wineskins are ruined. But they put new wine into new 

wineskins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has a commitment, a new 

commitment to meeting the needs of our neighbours in need. It 

has a new commitment to the children of our province. It has a 

new commitment to build responsibility. If we’re going to 

achieve that commitment, that new wine of commitment, we’re  



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  151 

going to have to develop some new wineskins. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is true in Social Services; it is equally true in 

Health. It is true in how we govern ourselves in the provinces. 

It’s true in Economic Development; it is true in Education. If 

we are going to deliver the new wine of a new century, we need 

new wineskins. That’s what we have the courage, Mr. Speaker, 

to undertake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see here in the House this afternoon the member 

from Lloydminster, and I will be for ever grateful to the 

member from Lloydminster for bringing to the attention of this 

House in the last session of this legislature what I think is an 

extremely profound quote, and I would like to close my remarks 

with it. 

 

This quote, Mr. Speaker, I believe is sound advice for any of us 

as we look to the 21st century, but interestingly it comes from 

the 19th century. It comes from a pioneer of our province in the 

19th century, Chief Poundmaker. Poundmaker said these 

words: 

 

It would be so much easier just to fold our hands and say 

there is nothing that I, one man, can do. 

 

It would be so much easier, Mr. Speaker, to say that we, one 

province, there’s nothing we can do. But Poundmaker went on 

to say, we all know the story about the man who sat beside the 

trail too long and then it grew over and he could never find his 

way back again. We can never forget what has happened, but 

we cannot go back, and nor can we just sit beside the trail. 

 

Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this government has no intention 

of just sitting beside the trail while the rest of the world passes 

this province by. This government has the courage to seize the 

opportunity of today, that the 21st century can be and will be 

Saskatchewan’s century and a century for all of our people. 

 

Because I believe that is the message of this throne speech, 

when it comes time to vote, Mr. Speaker, I will stand in this 

place and very enthusiastically I will say, yes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also wish to 

extend my congratulations to yourself and wish you all the best 

in assuming the duties of your new office here. And I trust that 

you will do these to the best of your abilities, and we do look 

forward to your guidance in these matters as we head through 

our first session here in the Assembly. 

 

I’d also like to take this opportunity to thank the constituents of 

Thunder Creek. Thunder Creek was a constituency during this 

past election in which we enjoyed a rather larger turnout than 

the provincial average in terms of voting. I do express my 

gratitude to the people of Thunder Creek for having done so, 

for having exercised their right to the vote. 

 

I also take a great deal of pride in the fact that the people of 

Thunder Creek have entrusted me with the responsibility of 

representing their wishes, their concerns, and representing what  

they have as their needs in this Assembly. 

 

I also found it very gratifying during the course of the campaign 

of last year, the number of people who came forward to assist 

me in my efforts. And ever more gratifying is, since the 

election, the number of people who have continued to work 

tirelessly for myself in helping me in my efforts to represent the 

people of Thunder Creek as effectively as I possibly can. 

 

I would also like to recognize the efforts of some previous 

MLAs who represented Thunder Creek, or what was Thunder 

Creek proper prior to the previous election. Mr. Rick Swenson, 

who I do believe represented the people of Thunder Creek to 

the best of his abilities. 

 

I would also like to recognize the MLA from the old 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency, which I ended up 

inheriting the town of Gravelbourg through redistribution, in 

one Dr. Lewis Draper. I’d also like to wish him all future 

successes as it relates to his duties with the health district board. 

And I do trust that this gentleman will continue to voice his 

concerns for rural health care in this province. 

 

I’d also at this time like to recognize . . . a special recognition 

for some help and support that I’ve had from other MLAs who 

reside in my constituency. A gentleman that many of you may 

recognize from the past, Mr. Alex Mitchell, I found his help and 

his advice very gratifying. Also a gentleman that no doubt, Mr. 

Speaker, you’ll be well familiar with and your colleague from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow, in one Dr. Don Mitchell or Dr. Don 

MacDonald, I’m sorry, from Moose Jaw who also I found was 

of tremendous help and has provided a good deal of advice to 

myself. 

 

(1545) 

 

I’d like to just provide you with a brief profile of the Thunder 

Creek constituency, given that it has been so redistributed this 

past go-around and the fact that it is such a sprawling 

constituency. The constituency of Thunder Creek contains a full 

21 rural municipalities. It contains close to if not over two 

dozen towns and villages. 

 

There are five different health districts, Mr. Speaker, that touch 

upon the constituency of Thunder Creek. I could mention those 

health districts here, being Rolling Hills, Swift Current, South 

Country, the Moose Jaw/Thunder Creek health division of 

which yourself will be well familiar, and then the Regina Health 

District as well. 

 

It is a rather expansive constituency as I have said, bordering 

very close to Regina on the east side of my constituency; and as 

we head west, almost arriving at Swift Current. So you can see 

that, just not unlike many other rural MLAs here on any side of 

the House, how difficult it can become and the extra effort that 

has to be put forward to try and represent people who are spread 

over such a wide area as effectively as possible. 

 

It is a challenge. It is one that I am up for. It is one that I intend 

to try and perform to the best of my abilities, as I am sure I can 

say for the balance of my colleagues here today as well, that all  



152  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

represent rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  As I say, the Thunder Creek constituency is 

best described as rural by nature, a wide variety of 

agribusinesses in Thunder Creek, and as well light industries  

Trailtech in Gravelbourg to mention one  but then you also of 

course are well familiar with the potash plant at Belle Plaine; 

the Saskferco fertilizer plant as well. 

 

Because of the vastness of Thunder Creek, you would think 

there would be a more diverse number of concerns that may be 

expressed. However, there are a lot of very common needs and 

concerns the people of Thunder Creek share. And it is just these 

sorts of needs and concerns which got me involved in the 

process which led to my being elected to the legislature. 

 

I decided to become involved to effect change. It is something 

that I feel there is a need for in this province, and it is 

something that I am fully prepared to undertake on behalf of my 

constituents. As they express their needs and concerns to 

myself, they will be brought forward and I will ensure that they 

are dealt with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  The people of Thunder Creek are concerned 

about openness in government. They are concerned about 

accountability. They are concerned about fairness, Mr. Speaker, 

and of course they are concerned for the future of their families 

and their friends in this constituency of Thunder Creek and 

throughout the province. These, Mr. Speaker, are concerns 

which I feel have not been adequately addressed in the recent 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

I’d like to just also take a moment to express my gratitude to my 

wife, Margaret. She shares these same views and of course this 

was a big part in the decision that was undertaken to represent 

the people in Thunder Creek. I am fortunate to have both a life 

and a working partner who has supported me despite many 

difficult times that can be encountered in life and in business. 

And she has been a tremendous strength to me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Aldridge:  I also would like to take the opportunity to 

just express my gratitude to a couple of teachers at St. 

Matthew’s School. These two teachers are entrusted to look 

after the education of my two children. We have my son 

Michael who will be 13 next week, and he is very fortunate to 

have a good teacher. My daughter Joelle who is eight, in grade 

3, and as well a very capable teacher as well. And it is a 

tremendous relief to both myself and my wife that at this point 

in time they’re able to attend and have capable people teaching 

them. So I do express my gratitude to them. 

 

I would also like to point out to my children that I hope that 

they will consider that whatever they hear as far as the 

endeavours of their parents, and most particular in terms of the 

endeavours of their father as he attempts to represent his  

constituents in Thunder Creek as best as he can, that they 

continue to have their full faith and confidence in myself that I 

am convicted of what I think is right to do, and that I am taking 

every step that is proper in terms of fulfilling my 

responsibilities as representing the people of Thunder Creek. 

 

I also would like to take this opportunity to thank my parents. I 

have a father who from a very early age groomed me to make 

decisions, groomed me to be decisive, and groomed me to be 

persistent thereafter in following through with the decisions. 

And I also was blessed with a mother who taught me to apply 

the proper amount of compassion, Mr. Speaker, to those 

decisions which I undertook. So I am very grateful to them as 

well. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, it is the attributes that I’ve just mentioned 

that I have applied to the recent throne speech. And it’s because 

of that that I am regretful that I feel I cannot support the motion 

of the throne speech. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

with a great deal of pleasure I join in this debate today on the 

Speech from the Throne, the speech so eloquently moved by my 

colleagues from Battleford-Cut Knife and Regina South. 

 

I would like to start, Mr. Speaker, by joining my other 

colleagues in congratulating you on assuming the most 

important role that you are carrying out on our collective 

behalves in an impartial way, which I know you will do, and to 

express my complete confidence in your ability to keep this 

legislature functioning the way it should. And I look forward to 

a little humour on the side. 

 

To all of those who have special responsibilities in this House, 

with respect to staff functioning and the various caucuses, I also 

want to express my congratulations and my well wishes to all of 

you in making this parliamentary legislative process work. 

 

I want to extend words of welcome to the new members of this 

Assembly on both sides of the House, and I want to 

congratulate the members, new particularly, on both sides of the 

House, in their first forays into the debate on this Speech from 

the Throne. 

 

Our speeches don’t sound the same; we might disagree on 

policy and on the means necessary to reach desired ends. But 

everyone who enters this legislature does so with the same goal 

in mind, to do what we can to make this province a better place 

in which to live. That is an honourable goal to pursue and I 

want to take this opportunity to thank all the new members for 

their commitment that they’ve shown to this great province that 

we all love so deeply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the document we’re discussing today, the Speech 

from the Throne, is one of the most important seen in this 

Assembly in a number of years. This is because it is the 

blueprint for how we reinvent this province as we move into a 

new century and in fact a new millennium. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  153 

Examining the status quo is the central theme of this throne 

speech, so eloquently put by my colleague from Moose Jaw. It 

is not an agenda to stick our heads in the sand. It is an exercise 

to work with the public to develop effective and efficient 

government in a changing world. 

 

It is an honest commitment to find whatever weaknesses our 

system may have and direct our energies to correcting those 

weaknesses. I speak of weaknesses in our system, Mr. Speaker, 

not meaning to imply that we’ve not been well served in the 

past by our existing institutions, rather as a simple realization 

that as times change, the needs and aspirations of the 

Saskatchewan people change and the institutions that serve us 

must change with those changes. 

 

This challenge to explore the future is being directed to all 

government departments, to our partners in local government, 

and to our Crown corporations. 

 

In fact, the reason I’m standing here today representing a new 

constituency of Rosetown-Biggar is in fact a result of one of the 

early measures of change that we took in our first term in office 

to adjust the size of government to fit the expectations of 

people in this day and age. In fact a reduction of 12 per cent in 

the number of seats in this province. 

 

As this first time speaking in the House as the new member 

from Rosetown-Biggar, I want to take the opportunity to thank 

all of the people in the constituency of Rosetown-Elrose who so 

faithfully advised and supported me in my first foray into the 

legislature. It is in fact with a great deal of excitement and 

warmth that I have been taken in by the new constituency of 

Rosetown-Biggar, and I want to speak a little bit about the 

honour of representing this new area of the province. 

 

As members have often heard me speak of the Rosetown-Elrose 

constituency and the many strengths and the historical 

contributions that have been made in that area, I want to speak 

today about the history of the new area of my constituency, part 

of the old Biggar constituency. 

 

This is a farming area, as many of you know. A farming area 

with a pioneering spirit. It extends . . . the new area of my 

constituency extends from Tramping Lake to Pike Lake  a 

vast stretch of farmland with a great deal of variety and variety 

of scenery and farming enterprises along the way. Within this 

new area is a rail centre  the home of generations of 

railroaders who have made a commitment to supporting this 

vital industry of agriculture from the earliest days of the 

settlement of this province. 

 

Within this new part of the constituency is an industrial centre 

wherein which Prairie Malt exists, and Advanced Ag, and I 

could name many other enterprises that are significant industrial 

enterprises in this new part of my constituency. And one of the 

most significant contributions that have been made from this 

part of the world is the political leadership that has come from 

that area. Other members have spoken about that today. 

 

We have had leaders from this part of the world, from Biggar; 

leaders in challenging times of change since 1944. The first  

CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) member for the 

Biggar constituency was Woodrow Lloyd, and I think the 

accomplishments of this venerable statesman have been known 

to many and we need to remember. 

 

This was a man who in the early days of the Tommy Douglas 

government, brought forward educational reform appropriate 

for its time. Not sticking his head in the sand saying the status 

quo was good enough, but moving forward and saying, we need 

to do something differently to serve the future. 

 

And I think everyone who has lived with the Saskatchewan 

education system knows that it is recognized worldwide for its 

achievements, worldwide for its responsiveness to change. In 

the member from Moose Jaw’s words, the responsibility. And 

in this little province of Saskatchewan we have developed one 

of the best educational systems in the world, led by Woodrow 

Lloyd’s changes in the 1950s. 

 

This same leader became, for a brief period of time, the Finance 

minister, before he became the premier. That led in another 

most significant change that has affected not only this province, 

not only this country, but the world, having been the premier 

that implemented medicare, having been the premier that faced 

the rioting crowds, supported by members from the opposition 

benches here today. 

 

In the face of that, developing new institutions, supporting the 

development of new institutions. One of the first community 

clinics developed in the town of Biggar, in the face of the crisis 

that resulted from the mindless opposition of the Liberals of the 

day. And the contributions of this significant Saskatchewan 

leader will be remembered for all time. 

 

(1600) 

 

That wasn’t the end of the contributions from that area. After 

Woodrow Lloyd served in opposition for a short period of time, 

he was succeeded in the new government by Elwood Cowley, 

the youngest Finance minister in the history of Saskatchewan. 

The minister in charge of Crown Investments during the time 

when we established three of the most significant Crowns and 

established the route for three of the most significant 

world-class businesses in this province  when the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was established, when the 

Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation was 

established, when Saskoil was established. These three 

institutions maintain their headquarters in Saskatchewan to this 

day. These three institutions represent the result of visionary 

leadership, willingness to change and face new circumstances 

with new tools. 

 

And Elwood Cowley deserves a great deal of credit as we move 

forward into looking for models that we can use to redesigning 

Saskatchewan in the ‘90s and into the year 2000. 

 

Following Elwood Cowley was a brief stint with the opposition, 

with the government of that day, the third party now, which we 

would want to forget as quickly as we could. 

 

But following that period of time a young, new, energetic  



154  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

farmer representing a young, new farm family was elected in 

the Biggar constituency. And I feel honoured, Mr. Speaker, to 

succeed in this constituency, this area of the province, 

following in the footsteps of these great respected leaders and 

committed social democrats as we begin to examine the path of 

change for the next generation. The leadership demonstrated in 

this rich history continues today in business, in local 

government, in health care, in education, and in ecological 

conservation. 

 

In my constituency, as I've spoken before, long before we ever 

came forward with a new health care model, health boards in 

the Midwest Health District had put together a new vision for 

change. It wasn’t the model that finally resulted, but was 

certainly a significant step towards the larger district approach 

to planning health care in Saskatchewan. And they deserve 

credit for that. 

 

And they have not stopped. Within the Midwest Health Board 

is the little town of Beechy in the southern end of my 

constituency. I think it’s actually the one time home of the 

member from Greystone. These people in the village of Beechy 

have put together the first model in Saskatchewan for the use of 

advanced clinical nurses with the practising doctor in the 

community to set up a different model of health care delivery 

than the traditional model that we had. And this model in the 

village of Beechy of 300 people, is beginning to be written 

about as one of the great new approaches to the delivery of 

primary care in Saskatchewan. 

 

Within the local government area . . . members opposite 

complain when we challenge local government to examine new 

models. Local governments don’t complain. Local governments 

look forward to being challenged to change. 

 

Before we issued the challenge, the west central local 

government association was formed. To do what? To look at 

ways of better coordinating the use of resources they had within 

their area; began to look at ways they could share in capital 

investment to reduce their overall costs. They began to look at 

ways of planning transportation systems so their own 

transportation dollars were focused on the best way to support 

the social needs of the community, but also to support the 

greatest benefit for economic development in their 

communities. 

 

These are visionary people; these are visionary people who 

know that change is necessary. And they welcome change and 

they welcome the challenge of change, and they work with us. 

In fact they sometimes lead us in bringing change forward to 

make this province a better place. And I hope the members of 

opposition pick up on that spirit of positive growth and change 

that is everywhere in Saskatchewan except on the opposition 

benches. 

 

The Eston-Elrose School Division, in education  one of the 

best models of distance education, working in partnership with 

SaskTel. I had the privilege of working with one of the schools 

in a direct two-way television broadcast with North Carolina 

where the students in Kyle, Saskatchewan could look at  

students from the community of North Carolina, hear each  

other’s accents, see the difference in their clothing, talk about 

what their parents did for a living, talk about the local 

economies and the school system and how it worked. What a 

way to see the world. And through our advanced technologies, 

through one of our Crowns, and through the advanced thinking 

of the people of the Eston-Elrose School Division, challenging, 

using new technologies to aggressively pursue change. 

 

Entrepreneurs 2000, one of the first and one of the most unique 

economic development agencies in Saskatchewan, using a 

business model to put forward new economic ventures within 

the area. Very, very great success in this area. And to parallel it 

in the north end of my constituency, a new economic 

development association has recently been established in the 

Biggar area. 

 

I had the . . . talking about people aggressively pursing change, 

my last day in the constituency office on Monday, I had visitors 

from . . . two business proposals looking to construct guest 

ranches in Saskatchewan. They found a market. It wasn’t the 

government finding it. These are two local businesses finding it. 

They found a market in Europe for people who want to come 

and see the clean air, the wide open spaces, the unaffected 

ecology, the warm hospitality of prairie life; who pay good 

money for this; who want to come out here as relaxation. And 

they want to work with government in developing these 

resources. 

 

There are new ideas emerging daily in response to the needs of 

the rest of the world because we have the opportunity here in 

Saskatchewan to meet those needs and to build our economy on 

these new observations, on these new niches in the business 

community. 

 

The Saskatchewan Landing marina of which I’ve spoken 

before. The marina is being developed, the community is 

pursuing a new golf course, the community has put their . . . the 

community of Kyle and the district around there and Swift 

Current have put their hearts behind a wall-eye tournament 

annually. It brings people from all over the United States and 

Canada in there to explore the beauties of the area, and to 

compete. 

 

There is no end to the energy which emerges from rural 

Saskatchewan. And I’m just very, very proud to be a member 

that has the privilege of representing an area with this kind of 

energy, and I know that it’s an energy that infects all of 

Saskatchewan. And I hope it soon affects the people in the 

opposition benches. 

 

I could continue, but there isn’t time to talk about all the good 

things that are happening in this area of the province and this 

area of my constituency  both old and new  which I have 

the privilege to represent. But I can say that they are 

demonstrating the central theme of the throne speech. The 

world is changing. Change offers opportunities, and let us 

collectively capture those opportunities and not run from them 

and not criticize each other when we are finding solutions that 

are on new paths through new areas. 

 

And that’s what I want to talk about today as minister  



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  155 

responsible for Crown Investments  capturing the 

opportunities for Saskatchewan through the Crown sector and 

the role of the Crown review to position us to capture those 

opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know that we presented an outline of this 

review process last week. I believe it is, as I said at that time, 

the most comprehensive review of Crown corporations ever 

seen in the province or, if I may say so, ever seen in Canada. 

The goal of this review is to position our Crown investments to 

serve us well in the next century, as they have served us in the 

past century. That might mean change, but it will not be change 

for change’s sake. We will be seeking change to strengthen our 

province as a whole and, as I said before, to seek out 

opportunities that change offers. 

 

Therefore we need to examine virtually every aspect of the 

operations of public enterprise in this province, including their 

history, what they are doing today, the future problems they 

may face, how equipped they are to face these challenges, their 

current fiscal health, their contribution to the economy of 

Saskatchewan, and their future economic opportunities. 

 

We will hear from the public what services they expect in our 

new economy. This process is as open and transparent as we 

could make it. The people of Saskatchewan are the owners of 

our Crown corporations and it is important that they have 

ownership over any review of the future of those Crowns. In the 

private world, Mr. Speaker, you certainly wouldn’t have a 

major study of the future of your company without consulting 

your partners. And we think it only proper that the same 

standard apply in the public sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I speak for most of the people of this 

province when I say that Crown corporations have served us 

well in the past. And I firmly believe that if they are given the 

opportunity to strengthen in a changing world they will 

continue to serve us well, well into the future. But they will 

only be able to do that, Mr. Speaker, if they are allowed to 

change to meet these changing times. Planning the route of that 

change is the whole purpose behind this review. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before we embark on a discussion of the future of 

our Crown corporations, I think it is important that we spend at 

least some time on their history in our province. It is safe to say 

that public enterprise has been with us virtually as long as we 

have had a province. 

 

Just as 1995 marked the 90th anniversary of Saskatchewan, 

1996 marks the 90th anniversary of public enterprise in this 

province. It was in that year that the Department of Agriculture 

organized and operated commercial creameries, which 

eventually became cooperatives and transformed themselves 

into the Dairy Producers Co-operative. And as we have seen in 

recent days, and not without pain, even that has now evolved. 

And this evolution stands to remind us that sometimes change 

can bring with it difficulties, but change will and must come. It 

is a challenge to us to predict, and where we can, direct the path 

of change to make it a positive experience and to end up with 

something stronger than we had before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from 1906 on Saskatchewan has had a continued 

commitment to and growth in public enterprise. Crown 

corporations as we know them today date back to 1908 when 

the forerunner to SaskTel was formed. Then in 1928 the 

establishment of a royal commission on electrical power 

generation and distribution in the province led to the creation of 

SaskPower. 

 

In 1944 this province elected the first democratic socialist 

government in North America when Tommy Douglas and the 

CCF took power. SaskPower’s mandate was strengthened by 

Tommy Douglas’s commitment to rural electrification which 

was completed in 1961 and which still stands as one of the 

greatest accomplishments in the history of this province. 

 

When many people are questioning SaskPower’s rate 

restructuring program we should keep in mind that those of us 

who live outside of the major centres in this province  

farmers, small business, people in small communities  we 

have electricity brought to our door and are paying about 80 per 

cent of the actual cost of that service because we are able to 

cross-subsidize our smaller users with the payments by larger 

users in the system as we’ve designed it. 

 

This stands in direct contrast to the model that the members 

from the opposition benches would promote  the model that’s 

practised in Alberta  where the little guy pays more than the 

cost of generating and the big guy gets a break on the price. 

Now we know that open competition may pressure us, as it’s 

done already, to begin to reduce some of that cross-

subsidization. But I can tell you that as a social goal and as a 

goal for people in this province, to the extent that it’s possible, 

the people in Saskatchewan believe that everyone living in 

every corner of the province has the right to access these 

important services at the lowest possible cost and we will be 

governing with that philosophy as long as we are in these 

benches. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens:  Mr. Speaker, this is yet another challenge 

for our Crown sector  meeting social needs such that every 

farmer on every farm in Saskatchewan has electricity at 

affordable costs. And as long as we have the ability we will do 

so, as I’ve said. 

 

But the challenge of this review is to find the best ways to do 

this. A challenge made more difficult by competition. A 

challenge made more difficult by the voices of opposition that 

would challenge some of the basic ethics of these important 

institutions in the province. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations such as SaskTel and 

SaskPower have been strengthened and grown from their earlier 

days that I mentioned before. 

 

But along with that new institutions have been formed such as 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance and the Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company. During those years there were a 

number of new enterprises established in the government as 

well. There were ventures in air transportation, fish marketing, 



156  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

fur marketing and timber marketing. As well, there were a 

number of commercial Crowns established. 

 

And during Tommy Douglas’s time the province was making 

equity investments in firms such as IPSCO  investments 

which allowed these firms to establish here and to prosper. 

During the Lloyd and Thatcher eras the focus was on enhanced 

development of our utility Crown corporations, ensuring their 

growth to meet the changing demands of the Saskatchewan 

population. 

 

(1615) 

 

Then in the 1970s under the Blakeney era, and as I mentioned 

before under the tutelage of Elwood Cowley, we had a dramatic 

increase in Crown investments in the resource sector. We had 

the establishment of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 

the Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation, and 

Saskoil. In all three of this province’s major non-renewable 

resource sectors  potash, uranium, and oil  there was a 

strong government presence. 

 

During the Devine era there was a change of the form of 

government enterprise, but no one can deny that there was not a 

decrease in the government’s portfolio. In fact the government 

became partners in such ventures as fertilizer plants, heavy-oil 

upgraders, paper mills, life insurance companies, and numerous 

commercial enterprises such as food containers, jet trainers  

if some of you want to remember that  forest products, life 

insurance, translation systems, and golf simulators . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. Mr. Speaker, the 

increased portfolio during those years is a testament to that 

government’s continued commitment to public enterprise. 

 

I might make one qualification here. The fact that I and so many 

of my colleagues are on this side of the House serves as a 

testament to the public’s view of how that portfolio was 

managed, how they undermined the financial stability of the 

province, and how they gave away many of Saskatchewan’s 

prized possessions. But nevertheless they, like other 

governments before them, understood that people of 

Saskatchewan believe in public enterprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point is that despite the party in power and 

despite the vehicle used, public enterprise has always played a 

strong role in the economic development in this province. 

While public enterprise is one of the principal ideals of social 

democrats, it is clear that it also has the support of other parties 

which from time to time do govern this province. 

 

The reason for this, Mr. Speaker, is because the people of 

Saskatchewan are firm believers in public enterprise. It is, as 

the Premier has described on a number of occasions, one of the 

three engines of economic growth in Saskatchewan. The other 

two very important engines being the private sector and the 

cooperative sector. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, brings us to today when the government 

sits with a diversified portfolio of holdings worth in excess of 

$7 billion built up over 90 years by governments of every stripe 

and political persuasion. These Crown holdings have served our 

province very well in the past. The task before us today is to 

ensure that they continue to serve us well into the next century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been said that the world has changed more 

in the past 50 years than it has in the preceding 5,000 years. I 

would also argue, Mr. Speaker, that our part of the world, the 

province of Saskatchewan, has changed more in the past 10 

years than it has in the preceding 80. 

 

And more change is happening and more rapidly every year. 

Our Crown corporations are finding themselves in a world 

much different than the one they are accustomed to operating 

in, and these changes are just beginning. We are starting to see 

competitions in areas where our utilities had previously 

operated as monopolies. That is already evident in the telephone 

and natural gas distribution fields. It is clearly coming to 

electrical power generation and distribution as I mentioned 

earlier. And what will happen with SGI should the federal 

government eventually give in to the big banks to get into the 

insurance business? Those are questions that need to be 

answered and fights that need to be fought. 

 

What about technological changes? The telecommunications 

industry faces a challenging but exciting world with the advent 

of fibre optics, the worldwide Internet, voice-activated 

telecommunications, and on-line services. In short, the 

electronic global village foreseen for years is now at last upon 

us. We need to examine the opportunities this will bring to our 

province in education, in medicine, in business, in virtually 

every pursuit. 

 

Technological change does indeed present a challenge but it 

also opens up a whole new world of opportunities worth 

exploring. There are changing trade patterns which must be 

considered. With the lowering of global trade barriers, NAFTA 

(North American Free Trade Agreement), and freer 

interprovincial trade, Saskatchewan is reminded time and time 

again that we do not exist as an island. We could no longer 

simply tell the world we don’t need your goods and services, 

we can get along quite nicely without you. 

 

We have the changing global economy. The world has gotten 

smaller, markets have gotten smaller, and many corporations 

have had to expand their marketing initiatives to grow. 

 

Our Crown corporations fit into exactly the same box. They are 

restricted by our comparatively small population base. They 

have to evaluate the challenges and opportunities of looking 

beyond our borders. These are only some of the challenges and 

opportunities facing our Crowns as we move into a new decade 

 and significant challenges indeed. 

 

How do we meet those challenges? I don’t have all the answers. 

I would propose that nobody in this Assembly has all the 

answers although some would be satisfied to offer old views 

and quick fixes. It is in fact to get those answers, Mr. Speaker, 

that we have implemented this wide-ranging review of our 

Crown sector, a review for a $7 billion integrated company to 

ask its shareholders to join in shaping its future in identifying 

the design for a long, strong, and healthy future. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  157 

Mr. Speaker, the history of Saskatchewan has shown time and 

time again that the vision for the future comes from our 

farmers, our teachers, our small-business operators, our 

working men and women who go to work every day to bring 

home the bread for the family. And it is to them that we are 

looking again. 

 

This review, Mr. Speaker, is not, as some have categorized it, a 

simple question of, do you support privatization, yes or no. It is 

about exploring any and all options for recreating the Crown 

sector to ensure that it serves this province well in the next 

century. Mr. Speaker, I have faith in the people of 

Saskatchewan. I have faith in their knowledge and in their 

imagination. 

 

We are going to ask the people what they think should be the 

future of our Crowns and we are going to listen to what they 

have to say. I have no doubt that in the course of this review we 

are going to hear the views of people with extremely different 

views, and that’s good. From this act of discussion will come a 

pragmatic direction for the future of our Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that we are living in a world of 

rapid change and that the status quo is not an option for our 

Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, I said at the beginning of my 

remarks that this throne speech is about reinventing 

Saskatchewan. The reinvention of the province will be a 

long-term project which will see a reshaping of the delivery of 

government services to meet the changing needs of our people. 

 

What is true of the province in general is true of our Crown 

sector. I stand in this House today and reaffirm the commitment 

of the New Democratic Party to the idea and the ideal of public 

enterprise. Part of that commitment is the commitment of our 

political party to seek solutions which work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, social democrats do not fear change. Quite the 

contrary  we have over the years promoted change to make a 

better world. We know that if you manage change, it can shape 

our future and serve the social needs of our people well. 

 

Our successes in that field are too numerous to recount. One 

thing our government and our party will never do, Mr. Speaker, 

is to stand still. We will not rest until the world is changed to 

meet the social and economic needs of its people and we will 

begin right here at home. 

 

We welcome change. We welcome it in every facet of 

government including our Crown sector. We know that change, 

when properly managed, will move us further along the road to 

the New Jerusalem that Tommy Douglas so often spoke of. Mr. 

Speaker, because I do not fear change and indeed welcome it, 

and because I represent a party which does not fear change but 

welcomes it, I’ll be voting in support of the motion. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is an honour for me also to rise to speak to this 

throne speech. I want to join with other members in  

commending the mover and the seconder, the hon. member 

from Cut Knife-Battleford who did all of us proud, and I’m sure 

her constituents; and of course the member from Regina South 

who again  I believe the youngest member here  did all of 

us proud as well. It’s an honour to join those members, those 

colleagues, and the rest of the colleagues on this side to endorse 

the throne speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to express my thank-you 

again to the voters in Saskatoon Eastview who have again, for 

the third time, trusted me and our party to represent their 

interests, which are really the interests of all people of 

Saskatchewan. And I am indeed very, very honoured. This is a 

special privilege. We all know that. And I will continue to the 

best of my ability to represent the constituents of Eastview, and 

in fact all members of this province. 

 

And also of course it is important to acknowledge, as many 

members have done, the importance of your family in this 

whole process. Of course, as I found out not that long ago, 

sometimes when you get into hot water in this business your 

family is always there for you. And I want to pay special tribute 

to my family and to all families of the members here. 

 

And of course it’s important to recognize that none of us get 

here by ourselves. We’re here based on the important 

contributions I believe that this government has made in the last 

term. And we’re here again because we have the support of our 

parties, which is the essence of the system that we’re in. And 

there’s no doubt that all of us on this side are very proud to be 

members of the New Democratic Party, and the thousands and 

thousands of workers and volunteers, and the tens of thousands 

of, of course, voters who keep putting us in. So I acknowledge 

the workers who worked very hard to get me here as well, as 

we’re all part of a team. 

 

There have been many excellent speeches already, Mr. Speaker, 

and I want to echo the comments of many colleagues, veteran 

members, to congratulate and commend the new members. I 

know that, as they have said, they view it a special privilege to 

be here. And all the members who are newly elected will make 

their mark in the Assembly. I have no doubt about that. They 

will represent their constituents to the best of their ability, and 

of course, the people of the province as well. So I wish the new 

members well, and of course, all members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there are many things that every member 

here can be proud of and would agree on. One is that 

Saskatchewan is a wonderful place to live. We are known 

within Saskatchewan but certainly around Canada  which 

became clear to me in my tenure as minister of Social Services 

and minister responsible for seniors’ issues  that we have 

something that they refer to as the Saskatchewan spirit. Not 

only we do, but of course people outside Saskatchewan do that. 

 

I think all members here would recognize that while we may 

have our differences philosophically  we have differences 

based on our experiences  we have more in common than that 

divide us. And I think that is evidenced in my eight years of 

experience here by the fact that 90 or so per cent of the Bills  



158  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

that are approved here are done by all-party support, all-party 

consent. 

 

Again I know when I was a minister, I had the pleasure of 

moving six or seven Bills through this Assembly. I think every 

Bill had support from the opposition because they were 

involved from the outset and I think that is the practice that 

occurs with every minister. And sometimes we lose sight of that 

because there may be those three or four Bills in which . . . 

where our philosophical differences really come to the fore. By 

and large, the vast majority of Bills are passed with consent. 

 

I haven’t forgotten you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to add my 

congratulations to you. I think all of the tributes have been 

made and I agree with all of those. You did forget my riding 

yesterday but, you know, you’re fairly new in the job so I’ll . . . 

I know you corrected that today, so I appreciate that. 

 

You know I remember back to my by-election  1988  and 

you stand out in my mind, as do other members here, but you 

stand out in my mind, Mr. Speaker, as someone who welcomed 

me right off the bat. And you’ve been a great teacher on the 

processes in here over the years for me, and a wonderful role 

model for me and others. And your acceptance speech from the 

heart, to all members in the Assembly and to the public, it was 

very touching. But it also, I think, was one of the most 

oratorical speeches I’ve heard here in that it was from the heart, 

it was genuine; that’s how you feel; we all know that. And it 

was very relevant and there’s just no question, as the Minister 

of Social Services just recently said, that when we look back 

four years from now, your grace having been in that chair, I 

think will make all of us proud. I know it will. So thanks again 

and all the best to you. 

 

And I will also add my congratulations of course to the member 

from Regina Victoria who also distinguished himself as Deputy 

Speaker in the last term, and we’re very proud of that work and 

also that he put his name forth again. And he would have made 

a wonderful Speaker as well, and will continue to be a valuable 

member of this Assembly. 

 

(1630) 

 

I want to commend as well the Deputy Speaker, the member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood, who we’re all very proud of 

as well. He will do a good job. 

 

And of course the hon. member from Moosomin, who was here 

before I got here. I think he was elected in, I believe, ’86. He’s 

been a very distinguished member of the Assembly, a good 

friend, and there are many things we have in common. We went 

to a football game about two years ago, and we both cheered for 

the Riders. So I think that that shows you that we have more in 

common than divides us. So I give my congratulations to that 

member as well. 

 

And of course I welcome the new Sergeant-at-Arms and pages, 

and I know that they will continue to do a good job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before I talk about the throne speech, I just 

wanted to make a few passing comments about my tenure as  

minister of Social Services. I hope that’s in order because I 

want to just take the opportunity to thank my colleagues  my 

cabinet and caucus colleagues  for their support and 

cooperation, and indeed the opposition critics, because they 

worked very closely with me as well. And it was a great 

learning experience for me, that two and a half years. 

 

I know the new minister, the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow 

who distinguished himself in Health, will continue to do that in 

Social Services. The departmental staff in Social Services, the 

management are a great team that is looking to the future. And 

the new minister has mentioned the income security redesign. 

That innovation, a lot of that innovation, has come from the 

ideas of the staff there as well, and they are very future oriented 

and are making a lot of changes that would be very consistent 

with the thrust of the throne speech. 

 

So I want to give my thanks to the deputy minister and all of the 

staff in the Department of Social Services and all of the 

communities around the province who are creative and 

innovative as they take a look at their communities and try and 

find ways to strengthen the families, the supports to families, 

and strengthen their communities. And I want to commend 

them and thank them for their support when I was the minister. 

 

I’ve been in this field for 22, 23 years, the human service field. 

I find that it’s getting, in many ways, more complex. The 

challenges seem greater. We don’t always feel that we know 

what the solutions are, but I’ve always believed, Mr. Speaker, 

that the solutions lie within communities anyway. 

 

And I think the essence of the action plan for children that the 

Minister of Social Services referred to, the key thrust of the 

economic development strategy, of our educational programing, 

of our health care reform, is that the solutions lie in 

communities, and communities are best able to determine their 

needs and develop their strategies and priorize their choices. 

And I think that that is again the integrated approach which will 

become very evident to everyone, including the members 

opposite; that this government has an integrated strategy. 

Whether it is economic development, health care reform, 

education, social services policies, and so on, the integrated 

strategy is unfolding. 

 

And I can tell the House, just from my experience based on 

attending a number of ministers’ meetings and a number of 

negotiations with the federal government, that nobody has the 

solutions. I can assure the hon. members opposite that we are as 

well advanced, perhaps more so than anyone else in most of 

these areas. And I had that validated to me many times by 

ministers of Liberal governments. James Smith, a good friend 

from Nova Scotia, who is the Minister of Social Services, he 

believes that we are doing some fundamental things in terms of 

developing supports and services to families. 

 

And of course we’ve tried to suggest to Ottawa that in their 

reforms of social programs  we’ve pleaded with them  you 

can’t just reform the UIC (Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) system on its own. You can’t just phase out the 

Canada Assistance Plan, which I believe is perhaps one of the 

most important things that is happening today in Canada and  



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  159 

will have devastating consequences in terms of social policy 

and income support programs in the future. 

 

You can’t just make those decisions without any connection to 

a whole bunch of other things that are going on, like the 

taxation system. Child care, which has been promised and 

withdrawn, I don’t know where that stands now with the federal 

government. The issue of labour policy. I don’t know what the 

economic development policy is of the federal government. 

That didn’t become any clearer yesterday. 

 

We were trying to suggest to Mr. Axworthy and some of his 

colleagues that you have to have that holistic approach, that 

integrated approach, and you expect and need that kind of 

leadership from the federal government. 

 

Now I’m not an expert, but in my humble opinion, having been 

in the field a number of years and reading articles and talking to 

people whom I have a great deal of respect for, there just isn’t 

that national vision in these areas. 

 

And I can say that a number of ministers who I know across 

Canada are looking to Saskatchewan, as they so often have, 

whether it be health care or education reform or social policy, 

for the innovative solutions. And I believe that they recognize 

that our solutions are community based, community driven, and 

they are compassionate and holistic. And that’s why 

Saskatchewan is being viewed across Canada by those who 

know something about income and social policies especially. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I just leave my little tenure as minister of Social 

Services, I like to believe that I was part of some things that will 

be very important as we look back down the road. For example, 

the family service agreements with first nations and the 

partnershipping there whereby first nations are establishing 

their own child welfare agencies, as they should, to manage 

their own affairs  another important step in self government. 

And I would hope the member from Athabasca would see that 

as a very positive initiative as carried on in an integrated way by 

this government. 

 

Certainly the Action Plan for Children that the minister referred 

to is viewed as a model across Canada. Certainly the 

establishment of the children’s council and the child advocate 

office, the child advocate is certainly a servant of this 

Assembly. And I can say to the members opposite, and I know 

that you would appreciate this, that this is the only legislature in 

Canada where the child advocate reports to the legislature, 

unlike any other province. 

 

Now we’ve learned from their experiences. We appreciate that. 

But for example in Alberta where the child advocate reports to 

the Minister of Social Services, recently got fired because of a 

critical report. We made sure  that is, this government made 

sure  that the child advocate would have the independence 

necessary to hold all of us accountable; not just the government 

members but the opposition members are of course accountable 

as well for the state of services for families in this province. 

 

But now the advocate can hold us accountable and we believe 

that that independence is very important for that position. I  

believe there has been some important work done in the 

post-adoption area which allows, of course, birth moms and 

adult adopted children, with the support of the adoptive parents, 

to make those important connections as we all have some need 

to understand our roots. 

 

And what I think . . . some young offenders’ programing 

alternative measures, again the former minister of Justice, the 

hon. member from Fairview was very innovative in some of 

these ideas. And we know that the current Minister of Justice is 

going to make a great contribution here as well, because we 

know that locking young people up is not the solution. 

 

One of the things that I’m most proud of over the last term and 

right now, Mr. Speaker, is that we in Saskatchewan  and 

again I think this is where we get respect across Canada from 

those who matter to us, that is those who are concerned about 

preserving Canada as a compassionate nation  is that we did 

not cut . . . we did not deal with our deficit on the backs of poor 

and unemployed people, on the backs of poor seniors and 

disabled people. We, Mr. Speaker, were the first government to 

balance our budget the first time in this province in 12 years, I 

believe. And we did it in a fair way, which is a tradition of this 

party. We didn’t do it on the backs of low income people. 

 

And the National Anti-Poverty Organization, Mr. Speaker, 

recognized us. They decided to have their annual meeting in 

Saskatchewan because we’re the province that isn’t trying to 

deal with our deficit on the backs of poor people. And they 

used us as a model. 

 

We’re trying to deal with our deficit in the way that we did by 

restructuring government, by tight controls and good 

management, and by economic development initiatives, and by 

expanding the pie. And they held Saskatchewan up, Mr. 

Speaker, as a model. I’m not saying that  that’s a reality, 

that’s a fact. And they met with the government caucus and 

were very supportive of the approach that we were taking. And 

that is the view of the National Anti-Poverty Organization 

across Canada, is that the Saskatchewan way is the way to 

proceed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in some of the speeches  and there were some 

very good speeches by the new members on both sides of the 

House  but in some of the speeches by the members opposite 

there was a sense that this government has been a disaster, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I do not accept that proposition. More 

importantly I would say and with respect, that there’s a certain 

arrogance to suggest that we were a disaster in the last term. 

Like it or not, the Premier and this government had the largest 

second term mandate in the history of the province. 

 

So to suggest that this government has been a disaster, in my 

view is a bit offensive to the voters of the province who gave us 

the largest second term mandate in the history of the province. 

And so I think that while individuals may not agree that we 

were a good government, it would not be fair to say that we 

were a disaster. Because that would be somewhat offensive to 

the voters of Saskatchewan who chose to elect about 65 per 

cent of New Democrats for a second term. And I think that  



160  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

they’re very astute and they pretty well can make decisions that 

are ones that should be respected. 

 

But let’s take a look, for the benefit of some of the members 

opposite, at what we inherited in 1991. And I want to do that so 

I can then lead into the speech. Because I think what we did in 

the last term is really a continuation of what we’re doing in this 

term; because some of the groundwork for the redesigning that 

were in the throne speech today, some of that groundwork was 

done in the last term. But in 1991, there was no question  and 

these are objective facts that I’m sure that all hon. members 

would agree with  out-migration in Saskatchewan was 

rampant. There’s just no question about that  about 30,000 

net in the last term of the previous administration. 

 

The second point is, in 1991 this province was a financial 

basket case. And there are many indicators of that. I won’t go 

into them, but again everybody knows that. There were a litany 

of failed economic ventures. And again, GigaText, and there are 

so many that they just don’t come to mind. There’s no point in 

repeating them. There were multi megaprojects that were 

drafted on the backs of envelopes or cigarette boxes or 

something. They just didn’t have any credibility. Of course, it 

became clear that in fact in many ways the politicians didn’t 

take the advice of their advisers and just made bad decisions 

that we had to correct. 

 

It was a government that was totally in disgrace from many 

points of view. Wouldn’t call, you know, vacant seats open for 

over two years, and this kind of thing. The previous 

administration gave away $9 billion in assets  potash, oil, 

gas, and so on, highways equipment  $9 billion and they still 

left the people of the province with a $15 billion debt. 

 

There were punitive social policies. Absolutely punitive is the 

only way to describe them. And on and on. In fact, a summary 

was . . . of the last administration, prior to us assuming 

government in 1991, was a study done by the Red Cross, which 

is a public study but basically their conclusion was that 

Saskatchewan people had lost hope. That was the bottom line. 

That was sort of the story line of that study. It was that 

Saskatchewan people had lost hope. 

 

Now this isn’t my list; this is me saying these. All of these 

indicators I mention are pretty well accepted publicly as a 

situation. This is the fine legacy, this is the PC legacy that 

people will never forget in Saskatchewan. And they’ll be 

reminded because they got a $900 million interest payment 

every year, which is more than the education budget, to remind 

them of the Devine legacy, Mr. Speaker. So this has been 

devastating for future generations. 

 

Well after 1991, again I would say this is pretty well accepted 

by the public in Saskatchewan and across Saskatchewan, and I 

would say by opposition members, that we’ve restored financial 

integrity to the province. I don’t think anybody in good faith 

could say that that hasn’t been done. We’re not out of the 

woods but we’ve made great progress there and I think that . . . 

and we’ve opened the books and we’ve made accounting 

transparent to the public. I think everyone would agree with 

that. 

(1645) 

 

The democratic reforms that have been initiated, again are the 

envy of many other governments. I know that. I recently talked 

to the members in the Northwest Territories. Whether we like it 

or not, or whether the opposition members like it or not, they’ve 

used Saskatchewan as the model in terms of parliamentary 

reform. 

 

There has been an incredible attitude change and that’s been 

because we have things like the Partnership for Renewal, with 

the REDAs (regional economic development authorities) as our 

economic development strategy whereby again, by regions, 

local people are looking at their strengths, their natural 

advantages, their potential, and they’re developing their 

economic development strategies. And they’re working in 

partnership with their government. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

course, the Partnership for Growth, builds on the Partnership 

for Renewal. 

 

Health care reform  it has not been a disaster despite what the 

members opposite are saying. It has been innovative; it has 

saved the system. Everybody else is trying to jump on the 

bandwagon. I’m not saying it’s been perfect, you know. The 

hon. member’s smiling. But it is getting international 

recognition. Now that is a fact and when I see, when I hear 

members talking about what would Tommy think today as we 

did hear today . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Douglas, I think about a year ago, 

wrote to the Premier and told her what Tommy would think 

today and she was very proud of what this government had 

done. And you know what she was the most upset about? What 

she was the most upset about is that people who he had fought 

all of his life, like Liberals and Tories, kept bringing his name 

up as if he somehow wouldn’t agree with what the Premier and 

this government had done. 

 

But she was asking him to stop doing that because he spent his 

whole life fighting those kinds of backward and punitive ideas. 

It was an insult to the departed Mr. Douglas. It was an insult to 

the family. So I hope that the new members don’t continue to 

bring up Tommy’s name because he did not stand for anything 

that I’ve heard from the opposition benches with regard to 

especially issues like health care. We’re on the second phase of 

health care as he intended it to be, Mr. Speaker. He’d be very 

proud of what we’re doing. It’s community based, it’s 

community controlled, it’s community driven, it’s preventive. 

And those are the things that Tommy Douglas stood for. 

 

And it is an objective fact, it is an objective fact, that the 

Liberals of the day  at that day  fought with all of their 

might. The Ross Thatchers fought with all of their might, 

medicare, and they pretend now that they’re trying to defend it 

and they’ve got some ownership of it. And they got the same 

opposition to the reforms today that they had in 1962. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Déjà vu all over again. 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Déjà vu all over again as Yogi Bear would say. 



March 7, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard  161 

Mr. Speaker, as well, since 1991 we’ve advanced a great deal 

working with aboriginal people, first nations and Metis people, 

on a number of fronts, and as I just referred to, certainly the 

area of child welfare is something that I believe that is moving 

along very rapidly, but so are many other initiatives of self-

government. 

 

Certainly a lot of ground work we did with regard to the welfare 

reform, and I think it would be fair to say that there is . . . We 

went into the election with a sense of Saskatchewan people 

believing in themselves again and having a sense of confidence. 

And there’s no question that a sense of . . . that this is a place to 

invest, because we had an economic development strategy; we 

had our finances under control; we had a compassionate 

government who wanted to work in partnerships with 

communities. And the integration and the holistic approach of 

the government working with communities was something that 

was appreciated as well. 

 

The new member from Humboldt  and I listened to her 

speech very carefully and she was very articulate  she will be 

a very good member; I have no doubt about that. And she is a 

very bright person. She talked about the economic development 

initiatives in her area, about the innovation and the special 

strengths of small businesses in her riding. And I would agree 

with that. She’s right on. 

 

However, again, as my colleague from Tisdale said  not 

Tisdale now, it’s Carrot River Valley, I’m sorry  said there 

are many positive things as well that have been provincial 

initiatives and provincial cooperation that have supported the 

kind of economic development that has occurred in that 

member’s riding. For example, a balanced budget. Who could 

argue that a balanced budget isn’t good for small-business 

people? In the last two budgets there has been a $70 million tax 

reduction in the manufacturing sector for companies just like 

the ones in her riding who are doing well. 

 

So the fact that they’re doing well is not unrelated to what 

we’re doing. We believe that we work with those communities. 

We’ve taken their advice, but she’s given us no credit. She’s 

given us no credit and, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to have 

informed critique. I just wanted to give a sense of history, that 

there are a number of things that happened in the last term of 

this government that are the very reasons as to why those 

businesses around St. Brieux and Humboldt are doing well. It’s 

because of the environment created by this government and 

some of the specific tax initiatives undertaken by the 

government in tax breaks for small-business people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle:  Mr. Speaker, we have, in my view, few lessons 

to learn from the Tories and Liberals with regard to small 

business. I want to talk about the Tory agenda, and that’s been 

discredited and will be — the $900 million interest payment 

will remind Saskatchewan people for the next 50 years that they 

don’t want those people again. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we’re getting is the same old chicken 

because basically what’s happening is that the same people are  

sort of drifting back to the Liberals. I mean there’s two Liberal 

parties here, so they’re confused about that too, but, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t have any lessons to learn there. And based 

on, with respect, based on the speeches that I’ve heard, I would 

hope that the new members, because they’re part of their 

communities, they’re legitimately elected here, would feel free 

to forward their ideas to us on initiatives that they think are 

important. 

 

You know the member from Greystone was going to give us an 

idea a week for economic development initiatives. I don’t think 

we received any in the last three years from her, and we would 

certainly welcome them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that all provinces, and the hon. 

member from Humboldt is here, all provinces are struggling 

with the challenges that face us in the human services area, 

which is your critic area. And I was suggesting earlier, I think, 

that based on the feedback we’re getting from other provinces, 

that there are a lot of lessons that they believe they can learn 

from looking at Saskatchewan, and the child action plan is one 

of them; the income security redesign; the approaches in 

alternative measures for young offenders. 

 

And certainly, of course, what people like is that we’ve had a 

compassionate approach. We’re the only government in Canada 

that did not cut social assistance budgets during the tough 

times. Every other province in Canada did. Liberal provinces 

did. On top of that, compounding the problem of course, was 

the fact that the federal government was putting cuts on the 

provinces like crazy. 

 

The federal government was dumping . . . the federal 

government right now has dumped about $67 million worth of 

social assistance, new expenditures to us, where we’re having 

to pick up the total cost of those expenditures. Now we could 

have fixed a lot of other problems — a lot of other problems — 

for that $67 million. We chose not to cut benefits to the poorest 

of the poor. And on this side of the House we are very proud of 

that. Every other administration did that but we still balanced 

our budget first. So there is another way. And I would like to 

suggest that the other way is the social democratic way and it is 

based on the thrust of this throne speech. 

 

So we are trying to restructure the systems and procedures. 

We’re trying to reshape policies and services We’re trying to 

redesign strategies that deal with today’s realities. This will be 

done, this will be done by Saskatchewan people in their 

communities working with each other, working with their 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the consultation process that we were 

engaged in was important. I know that there’s been some fun 

made of that but Saskatchewan people took that process 

seriously. That’s who it was intended for. And they have 

repriorized the things that are important in their communities, to 

strengthen their communities and to strengthen supports and 

services to families. And it is no surprise to us. But those 

priorities happen to fit with the thrust of the government 

because we have been in touch all the way along, Mr. Speaker. 



162  Saskatchewan Hansard  March 7, 1996 

This is why our values of community, compassion, and 

opportunity are important. Because you need a philosophical 

framework. We didn’t see yesterday’s budget based on a 

philosophical framework. Not only did we not see a plan in a 

number of areas, we didn’t even see a philosophical framework 

that will be the basis of decision making by the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to say . . . the members can say 

that the throne speech was too ambitious. They can say that the 

throne speech lacks some detail in some areas. They can say we 

could emphasize some area more than the other. But it would 

be unfair to say that the throne speech is off the mark, and to 

simply oppose it really puzzles me. And I want to talk a bit 

about why it puzzles me that they would just simply outright 

oppose the throne speech. 

 

The thrust, Mr. Speaker, is change and it’s preparing 

Saskatchewan for the new century. Why would Liberals and 

Tories oppose change? Why would they oppose preparing for 

the new century? Saskatchewan people don’t oppose it; they 

welcome the opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech priorizes economic development 

and job creation. That’s the number one priority of 

Saskatchewan people. Now why would the members opposite 

oppose economic development and job creation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech talks about an additional $200 

million going into agriculture for agri-food innovation, 

agri-food development, diversification, ag equity funds. Now 

many of those members are rural. Why would they oppose 200 

additional million dollars going into agriculture? I don’t 

understand that. 

 

The throne speech talks . . . has many strategies for further 

development of northern people and in the forestry area. Why 

would members opposite oppose that? Why would the member 

from Athabasca oppose those initiatives? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other things I want to say about the 

throne speech, which I’m very committed to, but at this 

particular time I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
Osika ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 131 
McPherson .................................................................................................................................................................................. 131 
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 131 
Belanger ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 131 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 131 
Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 131 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 131 
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 131 
Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 131 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 132 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 132 
Heppner ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 132 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................. 132 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 133 
Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................. 133 
Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 133 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 133 
Lorje ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 133 
Toth ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 133 
D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................... 133 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
Farm Safety Week  

Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................... 133 
Power Cable Plant Expansion in Weyburn 

Bradley ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 133 
REACT Waste Management Program  

Julé .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 134 
Northern Saskatchewan Debating Tournament  

Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 134 
Husqvarna Sled Dog Challenge and Winter Festival 

Draude ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 134 
Special Olympic Winter Games Medal Winners  

Serby ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 134 
Cut Knife Wildlife Federation Wins Conservation Trophy  

Murrell ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 135 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

Crown Corporation Tendering  
Gantefoer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 135 
Lautermilch ................................................................................................................................................................................ 135 

Federal Budget Implications  
Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 136 
Romanow .................................................................................................................................................................................... 137 

Crown Corporation Tendering 
Goohsen ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 137 
Lautermilch ................................................................................................................................................................................ 137 

Rental Property Damage Deposits 
Haverstock .................................................................................................................................................................................. 138 
Nilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 138 

K to 12 Funding 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 139 
Atkinson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 139 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

Renaud ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 139 
Krawetz ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 142 
Calvert ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 147 
Aldridge ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 151 
Wiens ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 152 
Pringle ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 157 


