
























































June 14, 1996 Hansard


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2619 
 June 14, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of the 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the signatures on the petition are from Fort Qu’Appelle, 
from Nokomis, and from Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present petitions of names from throughout Saskatchewan 
regarding closure of the Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
All the signatures, Mr. Speaker, have come from the town of 
Nokomis. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre closure. The 
prayer reads as follow, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The names on the petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Regina, 
Moosomin, Lafleche, Hodgeville, and other centres throughout 
the province. I so present. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present petitions of names from residents in 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayers 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
The people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from the community of Milestone, but also from 
Wilcox and the city of Regina. I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the impending closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon.  

Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Langenburg, 
Rocanville, Moosomin, Saskatoon, Spy Hill, Gerald, and the 
city of Regina. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider the decision to 
close the Plains Health Centre. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by many concerned 
citizens from the communities right across southern 
Saskatchewan, starting at Mortlach, Brownlee, Mossbank, 
Central Butte, Eyebrow, Liberty, Penzance, Stalwart, Craik. 
There’s some on here from Regina. And there’s a number of 
them, Mr. Speaker, from the community of Regina Beach. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
petitions of names of Saskatchewan people with respect to the 
Plains Health Centre. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
communities such as Cabri, Swift Current, Mortlach, 
Gravelbourg, and a number from the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again rise 
today to present petitions of names from throughout 
Saskatchewan regarding the Plains Health Centre. The prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 
And the people that have signed the petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Moose Jaw. There’s also a few from a few other 
communities, and I so present. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today, on 
day no. 73, the 73rd time we’ve stood in this House presenting 
petitions on behalf of the people in south-west Saskatchewan in 
their efforts to save the Plains health care centre that in fact that 
government’s willing to close. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to reconsider closure of the 
Plains Health Centre. 

 



2620  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

The people that have signed this petition, many from Regina, in 
fact many from Regina Albert South constituency, Regina 
Elphinstone, and Dewdney in particular, and of course Wilcox 
and some from Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Clerk:  According to order the following petitions regarding 
the closure of the Plains Health Centre have been reviewed, and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and received. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of the Assembly, seated 
in the east gallery, a group of concerned citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are opposing the construction of the 
Condie-Queen Elizabeth power line. 
 
In the gallery  and I’d ask you to stand as I call your names, if 
you would, please  Mr. Darren Qualman from Dundurn, Mr. 
Jim Smith from Allan, and we have Mr. Linty Crawford from 
Kenaston. We have from Liberty, which is my home town, Mr. 
Don Wolff, who is a neighbouring farmer of mine and has been 
a neighbour for most of his life, being much older than I. We 
also have Mrs. Vi Fuchs from Dilke, as well as Mr. Joe Fuchs 
from Dilke as well. 
 
And I’d ask all the Assembly to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, some guests who are visiting our province from 
Manitoba. They are 52 grade 3 to 6 students from Pierson, 
Manitoba. And they’re seated in the west gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re here with teachers Mavis Halls, John 
Casavant, and Jennifer Klassen, as well as 10 chaperons helping 
to make this trip possible. They’re also accompanied by Orville 
and Eleanor Renwick. 
 
I’ll be meeting with this group at 10:30 in room 218 to share 
refreshments and any questions they might have of the 
proceedings that they witness today from the gallery. So I’d ask 
all members to be on their best behaviour and join with me to 
give them a warm welcome to this Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we have 
some very special guests visiting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
There are 15 grade 7 students from Dene High School; La 
Loche is their home community and they’re here for the 
morning. 
 
I’d like to introduce a couple of their teachers, Christine Chuey 
 if I could get her to stand  and another teacher, Tammy 
Pow. And these two fine teachers have taken the time to plan 
this trip and bring 15 of these grade 7 students to visit the  

Assembly. And I did offer to buy them hamburgers and treats 
and drinks, but they are on a tough schedule. They’re only 
going to be here for a couple . . . for half an hour so the offer 
can’t be made. But on behalf of the Assembly, and I ask that my 
colleagues join me in welcoming this grade 7, 15 students from 
grade 7. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Jess:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and to the rest of my colleagues, a group from Delisle 
Elementary School; total of 38 people filling up your gallery 
along with Doreen’s visitors. Sitting in the west gallery is the 
grade 5, with teachers Deborah Seib and Elaine Jarvis, along 
with 9 parents as chaperons. And I will be meeting with them in 
room 131 from 11 until 11:30 and I’d ask everyone here to 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — If all hon. members have completed 
introductions, I’d like to introduce to the Assembly some guests 
of the Speaker who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery today. 
There are 50 grade 4 and 5 students from King George School 
in Moose Jaw in my constituency. They are accompanied today 
by their teachers, Ms. Jessica Roedeba and Ms. Marlene Hart, 
as well as chaperons Mrs. Dobrescu, Mrs. Couture, and Mr. 
Hill. 
 
They will be following the proceedings in the Assembly here 
until 10:30, at which time they’ll take a tour of the building, 
and with the assistance of the Deputy Speaker, I look forward to 
meeting with them at 11 o’clock for a visit and questions and 
refreshments as well as a photo before they leave. And I’ll ask 
all hon. members to welcome my guests from King George 
School in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Goodsoil and Meadow Lake Credit Unions’ 50th 
Anniversaries 

 
Mr. Sonntag:  This year both the Goodsoil and Meadow 
Lake credit unions are celebrating 50 years of service in their 
respective communities, and I had the privilege of managing 
both of them. No, I wasn’t around when either one opened, but 
like many people in this province, it’s where I did hold my first 
account as a youngster. 
 
After months of planning, the Meadow Lake Credit Union 
opened on December 13, 1946. Six weeks later it had assets of 
 get this  $728.60 and had 36 members. It now has nearly 
28 million in assets, over 5,000 members, and employs 21 
people. 
 
In the last 15 years alone they have granted in excess of 125 
million in loans, proving that capital from the community is 
employed locally for the social and economic benefit of 
everyone living there. 



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2621 

The Goodsoil Credit Union had similar modest beginnings. 
Many community meetings were held before they were 
incorporated on September 23, 1946. Today they have over 11 
million in assets. 
 
This growth and success would not have been possible without 
the members who had faith and trust in their organization, the 
dedicated and loyal staff, and the directors who spent numerous 
volunteer hours ensuring that prudent policies and practices 
were in place. 
 
The Goodsoil Credit Union is holding an old-fashioned picnic 
this Sunday, and Meadow Lake Credit Union next Sunday, to 
honour their 50 years of service. Both are models of what 
people helping people is all about. 
 
I want to thank them for the important contribution they have 
made to our communities and wish them equal success in the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Father’s Day 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Sunday is 
Father’s Day and I like to give heartfelt recognition to all the 
fathers across the province. 
 
Fathers play a crucial role in the lives of their children. They are 
counsellors, care-givers, and role models. They offer guidance, 
comfort, and love. 
 
As I look around this Assembly, I know there are many fathers 
who are looking forward to spending the day with their 
children. And I know many members who still have the 
opportunity to share the day with their own fathers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues in the Liberal caucus, I 
would like to wish every father in Saskatchewan a wonderful 
Father’s Day. I wish anyone travelling home for this weekend, a 
very safe trip. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Successful Saskatchewan Hockey Career 
 
Mr. Wall:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You’ll have to pardon 
me if I sound like I am a bit boastful today, but the community 
of Swift Current has every reason to be proud of the hockey 
talent it has developed over the years. 
 
I am referring to the captain of the Colorado Avalanche, Joe 
Sakic, who was instrumental in helping his team win the 
Stanley Cup four games in a row against Florida. Joe’s clutch 
goals were a big reason why Colorado won the cup, and as a 
result, he was rewarded with the Conn Smythe trophy. 
 
The long road from junior hockey in Swift Current to the 
Stanley Cup final was at times a difficult one. Joe has paid his 
share of emotional dues. In 1986 he had to cope with a personal 
tragedy, losing four of his team-mates on the Swift Current  

Broncos hockey team who were killed in a bus accident. 
 
Perhaps he learned something from that tragedy, giving him the 
determination to succeed and enjoy the ultimate honour that the 
game of hockey offers. I know that the community of Swift 
Current is elated with Joe Sakic’s successful hockey career, and 
his commitment and hard work at the junior level has paid off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were several other players who made it to 
the Stanley Cup final and played junior hockey in 
Saskatchewan. Congratulations to former Saskatoon Blades, 
Brian Skrudland, Curtis Leschyshyn, and Rhett Warrener. 
 
Not only is Saskatchewan the best place to live but we also 
have the best hockey players as well. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Decline in South-west Area Economy 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
inform members of this House of an issue of serious concern. 
Over recent months this government painted a glowing picture 
of our provincial economy. While the economy as a whole is 
growing slowly, I would like to bring the members’ attention to 
the difficulties faced by towns and rural communities in the 
south-western area of Saskatchewan. 
 
According to the latest Sask Trends Monitor, that area suffered 
a 1.6 per cent decline in the number of employers hiring rural 
men and women over last year. That tragic loss, Mr. Speaker, is 
much in part to blame for a 5.7 per cent drop in the number of 
jobs in the south-west region in just one year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on the government side, such as 
members from Regina South and Regina Elphinstone, continue 
to paint everything in a rosy fashion. By doing so, they are 
ignoring the plight of some 4,000 residents of communities and 
constituencies like Wood River, Cypress Hills, and Thunder 
Creek, who no longer have jobs. 
 
I urge this government to take action by adjusting an economic 
development strategy which continues to fail the residents of 
these communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News for Thunder Creek Constituency 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some good 
economic news this morning to report and it’s in the Thunder 
Creek constituency. Since the member from Thunder Creek has 
not had anything positive to say about his own constituency so 
far this session, I thought the people in that part of the province 
are entitled to some good news for a change. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Did you know that Saskferco Products has 
announced a $37 million expansion of its Belle Plaine plant? 
 



2622  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  The company estimates $15 million worth of 
economic activity would be generated in Saskatchewan. About 
a hundred construction jobs will be created with the expansion. 
And that’s good news for Thunder Creek. 
 
Did you know that the River Lake Pig Production facility at 
Riverhurst is expected to produce 13,000 market pigs per year 
at an estimated value of $1.7 million? That’s good news for 
Thunder Creek constituency. 
 
The Moose Jaw-Diefenbaker Lake region is in the first phase of 
developing 2,000 acres of potatoes, and in a number of years 
the area will attract a major French fry plant, creating hundreds 
of jobs. That’s good news for Thunder Creek constituency. 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. I’ll ask all hon. members 
to come to order. I am unable to hear the member making her 
member’s statement and I’ll ask all hon. members . . . Order. 
Order. I’ll ask all hon. members to allow the member the 
courtesy  Order  of being able to be heard. 
 
Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Did you know that 
the Herbert Cooperative reported record-breaking sales of $3.6 
million for 1995  a 12.3 per cent increase over the previous 
year. That’s good news for Thunder Creek constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t have enough time in a member’s statement 
to list all of the positive activity taking place in Thunder Creek. 
And if the member for Thunder Creek was able to find the time 
to report some good news from his riding, it would make my 
job a lot easier. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Developments in Stony Rapids 
 

Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
commend all the people in the extremely northern community 
of Stony Rapids. Stony Rapids has a population of about 350 
people and is located near Black Lake. Forestry and mining 
industries are very important to the local economy, but people 
also make a living in small business, hunting, and trapping. 
 
There are some new developments taking place there right now. 
The village is helping set up its first new playground on 
playground equipment that will be arriving on the first barge. 
 
Stony Rapids is also in the process of setting up a new outreach 
office that will focus on job placement. This is being achieved 
through a partnership with Northlands College. 
 
This community continues to press into the future despite 
facing some tough challenges. It lacks proper water and sewer 
services, and heating costs are extremely high because fuel and 
electricity are so expensive. Many people spend many hours 
every week trying to gather enough firewood to compensate for 
the heat costs of their homes. 
 
I would like to commend the people of Stony Rapids for their  

efforts to lobby this provincial government to live up to its 
promise to provide quality health care services for all people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

1996 Vintage Building Award 
 

Ms. Bradley:  Mr. Speaker. I would like to acknowledge a 
person in my constituency who has received an award for his 
work in preserving a part of Saskatchewan’s heritage. 
 
Logan W. Bjarnason has received the 1996 Vintage Building 
Award from the Saskatchewan Architectural Heritage Society 
for his work in restoring the 1907 Symes homestead house in 
the hamlet of Froude. He won the award in the category of 
Restoration-Exterior-Residential. 
 
Ernest and Mary Symes’s homestead house is a typical 
turn-of-the-century, wood frame house with drop-siding cedar 
shingles. The present owner and grandson of the original 
homesteaders, Logan Bjarnason, undertook the restoration of 
the property from an interest in the family history and the 
antiques within the house. 
 
The restoration work involved a number of elements such as 
retarring, shingling the roof, replacement of the floor joists, 
floor boards, and replacing the original chimney on the roof 
peak. Almost all of the materials used were recycled to retain 
the vintage quality of the building. 
 
The homestead is being used as a museum/interpretive centre of 
the family’s background and of early prairie life. Plans to make 
the home more available to the general public are being 
considered for this summer. 
 
I am looking forward to attending the presentation of this award 
to Logan Bjarnason next week. I would like to congratulate Mr. 
Bjarnason for all of his hard work in preserving a part of our 
Saskatchewan heritage. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mount St. Joseph Home Opens in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Kowalsky:  Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I brought good 
news to this House and advised the House that there was going 
to be a new CT (computerized axial tomograph) scanner 
coming to Prince Albert which would be welcome very much. 
 
Today I have more good new with respect to what’s happening 
in the health field in Prince Albert. My colleague from Prince 
Albert Northcote and I will be attending a sod-turning 
ceremony for the new 120-bed Mount St. Joseph Home this 
afternoon. 
 
This home is located near Carlton Comprehensive School in 
Prime Minister’s Park, and it will allow for the sharing of some 
services between the two operations. Mr. Speaker, this has been 
in the planning stages for over a decade. The cost will be 
approximately $13.8 million of which the province is 
contributing 9.3 million. The federal contribution is 2.3 million,  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

and the local share is 2.1 million. 
 
The project will be over 5,000 metre-square facility. And it will 
be affiliated with the Prince Albert Health District. It will be 
owned by the Roman Catholic diocese and operated by a board 
appointed by the bishop. 
 
I wish the bishop and the board the best in the construction and 
fund-raising for this facility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Political Donations 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Given recent 
revelations of secret trust funds, people of Saskatchewan are 
definitely concerned that secret donations may mean big 
business may benefit from or influence government decisions. 
Yesterday in this House we presented a letter from Extendicare 
to demonstrate how corporations can hold finances over the 
head of a political party or government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Premier may be aware, Extendicare owns a 
30 per cent stake in Crown Life and has benefited from 
government involvement in that company. Mr. Speaker, the 
letter from Extendicare serves as proof that some donations 
come at a price. If political parties favour the interests of the 
taxpayer over big business, they don’t get donations. 
 
Will the Premier explain to this House whether this particular 
company has been donating to secret funds of the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) and using these donations to acquire 
influence with this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I will ask all hon. 
members of the House to come to order. 
 
Order. I will ask all hon. members of the House to come to 
order. All hon. members of the House will come to order now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, that question is not worthy 
of the hon. member. The hon. member knows  must know  
and if he doesn’t know, I’ll assure him that this political party 
and this government would not ever be influenced by political 
donations or the lack of political donations. 
 
We are bringing to the Government of Saskatchewan a level of 
integrity that just would make that impossible. I’m ashamed to 
have to stand here and answer such a question. It is not worthy 
of the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to clarify the 
concerns that we have brought forward would be through an  

independent inquiry to put it to rest once and for all, Mr. 
Speaker. There is evidence; there are some concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers deserve to know how many 
corporations may have been involved in getting favours because 
they made donations to secret trust funds. If Extendicare is 
trying to hold finances over the head of the Liberal Party, there 
must be others who have used the same method to influence 
decisions of this government or previous governments. 
 
Will the minister address this serious issue today by ordering a 
review of political party financing to assure taxpayers that their 
democratic system isn’t bought with secret corporate 
donations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  As I understood the letter that was given 
to me yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition addressed to 
Senator Sparrow, Extendicare were dealing with the 
irresponsibility of the Liberal Party, and not any more than that. 
 
I can tell the hon. member again that this government would 
never let a political donation or the lack of political donation 
affect any of our decisions with respect to the administration of 
this government, and it is not worthy of the hon. member to 
raise such allegations in this House. If you’ve got something to 
say about that, walk outside the Chamber and say it in public 
where you will have to bear the responsibility, you will have to 
bear the responsibility of that scurrilous allegation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order! Order, order. Hon. members on 
both sides of the House . . . Order! Hon. members on both sides 
of the House will come to order and stop the shouting across 
the floor which prohibits the Leader of the Opposition from 
being able to be heard in putting his question. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to bring to the 
attention of the House the fact that a corporate search reveals 
that this government’s own Conflict of Interest and Freedom of 
Information Commissioner serves as a director of Extendicare, 
and also the official spokesperson for Extendicare in 
Saskatchewan, with power of attorney. This is a company that is 
a major shareholder in Crown Life, a company which this 
government has directed hundreds of millions of tax dollars 
into. 
 
Extendicare is also a big business that openly admits its 
donations are dependent upon parties not questioning any 
government dealings that impact on its profits. Mr. Speaker, 
clearly Mr. McLeod, our Conflict Commissioner, is in conflict 
himself; that he is heavily involved in a company that may have 
donated funds to the New Democratic Party which governs this 
province. Will the Premier do the honourable thing and remove 
Mr. McLeod from his post? 



2624  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, this is beyond being 
humorous  this is shocking. Mr. McLeod is one  is and was 
 one of the province’s most respected lawyers of years and 
years standing. He is a long-time supporter of the leader’s own 
party. Everybody knew that. His appointment was made only 
after the most careful and thorough consultation with both 
opposition parties. He is beyond reproach. 
 
If the member will step outside the legislature and make those 
remarks, I’m sure Mr. McLeod would appreciate an opportunity 
to react. You can’t stand in this House behind legislative 
immunity and make such scurrilous comments. It is not worthy 
of the Leader of the Opposition, and he should be ashamed of 
himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Condie to Queen Elizabeth Power Line 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. Order! I will ask the 
cooperation of all the hon. members on both sides of the House 
whose shouting across the floor prohibits the hon. member from 
Arm River from being able to be heard in putting his question. 
Order. Order. 
 
Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
recently approved construction of the $40 million 
Condie-Queen Elizabeth transmission line. This decision was 
arrived at in spite of the fact that the overwhelming majority of 
landowners who reside along the proposed corridor are opposed 
to the project. They have registered many environmental, 
health, and economic concerns relating to the construction of 
this transmission line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Environment has registered his 
opposition to this project in the past. Will he explain what these 
concerns were at that time and how they have been addressed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to 
the member opposite that this particular proposal has been 
under review by SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management). It has had a lot of public input. It’s 
been a process that’s gone on for many, many months. 
 
The Power Corporation is proposing this particular line to 
provide service to Saskatoon and to the northern area of our 
province for a number of reasons. We would propose this, Mr. 
Speaker, so that there could be a secure supply of energy for 
that area. The fact of the matter is that this proposal would 
reduce the amount of line loss, creating a lot of efficiency. 
 
It has been studied by numerous departments, the proper 
environmental process has taken place, and I want to say that 
we have done due diligence and followed all of the appropriate 
channels with respect to the Condie-QE (Queen Elizabeth) line. 

Mr. McLane:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, 
these landowners are very much opposed to the project. In fact 
228 are refusing to sign construction easements which would 
allow work to begin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government expropriation of the land of hundreds 
of Saskatchewan residents is unprecedented in this province. 
However, this is exactly what these people are prepared to do. 
 
Will the minister in charge of SaskPower explain if the 
government intends to enter into a bitter and expensive 
expropriation battle with hundreds of Saskatchewan 
landowners? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch:  Mr. Speaker, I would want to say to 
the member opposite that he has in fact suggested that 228 
landowners have signed letters; that I in fact have been 
contacted by a number of residents in that area. I would want to 
say to the member that many of those people who have signed 
these letters have now signed their releases. 
 
I have been asked for a letter by some concerned citizens . . . I 
have been asked for a meeting by some concerned citizens in 
this area. I have agreed to meet with them. My staff is in the 
process of putting together a meeting time and place, and I 
would want to say that it’s my intention to discuss with the 
concerned residents in that area, and I think that’s the 
appropriate measure to take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Occupational Health and Safety Regulations 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this morning are for the Minister of Labour. 
 
You just couldn’t help yourself, could you, Mr. Minister? You 
just had to give Saskatchewan business one more kick in the 
head as you are on the way out the door. You’re new 
occupational health and safety regulations are going to amount 
to a $10 million tax on business according to your own report. 
Now it’s no wonder you want to get out of this province as 
soon as possible. What’s worse is that neither business nor 
labour have been consulted on this final set of regulations that 
you are bringing in. 
 
Mr. Minister, what could be possibly have been thinking? Why 
are you launching another massive attack on business and job 
creation in your former province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow:  Mr. Speaker, I’ll leave aside for the 
moment commenting on the overtones of the question directed 
to the Minister of Labour about former province and the like. 
The commitment of the Minister of Labour to this province and 
to this country, whatever and wherever his duties take him, is 
beyond reproach. And I really think the question can be asked 
without those little side bars which add nothing to the debate. 
 
But the answer really simply is put in the context of the KPMG  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

report itself, which was unfortunately only partially reported in 
the newspapers because the report goes on to say as follows. 
That if you could have a 5 per cent reduction, a 5 per cent 
reduction in injuries and deaths, the savings and the benefits are 
estimated at $146.8 million. A 10 per cent reduction, the saving 
could be calculated to be a $292.9 million. So that for the 
additional money that this might ask people to contribute, if we 
could educate, consolidate occupational health and safety, the 
savings would  by a country mile, 10 country miles  
outweigh any of the costs by these numbers. 
 
And that was not as reported. It’s in the interest of employers 
and employees to seek these benefits. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goohsen:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A supplemental. 
When you say, Minister, or the Premier . . . the key word here, 
Mr. Premier, of course, is “if.” And of course we’d all like to 
live in a wonderful world of “if”; if you could eliminate all of 
the problems in the world, especially in occupational health and 
safety, and eliminate all accidents, you could balance the budget 
of this province. But your “if” won’t work; it’s a reality. 
 
Mr. Minister of Labour, it flies in the face of the NDP 
government-stated commitment to reducing the government’s 
regulation and red tape, the actions that you are taking. And it is 
a massive change for a lame duck minister to be making, as you 
are about to leave and you’re walking out the door of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you really want your last act as a Minister of 
Labour to be a scorched-earth attack on the businesses of this 
province? Will you admit that this matter should be revisited by 
the new Minister of Labour? Mr. Premier, you might want to 
comment on this. Would you put these regulations on hold until 
a new minister is appointed and the proper consultation be 
taken place with the employers and the employees of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Well the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, has a bit of a wrong interpretation of a last act . . . and 
somehow people aren’t aware of these regulations. The 
Occupational Health and Safety Act was passed in 1993. It was 
the first major revision in at least 20 years, and when he talks 
about the scorched-earth attack on the business community, the 
average cost to the business community over all, an employer in 
the first year, of the average employer, would be $327, Mr. 
Speaker. Years after that, it would be average $93 per employer 
per year after that. 
 
I’ll be proud if my last act in the Legislative Assembly is to pass 
legislation that protects the working men and women of this 
province from being maimed and injured and killed on the job. 
That’s the objective of the occupational health and safety 
regulations. There’ll be an overall net benefit to the businesses 
and the overall people in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d be proud if I can put through the occupational 
health and safety regulations. 

No-fault Insurance 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). A constituent of mine, Sharon Diederichs was the 
victim of a severe car accident last December, but now she’s a 
victim of your government’s no-fault insurance. 
 
Sharon was excited about her future and the future of her three 
children as she had just signed a three-year lease agreement to 
open a business. Unfortunately while driving home a couple of 
weeks later, she was hit head-on by a half ton truck being 
pulled by another. One of the drivers was drunk. 
 
Ms. Diederichs suffered fractured facial bones, shattered eye 
socket, a shattered knee cap, severe fractured femur, a fractured 
sternum, severe whiplash, bleeding in the skull around the 
brain, and much more. The lack of coverage under your no-fault 
insurance has left her financially destitute and with a shattered 
future with nowhere to turn. 
 
Mr. Minister, what do you say to people like Sharon 
Diederichs? What can be done for her? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the member for the question. The response, first of all, 
that I want to make to the member opposite is that when we 
made our changes to the no-fault program in 1995, we took into 
considerable consideration making sure that if people are 
unable to resume their lifestyle again, that we would provide for 
them an income support program that would see them through 
to ensure that they might be able to support themselves and 
their families. That’s certainly there. 
 
We’ve also provided, under the no-fault program, Mr. Speaker, 
a very comprehensive treatment program for individuals where 
they might be able to obtain rehab services, all sorts of medical 
treatment that can be provided to ensure that these people are 
capable of resuming again a quality of life that they had been 
accustomed to. 
 
Those are the kinds of programs that we put into place under 
the no-fault program. And certainly all of these would be 
available to the individual, Mrs. Diederichs, that the member 
speaks of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
speaks in glowing terms of his no-fault insurance. 
Unfortunately it simply doesn’t work. Mrs. Diederichs states in 
her letters that “although the trauma to my face and neck still 
causes me severe headaches, my real headache started when I 
began dealing with SGI.” 
 
She cannot sue the drivers, even though one of them was drunk. 
She can’t sue because you took away her right to sue with the 
no-fault insurance, Mr. Minister, and you claim that it makes 
Saskatchewan people’s life better. She could sue if she had 
made more money, if she grossed over $50,000 a year, but she 
didn’t. 



2626  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

Incidentally, the at-fault driver walked away with a $100 fine, 
while the drunk driver got off on a technicality. At the same 
time, this mother of three remains in a full-length body cast, 
undergoing reconstructive surgery to her face and leg; two 
separate blood transfusions and more. 
 
And you, Mr. Minister, have the audacity to call this fair. How 
can you stand here and say that this system is good for 
Saskatchewan families? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 
the member that the changes that we made to the program, to 
no-fault insurance in 1995, were really intended to do a number 
of things. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, the program was intended to provide, 
as the member should be made aware of, rehabilitative 
programs across the province which would enable people to get 
better health treatment, quicker health treatment, and more 
extensive treatment, which is the case. 
 
Also under the no-fault benefit, Mr. Speaker, we have provided 
opportunities for individuals to be on an income replacement 
program for as long as they need to be on that. So the benefits, 
in terms of financial benefits for these people, are far greater 
than they have ever been, and for a longer period of time. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the strength of the 
no-fault program in Saskatchewan, it can be easily noted that 
we have in this province the best rehabilitative programs, the 
best income replacement programs anywhere in the province. 
And there is a process here if clients are not satisfied they can 
appeal this process. The appeal process in this province will . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Next question. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sharon needs 
real assistance immediately. The income supplement you 
provide her is less than she would get under UIC 
(Unemployment Insurance Commission). And she’s trying her 
best to make lease payments on a business space she cannot 
use. She’s trying to raise her children with a full-leg cast. She’s 
doing her best to cope, but your no-fault insurance is providing 
no help, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, isn’t insurance supposed to help those who are 
victims of an accident? Ms. Diederichs states in her letter: 
 

My goal is not and never will be to get rich off this 
incident. I simply want to come out of this ridiculous mess 
in the same financial position as I went in. 

 
Is that too much to ask, Mr. Minister? Will you personally take 
steps to see that Sharon Diederichs receives fair treatment from 
your no-fault insurance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby:  Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Just in response to the member’s question, again I’ve already 
indicated to the member that under the no-fault program in this 
province, we are already providing an income replacement for 
not only the person who’s victimized by the accident but for  

also the family. 
 
And the benefits that are provided in terms of income 
replacement, Mr. Speaker, comfortably exceed the insurances 
that people who are injured in car crashes . . . in fact are 
sustained, not only for the individual, but also for the family. At 
the end of the day this individual and other people who are 
injured in car crashes are far better off under the new system of 
no-fault than they were under the tort system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, as I’ve already mentioned, that we have 
the strongest rehabilitative programs anywhere in Canada under 
our no-fault program with expanding services that are going to 
be provided through our secondary and tertiary care services at 
the local levels. So when the member opposite stands up and 
says that individuals aren’t adequately covered, simply is not 
the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
Long-term Care 

 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Health has stood up in this House on many 
occasions to indicate that his government’s version of health 
reform addresses all the needs of the sick and elderly. 
 
As further evidence that this is nothing but a myth, I would like 
to bring to the attention of the minister an issue involving Katie 
Lonoway. This 91-year-old lady is a former resident of Gerald 
who presently resides in a private care home in Yorkton, a 
facility that can no longer provide the care she needs. As a 
result she has been asked to find other accommodations by the 
end of June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem is that all long-term care facilities in 
Yorkton and surrounding communities of Esterhazy, Saltcoats, 
Kamsack, and Langenburg, are occupied and all have extensive 
waiting-lists. Respite care isn’t even an option because all such 
beds are also occupied. The only option this elderly lady has is 
to be placed in the Esterhazy hospital until such time as  and 
this is what she was told  something comes up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this might be a valid answer if we were talking 
about . . . 
 
The Speaker:  Order. Order. The hon. member has been 
quite lengthy in his preamble and I’ll ask him to go directly to 
his question. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Will the Minister of Health justify this kind 
of treatment for our seniors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, I should indicate to the 
member, first of all, that I was at the opening of the Langenburg 
health centre yesterday, and it was a very pleasant day in the 
community. 
 
I want to say to the member that if this resident, if her needs are  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2627 

not being met where she is, and that would be a decision made 
by the people that run the facility, and obviously they’re looking 
for long-term care . . . This is not . . . the member will want to 
lay this at the feet of health reform and say it has something to 
do with health reform. My understanding in the Yorkton and 
area district is that it is an area that is under-resourced in terms 
of long-term care beds. In other words, unlike some areas, it 
doesn’t have too many beds. It in fact doesn’t have enough 
beds. And I acknowledge that. 
 
And the funding takes into account the fact that in that area of 
the province we have to increase the number of beds. And I 
believe that’s what the districts in the area will be working on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Minister, I understand you were at 
Langenburg the other day. But I noticed four years ago when 
you closed their hospital, there wasn’t a member of your 
government there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud:  Mr. Speaker, Mrs. Lonoway, like many 
other seniors, has become a victim of this government’s chronic 
underfunding of the health care system. She does not deserve 
the anxiety brought on by not knowing if she will be moved far 
away from family and friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this issue is one that will not go away. As the 
minister well knows, the senior population continues to grow in 
this province, at the same time the NDP is forcing the closure of 
long-term care facilities and drastically reducing the quality of 
health care for our seniors. The sad part of this story is the fact 
that only the relief for people like Mrs. Lonoway come when 
other seniors pass away, opening up long-term respite spaces. 
 
Will the minister justify this inhumane system in which people 
have to die before others can receive proper care? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline:  Mr. Speaker, the fact that they’re 
experiencing this problem with respect to this resident is of 
concern to me, but this is not a new situation. This is a problem 
that has gone on for years and years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality is, whether the member wants to acknowledge it or 
not, it has nothing to do with any cuts to long-term care. The 
district the member is referring to, as I’ve said, needs more 
long-term beds. 
 
But I want to say to the member, who of course wants to 
confuse the issue with the closure of some nursing homes, that 
what we’re trying to do across the province is not to end the 
availability of nursing home care. It is to have some rightsizing 
and to place some emphasis on taking care of people in their 
own homes and promoting their independence. 
 
And I tell the member in the House this, Mr. Speaker: that 
despite the fearmongering of this Liberal Party over there, when  

people need nursing home in Saskatchewan . . . nursing home 
care, they’re going to receive it, Mr. Speaker. And when they 
need hospital care, they’re going to receive that too, 
notwithstanding the fact that there’s fearmongering coming 
from the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Order, order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’m 
going to ask the House Leader of the opposition and the 
Premier to come to order. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Flavel:  To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker:  I’ll recognize the member just before orders 
of the day. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McPherson:  To ask leave for introduction of guests. 
 
The Speaker:  I’ll say the same as I said to the member who 
just stood; I’ll recognize you before orders of the day. 
 
The hon. member for Last Mountain-Touchwood has requested 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Flavel:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to my 
colleagues for allowing leave. 
 
I want to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the rest of the 
colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, 19 grade 5 students 
from Cupar School. They’re seated in the Speaker’s gallery 
today. They’re in for a tour of the building and we will have a 
photo with them and a visit with them later. With them today is 
their teacher, Ms. Bajak, and chaperons Mr. Turner, Mrs. 
Brodner, and Mrs. Gerencser. 
 
And I will be meeting with them and I hope to answer any of 
the questions they have. I hope they enjoy an enjoyable day in 
Regina. Don’t miss school too much; it will be there for you on 
Monday again when you go back, I’m sure. 
 
So welcome to the Legislative Assembly and do enjoy it. And 
I’ll ask the hon. members from Saskatoon and everywhere to 
help me welcome them here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  The hon. member for Wood River has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McPherson:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to  



2628  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Legislative 
Assembly, a couple of good friends and constituents of mine, 
Rod and Paulette Pearson from Coronach. Rod and Paulette are 
here to enjoy the city today and watch the proceedings in the 
House and wait with anticipation when the Premier announces a 
judicial inquiry. Thanks. I welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to members of the 
Assembly, 22 grade 5 and 6 students with us today from 
Qu’Appelle. Their teacher, Larry McCullough, and several 
parents and bus driver also here. I will be meeting with the 
group shortly here, and I look forward to meeting with them. 
And I ask all members to join in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  In accordance with our growing 
reputation for openness and accessibility, I table the answer. 
 
The Speaker:  The answer to question 112 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections 
 
The Chair:  I would ask the minister to introduce his 
officials, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have with me 
today Mr. Darcy McGovern, Crown counsel in the legislative 
services branch of the Department of Justice. Darcy is seated to 
my left. And behind me is the hard-working Mr. Ian Brown, 
chief legislative Crown counsel with the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome, and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we obviously have a great deal to talk about 
when it comes to this particular Act. It’s not a brief Act. It’s one 
that involves various directives, directions, concerns that we 
have already previously discussed with respect to changes that 
may be required. 
 

Before going into some of the issues that we have been talking 
about in the recent past, perhaps we might just be able to 
address some of the other items within the Act with respect to 
the changes. First of all, particularly with the estimate perhaps 
of how many people . . . With the extension of the absentee 
ballots and mobile polls, is there any . . . perhaps it might be a 
question that could be answered for how many people in the 
past have missed out on being able to vote. How many people 
in the future might this allow to become part of our democratic 
process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, it is a 
pleasure to be able to begin discussions of this Act. And before 
I address the member’s particular questions, I just want to say a 
few words for the record on the way in which this Act has 
developed. 
 
I want to say first of all, that as the minister responsible for the 
carriage of this Act, I have deeply appreciated the willingness 
of the official opposition and the third party to consult with us 
about the content of the Bill. I think that’s appropriate in . . . 
more than appropriate in an Act like this which affects all of us, 
all of the constituencies that we represent, and indeed all the 
people of the province. 
 
And we worked hard in those consultations to understand the 
concerns that had been raised over the years, to understand each 
other’s concerns, and to move towards a legislative resolution 
to concerns that grew up as the result of years of experience 
under this Act. And I commend especially the Leader of the 
Opposition and the member from Wood River, who I know 
spent a lot of time on this Act, as well as the members from 
Moosomin and Cannington and the Leader of the Third Party 
for the time and effort that they put into it. 
 
We tried mightily to respond to all of the concerns raised by 
both of the opposition parties. And with one or two exceptions 
we were able to accommodate that. 
 
I also appreciate that we’re now going to be able to discuss this 
Act with a little bit of the heat of question period removed from 
it, and sort of get down to some of the basics in a calmer 
environment. And I think this is a good thing for this Bill. It 
needs calmness and it needs wisdom and a bit of 
far-sightedness, if I can use that term, an ability to look at the 
consequences of our changes to the elections and by-elections 
that will be held in the future. 
 
The member in his question raises one of the very important 
improvements to the Act, namely the absentee ballots and the 
mobile polls. We think this will be significant in terms of 
extending the franchise to people who often haven’t been able 
to cast their ballot. 
 
To some extent that depends upon circumstances, particularly in 
the case of the mobile polls, where depending upon when the 
election is held and what’s happening at the time, people are 
often unable to get to their home ballot boxes and cast their 
votes. 
 
(1100) 



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2629 

In the last provincial election in June ’95, no one was able to 
predict what the forest fire situation would be like. But as it 
turned out it was a very, very serious forest fire situation. If I’m 
not mistaken, it was unprecedented in Saskatchewan. 
 
As a result, really significant numbers of people were unable to 
vote. That includes the people who were out on the line fighting 
the dozens of forest fires that were going on. They went in 
before the advance polls opened and they came out after the 
election was over so they just were unable to vote. And that 
especially applies to the elections in Athabasca and in 
Cumberland although it impacts in other constituencies as well. 
 
In addition the forest fires themselves caused at least one 
community to be evacuated, and that was Sandy Bay. Those 
people for the most part were put up in Saskatoon, housed in 
Saskatoon, until the dangers to their community had passed. 
And under the terms of The Election Act they were just unable 
to vote. So in ’95 these amendments would have impacted a 
very large number. Who knows what it’ll be like in ’99 or 2000 
in that respect. As I say, it depends on circumstances and those 
of course can’t be foretold. 
 
The absentee ballots and the new provisions we have with 
respect to that, I think will be significant. We of course don’t 
have numbers for that but we have some numbers that are 
relevant. The number of votes cast at hospital polls in the last 
election was 1,375 — quite a large number when you consider 
we’re talking about 58 constituencies. And the number of votes 
cast in the limited mail-in ballot provisions that existed under 
the old Act were 353. Well you can roughly extrapolate from 
that and imagine that the figure for mail-in ballots in the next 
election is likely to be some multiple of 353, maybe 10, 20 
times as many. 
 
But we don’t know. We haven’t seen it yet; we haven’t tried it. 
And it’ll be interesting to see what the results will be. 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I can appreciate that 
specific numbers would be difficult to zero in on. Your 
explanation with respect to evacuees as a result of forest fires 
very definitely, no question, has an impact. 
 
With the addition of now being allowed to extend the 
opportunities, how much do you anticipate that this may in fact 
cost? And I guess we’re all cost-conscious in this day and age. 
Are there any projections  the possible costs or estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
absentee ballot provisions will cost practically nothing because 
they’re just pieces of paper, they’re just pieces of paper on 
which names are written. The mobile polls and the polls for 
temporarily displaced people will cost money. Again it all 
depends on the circumstances. It depends on where you have to 
go and how much it costs to go there. 
 
It would be significant in some circumstances and less 
significant in others. But if you’re dropping a mobile poll into a 
fire-fighting area, you can imagine it may be costly. It may be 
necessary to rent a helicopter in order to get there, and it may be 
difficult to do that. 

An Hon. Member:  They always have extra ones sitting 
around. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  An hon. member says that there are 
always helicopters sitting around, and that’s true, but they cost 
to operate. And so there’ll be some cost involved. 
 
I think the best answer I can give to the question of the Leader 
of the Opposition is that it depends on the circumstances, 
depends on where the poll has to be set up, and it’s not possible 
in advance to estimate that. But there will be a cost. 
 
I think we all welcome . . . or at least are not fearful of that cost. 
First of all, because it won’t be excessive; we know that. And 
it’s worth it. The right to vote and ensuring people the right to 
vote is a right that has a huge value in our system, and if it costs 
a little money to ensure that the citizen has the right to vote, I 
think we’re all prepared to pay it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
and officials, I’d like to welcome you here today to deal with 
this issue that’s of particular importance. 
 
I’d like to move on to some of the contentious issues that have 
been brought forward. How are donations from corporations to 
be dealt with under The Election Act? And if a corporation, 
let’s say, makes a donation of $1,000, how is that to be dealt 
with? What types of disclosures are to be provided? How 
extensive is this? Does this include the names of the directors, 
who paid it, etc.? Can you explain that, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member’s question, as I understood 
it, is: if the corporation gives $1,000, what kind of reporting has 
to be done about it? And I believe the answer to that is to be 
found in section 250(2) of the Bill, which provides that for a 
return by the chief official agent of a registered political party, 
the return is to the Chief Electoral Officer. And in the case of a 
corporation, a donation from a corporation, the return is 
required to set out the amount of money contributed by the 
corporation. And it would be included in that return. 
 
I hope I’m responsive to the member’s questions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  So the only disclosure necessary is that 
corporation A donated a thousand dollars; there’s nothing 
above and beyond that. There is no need to reveal the names of 
who signed the cheque, or who authorized the payment, or who 
the directors of the corporation are. Okay, I’ll just leave it there 
for now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  That’s correct. Any donation from a 
corporation over $250, under the Bill, would be required to be 
disclosed, as I indicated earlier, without any further information 
about directors or officers or anything like that. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you very much, Mr. 
Minister. I wonder if you can explain who would . . . qualifies 
under the term “corporation.” What entities are you talking 
about? Obviously it’s not individuals, but who qualifies under 
the definition of the term “corporation”? 
 



2630  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The term “corporation” is not a defined 
term but is widely used in legislation, and it is understood to 
mean all incorporated entities, and that would include the 
ordinary business corporations. It would include non-profit 
corporations. It would include cooperatives  that sort of 
thing. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. What 
about trade unions? Where would they fit into this picture? Do 
they qualify under the term “corporation,” or are they excluded 
from that term? What kind of reporting mechanism is in place 
in this Act for trade unions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The obligation on the political parties to 
report with respect to contributions of trade unions is precisely 
the same as the requirements with respect to corporations. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s my 
understanding that according to Department of Justice opinion, 
that there is currently no requirement under the Act to disclose 
the names of individual donors who make donations through a 
third party such as a trust fund or through a non-profit 
corporation such as the Tommy Douglas House or some other 
type of entity like that. 
 
Could you confirm this, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, we do not discuss Justice 
opinions with respect to the meaning of the present Act, the 
present law. And I have to honour that long-standing tradition. 
 
The member will know, from the consultations that we’ve had, 
that we propose to introduce an amendment to section 240 of 
the printed Bill in due course. And we will be glad to discuss 
the contents of that and the meaning behind it and the reasons 
for it, but without reference to Justice opinions. We will be glad 
to answer all of the member’s questions though in that 
connection. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. Well let 
me ask it a different way. Under the current Act, what are the 
requirements for disclosure of third-party contributions as the 
Act states today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I will try to be responsive to 
the member’s question. These are of course provisions that are 
administered by the Chief Electoral Officer and I provide my 
answer subject to that comment. 
 
But I think the answers to the member’s question are to be 
found in section 210, and then in some limited circumstances, 
section 219. And the provisions are there, and I think we 
understand them, although events of recent days sometimes 
makes you wonder about that. 
 
But the section 210 describes the obligation of a chief official 
agent of a political party to file a return with the Chief Electoral 
Officer and sets out what the return will include. And that is set 
out in great detail in section 210(2). 

Then section 219 also has to be considered with respect to a 
gift, contribution, loan, advance, or deposit, or other financial 
assistance given to a candidate or a registered party, and the 
provision that they may use an agent for that purpose, which is 
also relevant to the question that the member asks. And again 
there’s a great deal of detail there. 
 
But my understanding of the Act, of the present Act, is that the 
member’s question will involve an interpretation of those two 
sections. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if 
you could outline for us the changes that are being proposed in 
dealing with Crown corporation advertising during a writ 
period. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  With leave, Mr. Chair, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated in the east 
gallery is a group of grade 4 students from Parkview School in 
Melville with their teachers, Mrs. Taylor and Mr. Heska, and 
chaperons, Mrs. Rathgeber, Stokal, Dycer and also Mr. 
Melanson. And others include the bus driver, Mrs. Herbert. 
 
These are constituents and school from the member from 
Melville’s constituency. He’s unfortunately not able to be here 
right at this time to introduce you to the House this morning. 
But I at this time would just like everybody here to 
acknowledge their presence, and I hope you enjoy your visit to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 92 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. The present Act 
contains a prohibition against advertising during a general 
election; let me put it that way. It says that no department  
referring to a department of government, board, commission, 
Crown corporation, or agency of the Government of 
Saskatchewan  shall, during a general election or during a 
by-election, publish any information or particulars of the 
activities of that entity except in the case of an emergency 
where the public interest requires the publication of any such 
information or particulars. 
 
And you know, we all have a general sense of what that covers. 
Maybe it’s SaskPower in respect of a safety situation or 
something like that. 
 



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

Now we are proposing in the present section 277, that that 
emergency . . . well first of all we’re proposing that the general 
ban against publishing during an election or by-election period 
will be continued. And we are also proposing that the exception 
to that in the case of an emergency be continued. 
 
The new situation that we’re proposing is covered by clause (b) 
of subsection (5) of section 277, and that would create another 
exception to the general ban on publication. And it would be: 
 

advertising by a Crown corporation that was contracted 
prior to the issue of a writ and is related to the 
corporation’s business. 

 
And we do that having just freshly experienced a situation that 
arose in SaskTel. And what happened there is that SaskTel, 
being involved in the mobility field in the cell phone field, 
found itself in an intensely competitive situation. And its 
competitors had a big blitz on, big advertising campaign, and 
were trying to take customers away from SaskTel or to sign up 
customers that SaskTel ought to have had a good crack at too. 
They’re competing. And it’s just one of the things we have to 
face in the telephone field these days. It is not a monopoly any 
more. It is a competitive situation, and we have to . . . SaskTel 
has to compete. 
 
It therefore planned an advertising campaign. I don’t have the 
numbers with me, but it was an expensive advertising 
campaign. And it entered into a contract with the agencies that 
you have to deal with in order to launch that campaign. 
 
And then the election writ was dropped. And under the law as it 
now is, as it previously existed, they couldn’t go ahead with the 
campaign, so they cancelled it at some considerable financial 
cost, according to what I’ve been told And we think in those 
circumstances there ought to be an exception which would 
allow such a campaign to go forward which would allow such 
advertising to continue. 
 
I’ll just repeat the elements. It is a competitive situation. It is 
the kind of . . . the advertising or the publishing has already 
been contracted, and it just seems entirely appropriate that we 
would create that kind of an exemption in the interests of good 
business and keeping the Crown corporations in a position 
where they can be competitive even during an election period. 
 
Now having said all that  the member and I have discussed 
this, or at least the member’s party and I have discussed this, 
and we recognize the concern  we answered in the following 
way. 
 
Any government party seeking re-election who would dare to 
abuse that section to take unfair advantage through an 
advertising campaign by a Crown corporation would, I think, 
lose more than they gain; that the opposition parties would 
make us pay for that, make the governing party pay for that over 
and over and over again by the time that election campaign was 
over; and that in the end, it would be a serious mistake for any 
governing party to try and use that exemption for their political 
advantage. 
 

Now we’re interested in debating this. I’ve had interesting 
discussions about it. We think this is fair. We think that it is 
unrealistic to be rigid in all circumstances. We’ve tried to 
define it in such a way that it’s a limited exception. As I say, 
we’re interested in this discussion. No doubt as I take my place, 
I’m going to hear some of that discussion, so I’ll give the 
member an opportunity now. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Indeed we 
have had some discussion on this, and it has been discussion, 
not agreement. 
 
I believe when you’re in the competitive field, such as SaskTel 
Mobility, I do have some sympathy for the fact that your 
competitors are still in the field advertising their products and 
attempting to gain access to the customer base. However this 
piece of the Act does not specify those Crown corporations who 
are in a non-monopoly situation. It applies to all the Crown 
corporations including the monopolies simply because they may 
have set up an advertising campaign prior to the election, an 
election which we, as the opposition, have no idea when it’s 
going to be called. 
 
But the Premier has an idea and has the ability then to say to the 
minister responsible  let’s say, to SaskPower  you know, I 
believe that we should have a campaign out there to promote 
the benefits of SaskPower and the great service it provides to 
the public. So this campaign starts up two weeks prior to the 
writ being dropped. You know, it was all in place before. It’s all 
legitimate. And yet nevertheless, it’s a benefit to the governing 
party with the ability to say what a great job we have done in 
managing your assets in whatever Crown corporation it may be 
that’s providing the advertising. 
 
You may have a point though when you say that there is a price 
to be paid sometimes by the governing party when they do this 
because I recall all the ads that were in place dealing with the 
family of Crown corporations prior to 1982. And I wouldn’t 
want to give credit to that advertising to the crushing defeat that 
your party suffered that year, but I suppose if you wish to give 
the credit to that advertising campaign, you may do so. 
 
(1130) 
 
I think though that the opposition has limited resources when it 
comes to countering an advertising campaign by the Crown 
corporations. If the opposition wants to carry out a campaign of 
counter-advertising during a writ period, their funding is very 
limited, and there is a cap placed on that funding, whereas there 
is no cap placed on funding by a Crown corporation during a 
writ period under this Act. 
 
And I think that’s a great deal of . . . We have a great deal of 
concern about that, Mr. Minister. You claim that the opposition 
could raise a ruckus about this. Well that may get a little bit of 
news item, 30 seconds once or twice in the news during a writ 
period. But the Crown corporation advertising would carry on 
and on and on. And if advertising has the impact that the 
advertising agencies would have us believe that it has, then that 
constant repetition has an impact in the direction that the 
advertisers want it to go. 



2632  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

So I would argue, Mr. Minister, that while the opposition may 
have the opportunity to raise it as an issue during an election 
campaign, their opportunities are much greatly diminished as 
compared to the opportunities that advertising by a Crown 
corporation that could say, you know, we have done a great job 
in serving you . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order. Before we were so rudely interrupted by 
the power outage, which I hope doesn’t repeat itself, the hon. 
member for Cannington was full . . . mid-sentence might be the 
best way to describe it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I know 
that the minister has been in the dark on some of this issue in 
the past, so I’ll try to enlighten him on this now. 
 
With a Crown corporation advertising, Mr. Minister, I believe 
that there should be more restrictions placed on it than is 
currently under the Act. I believe that at the very least it should 
be restricted to those Crown corporations . . . the exemption 
should be restricted to those Crown corporations that are in a 
competitive field. 
 
The Crown corporations such as SaskPower, SaskEnergy, the 
SaskTel general area that they deal with is all a monopoly 
situation. SGI auto is a monopoly situation. All those in the 
monopoly categories should have to cease providing advertising 
during the writ period. 
 
I’m prepared to discuss with you and debate with you the idea 
of having those in the competitive field where they do not have 
a monopoly situation, such as SGI CANADA, whether or not 
they should be allowed to provide advertising during that period 
to provide services to their customers. I think though that 
perhaps there should be some cap on the amount of advertising 
that even they could do within that period. If they were simply 
flooding the airways with advertising, I think that would be 
most inappropriate. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, that there needs to be some changes to 
this. There needs to be some adjustment, some amendment to 
this particular section of the Act to restrict further the 
advertising, to put a prohibition on those Crown corporations 
which are in a monopoly situation and do not face direct 
competition in their market-place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, I tried to 
indicated in an earlier answer that . . . I tried to first of all 
indicate clearly what policy issues we were addressing and tried 
to also indicate that we were interested in listening to the 
discussion about it because we are prepared to consider and will 
consider how the section might be amended to more clearly 
reflect the policy position that I expressed earlier. 
 
And I understand that we’re going to not complete the Bill 
today, so we will attempt at the next time round to come up 
with something. And we’ll have consultations with the two 
opposition parties in the meantime. We’ll have consultation 
with the two opposition parties in the meantime on the subject. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Just along this  

same line, only pertaining to the situations where candidates 
may be in a position of having a potentially large sum of money 
available to them pre-writ, and not that much unlike the 
situation where Crown corporations have large sums of money 
available to them to enter into advertising campaigns . . . could I 
get the minister’s comment in this regard, whether it’s fair that 
candidates with large sums of money available would be able to 
spend those sorts of sums of money in a pre-writ period when 
other candidates may not have that available to them. It would 
seem like this is an imbalance in the whole electoral system as 
well. Could I just have your comment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member’s question is interesting, 
and I want to respond to it in very general terms. 
 
I think our election machinery in this country has been slowly 
moving towards a situation where your elect-ability does not 
depend on your wealth. And so in recent years, I think all the 
jurisdictions in Canada have introduced election expense 
ceilings for constituencies, that is to say for the constituency 
associations of political parties and for the registered political 
parties generally. That’s been a long difficult process in this 
country. 
 
In this province we’ve been doing that since, I think, 1974. The 
first caps were put in, and those caps have been adjusted in 
accordance with inflation since then. But when the hon. 
member ran in Thunder Creek or when I ran in Saskatoon 
Fairview, we knew with clarity what the election expense 
ceilings were. 
 
The member, Mr. Chair, introduces another thought to the 
debate, and that is whether the amounts spent in the pre-election 
period should be somehow limited. And in a general way I 
agree with that. We haven’t included any provisions for it in the 
Bill because we frankly haven’t done enough research or given 
enough analysis to the problem. But I believe that some day 
those questions will be addressed in the election laws of this 
country. 
 
And all that will be in pursuit of the general proposition that 
anyone ought to be able to offer themself as a candidate on 
more or less equal footing with everyone else. And that the 
wealth of a person ought not to give that person the potential 
for a huge advantage which was how I understood the 
member’s question. 
 
But we’re not in any position at all to consider introducing 
those matters into this Bill. That’s for I think another day, 
another decade, probably another century. But I think the 
member is on the track that we will all be following in the 
future in this country. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Move to report progress. 
 

Bill No. 111  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life 
Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

 
The Chair:  I will begin by inviting the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Behind me today 
is seated John McLaughlin who is the executive director of the 
Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. And beside me on my 
left is Michael Littlewood who is the director of third party 
funding and legislative services in the Department of 
Education. 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 112  An Act to amend The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And, Mr. 
Minister, welcome to your officials. A couple of quick 
questions on this Bill just for clarification. 
 
I note that the eligibility rule has changed regarding the 
qualification as far as contributions. You indicate that there is a 
change from contributory years of service to eligibility years. 
Could you clarify whether eligibility means any part of a year. 
Is it a half time? Is it a quarter time? Is it a very, very short 
period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The matter is set up on a monthly credit 
basis as the member will know. And a teacher will get a 
month’s credit for any month in which that teacher performed 
service, whether it is full time or part time, and with no 
limitation as to what the part time is. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. The second 
question is around the two pension plans, and I understand that 
the person may now purchase pensionable time and have it 
applied to . . . Will it apply to either of the plans? Or is it only 
the old superannuation plan? 
 
And the second question that you could maybe tie in as well is 
because there will be a further liability imposed on the plan. Is 
this a problem? Has there been an investigation in terms of how 
many years may be purchased back? And indeed what is the 
long-term liability on the pension plan, if it’s only the one, or 
on both of course if it’s the annuity plan? 
 
(1200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, and to the member, these 
changes apply only to the old plan, defined benefit plan. 
 
As to the cost of it, it is very, very small  marginal. It will 
affect fewer than 50 teachers, so we’re only talking about a 
small number of people, and the increase to the costs or the 
unfunded liability will be tiny. But we don’t know how much 
uptake there will be, so we are not able to estimate exactly. But 
in a worst case scenario, it’s a very small amount. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  One further clarification point, Mr. Minister. 
Has there been any change in terms of the number of years of 
service that a person can purchase that are not directly within  

the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation per se? Has there been 
any change in negotiated settlement in terms of the number of 
years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  No there has not. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chair, I will move that we report 
the Bill without amendment, and while I’m on my feet I’d like 
to thank Mr. Littlewood and Mr. McLaughlin for coming to 
assist the committee today. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 96  An Act to amend  
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act 

 
The Chair:  I’ll begin by inviting the minister to introduce 
his official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Brian Smith, in pensions. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and also our 
welcome to Mr. Smith here this morning, still. 
 
Just a very few questions here with respect to The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act. When we’re talking about 
making a change to take and fund any future deficits from out 
of the General Revenue Fund, I understand at this point in time 
this particular fund is in a surplus situation. Could you perhaps 
give us some comment as to how you may ensure in the future 
that that might occur. 
 
Perhaps this also ties in with the provision now where you’re 
going to be allowing people who have moved away from the 
province to continue to contribute to the plan. Is this your 
solution to maintain the surpluses in this particular fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  There is no prospect of this fund 
slipping into a deficit. It’s not being done for that reason. The 
reason why it’s being done is because the Provincial Auditor 
brought it to our attention, suggested this should be done, and 
we are in effect complying with the suggestion by the 
Provincial Auditor. There’s no prospect that the pension will 
slip into a deficit. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. With respect to the 
number of additional pension benefits that we are looking at 
here, now I understand there’s a number of them named here: 
life income funds, locked-in retirement income funds, and 
locked-in retirement accounts. Could you provide us with 
perhaps some brief overview as to how these will be positive 
for Saskatchewan residents. Would there be any mechanism in 
place to ensure that the contributors to the plan are made aware 
of all of these various choices that now will be available to 
them, given this change? 



2634  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  These of course are in addition to the 
options that are there now. And this is consistent with the 
options which are available under The Pension Benefits Act. 
 
So we’re simply making available, under this legislation, the 
options that are available under The Pension Benefits Act. And 
that’s really all there is to that. 
 
Mr. Aldridge:  I think that really takes care of any minor 
concerns we’d had with respect to this particular piece of 
legislation here. And I would just again like to give our thanks 
to the official here this morning, or this afternoon now, for 
having taken the time to come down here and answer a few 
questions. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Thank you very much. I want to join 
my colleague in those courteous comments of his. I want to join 
my colleague in thanking this official, not only for his time here 
today. The public may not appreciate he’s been sitting out there 
I think for close to a couple of hours waiting on this. 
 
Also because we are in a period of transition in pensions in this 
province as we seek to come to terms with some age-old 
problems and deficits, Mr. Smith in fact has done yeoman’s 
service in advising the government and suggesting alternatives 
which the government might take, representative I think of a 
very high quality of public servants which serve this province. 
 
I thank Mr. Smith for his services today and otherwise, and 
through him we’re thanking all public servants who work on 
our behalf. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 97  An Act to amend  
The Department of Agriculture Act 

 
The Chair:  I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Chairman, I want to say how 
pleased I am to be here to answer questions on this Bill on 
behalf of the Minister of Agriculture. With me today is the 
associate deputy minister of Agriculture, Terry Scott, who many 
of you will know, as well as Harvey Murchison, the director of 
livestock operations. 
 
I’ll try to answer any questions. If there are questions that I 
don’t have the answers here, we’ll be sure to get back to the 
members as quickly as possible. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
a few questions, a few short questions, I think, on the Bill. We 
have heard from the Minister of Agriculture previously in first 
readings and second readings as to the reasons for the Bill from 
his point of view. I wonder if you might explain to the House  

and to the public as to the reasons, if there were any, from the 
stakeholders as to why this Bill was necessary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member will be interested to 
know that the fund being established here is a revolving fund 
that will have as much as a million and a half or two million 
dollars in the revolving fund which is basically made up of 
monies that is arrived at from inspection fees or brand fees. 
 
The consultations that have gone on with the industry, the stock 
growers and other associated entities involved in the area, 
indicate that the flexibility that will be arrived at to respond 
quicker to the needs of the industry will be allowed under these 
changes. So this is something that comes after some discussion 
with the stakeholders in the industry and we think will actually 
streamline the operations of meeting the needs of the industry 
by having this revolving fund established. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the sections of the Act indicates that where there is no 
specific fee charged for services, it indicates that the minister 
will be given the authority to, and I think the quote is, “charge a 
fee to recover amounts incurred by the revolving fund to 
provide that service.” 
 
Do you not see this as a very . . . as a potentially controversial 
clause or point, where the minister may create a wide range of 
fees, different values of fees, and in the end probably the people 
out there who you’ve indicated wanted this in terms of 
streamlining and in terms of understanding and in terms of 
having a more workable system . . . Do you foresee that this 
may confuse things? 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The member will be interested to 
know that at the present time the system is balanced  the 
revenues coming in from the services I mentioned and the 
expenditures are pretty much in balance and therefore the 
revolving fund concept. 
 
But in the clause that you mentioned in the Bill, and just to 
quote: 
 

Where the minister provides a service through the 
revolving fund for which no fee is provided by Act or 
regulation, the minister may charge a fee to recover . . . 

 
These services that would be provided would only be at the 
request of the industry. And so obviously in requesting the 
services, there’s obviously an understanding of the industry that 
somewhere that money has to be recovered. And it would be 
recovered through the industry. 
 
So it’s a balancing act. But the industry is well aware of this 
clause and accepts the concept that if they request a service at a 
given time, that obviously a fee structure will be needed to 
replenish the revolving fund. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Thank you. Specifically it indicates that there 
will be exemptions of certain categories as far as the fees and as  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

far as actually charging them or crediting them back to the fund 
 I think the fur farming regulations, the game farming 
regulations, and there’s about four or five, as I understand it. 
 
Could you explain why these fees are not to be included in the 
fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I just want to say to the member 
that the game farms that you’re talking about, the reason that 
they’re not included in the revolving fund is because at the 
request of that industry, because it’s an emerging industry, they 
are not in a position to know exactly what the structure will be, 
what the balance will be between service and fees. 
 
So the option at some point of this industry coming into the 
revolving fund is obviously there, but they’re not quite ready at 
this point to be included in the fund. And so here again this is 
being done with the consent of the industry, both the 
established industry that is included in the revolving fund, and 
the emerging industry. And I think that’s a good way to look at 
it, as sort of the long-standing industry, the cattle or whatever 
that we tend to think of being included in the revolving fund, 
and then the emerging industry. And here again this is being 
done in consultation and approval of the industry. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  Mr. Minister, a final question I guess, sir, or 
nearly the final one, on administration. For those groups that 
have entered into this fund and are now part of it, prior the 
creation of this new fund, those obviously operated 
independently. Were there problems that have been identified 
regarding the administration of whether or not it’s the cattle 
industry, whether it’s the poultry; were there problems in terms 
of administration of those funds that existed separately and are 
we now inheriting those problems into a bigger picture as far as 
the complete fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  There are two reasons again why 
the revolving fund will work more effectively. I think the 
member alludes to it. But there were gaps in services under the 
old arrangement. I don’t want to go into all of them, although 
we could probably list some areas where we wanted a smoother, 
seamless servicing of the industry which this will do a better 
job of achieving. So that’s one side of it. 
 
But on the other side is the ease with which new services can be 
provided to the industry. Under the old arrangement, there had 
to be a budgetary processing and it could be months or even up 
to a year, a year and half, before new services could be 
implemented. Under the revolving fund it will be much easier 
to respond to new services because the revolving fund will be 
able to react much quicker. 
 
So two sides. One, it will be much more of a complete service 
with eliminating many of the gaps that were there; but secondly, 
it will be much quicker to respond to the needs of the industry. 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  You have indicated that the fees that will be 
charged of course are based on almost like a fee-for-service 
type of situation. And I guess there’s always the possibility that, 
through terrific management and the good workings of the  

fund, there will be a surplus. 
 
And I think the final point I’d like to ask you about, Mr. 
Minister, is that if there is a surplus, it indicates in the Bill that 
the surplus can be transferred to the general fund. Do you 
foresee that happening or is it the intent of the fund to work as 
close as possible to a break-even and that you may in fact adjust 
fees downwards if indeed you’ve shown that a surplus begins to 
exist? Or is this a way of ensuring that there will be additional 
monies since the fees can be set by the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  The objective of course of a 
revolving fund is to remain balanced, and you indicate 
obviously that’s the objective of a revolving fund. But 
obviously if the fund got too big you would not want to leave 
millions of dollars in a revolving fund. 
 
So the balance has been struck by saying that if there’s a 
surplus at any given time  less than half a million dollars, so 
that you have a cushion of about $500,000  that money 
would be simply left in the fund. 
 
So the anticipation is that with that kind of a cushion being 
built into the plan, that there really would never be a time when 
there would be a payment back to general revenue. And I think 
services and fees will be modified accordingly to make sure that 
if there is a surplus, it will be minimal. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the 
 Management of Forest Resources 

 
The Chair:  We’ll begin by having the minister introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
have with me on my right, Stuart Kramer, deputy minister; on 
my left, Rod Thompson, forester from the forestry branch; and 
behind me is Doug Kosloski, legislative analyst, policy and 
public involvement branch; and also Hugh Hunt, chief forest 
management agreement negotiator from the forestry branch. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I propose an amendment to 
clause 2 which reads as follows: 
 

Strike out clause (1)(e) of clause 2 of the printed Bill and 
substitute the following: 
 
“(e) ‘fees’ means any money, other than dues, including 
administrative penalties, interest charges and fees for 
renewal of forest products, reforestation, fire protection 
and suppression, forest inventory, seedlings and insect and  



2636  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

disease control, that is owed pursuant to this Act, the 
regulations or a licence, to: 

 
(i) the Crown; or 
 
(ii) a forest management fund”. 

 
 
(1230) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
I believe there are still some important issues to be discussed on 
this particular Bill. Yesterday we were discussing 
co-management and the interpretations of co-management and 
how the co-management boards would work in relationship to 
this particular Act. 
 
I wonder if you have an explanation today of how those 
co-management boards will work in conjunction with the forest 
management and what kind of relationship they have with the 
Act. Are they an advisory board? 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. Order. I’ll have to remind the hon. 
member that clause 1 has been agreed and we are past it. We 
are now on the amendment to clause no. 2. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 
 
The Chair:  What is your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  I would urge, by leave, that rather 
than make a motion to go back to clause 1 that these questions 
be allowed. I think the minister has agreed. 
 
The member wasn’t quite ready on clause 1 and we’ve agreed 
to allow these questions. 
 
The Chair:  I would prefer someone to ask, with leave, to 
revert to clause 1. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would ask 
leave of the Assembly to revert back to clause 1. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, the 
same question all over again without going through all the 
words. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I thank the hon. member for his question. 
Co-management boards are something that we have been 
involved with for several years here in Saskatchewan, and 
they’ve been very successful. And by and large, we have some 
that are working real well, some which could use a little touch 
up here and there. 
 
But the role of a co-management board is to involve the local 
people, the stakeholders that may be interested in a forest 
resource, and to . . . they’re more of an advisory board but 

certainly their ideas and their concerns are given serious 
consideration, and we only see room for more co-management 
and more input from stakeholders, people who live in the forest. 
 
And every board is different. Some of them perhaps deal 
around employment opportunities and certainly the concern of 
the resource is utmost in everybody’s book. So we see 
co-management boards playing a very important role. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
if you could indicate who serves on the co-management board? 
How do they become a member of the co-management board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Every co-management board is different 
and some are large, some are small. We have some 
co-management boards with Indian bands; for an example with 
Peter Ballantyne Band, we have a co-management agreement 
there. But if we look at a broader scale, the east side forest 
management area, we have provincial stakeholders as well as 
local input. 
 
So the makeup of the board is determined on the basis of the 
issues being discussed, the area of the province, the size of the 
area, and the scale. And so our goal is to involve everybody that 
has expressed an interest or that we feel has an interest in these 
co-management boards and agreements. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. For those 
co-management boards outside of the reserve settings, outside 
of reserves, do other stakeholders other than the people actually 
living in the area get to participate in the co-management board, 
such as a hunting outfitter who may have his block, hunting 
block, in that area but doesn’t reside in the area. Does he get 
some input on to the co-management board? Or do cottage 
owners who own some property in the area but who do not 
reside in the area, do they get some input on the 
co-management board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes they do, and again if we use the east 
side FMA (Forest Management Agreement) as an example, we 
have groups, provincial groups like the wildlife federation, 
Nature Saskatchewan, FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) involved in that process. And again we 
welcome the input, and we seek out the input from any group 
that we feel has an interest in a particular area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well why then, Mr. Minister, was there 
such a controversy up in the Montreal Lake area with the 
cottage owners and the co-management plan dealing with the 
federal government, the provincial government, and some of the 
native bands in the area? The cottage owners in that particular 
area felt that they had no input. They had no voice on the 
co-management board and seemed to have a great deal of 
concern about some of the things that were happening in the 
area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Our co-management boards are in an 
advisory capacity. The Montreal Lake proposal that it was, was 
federally driven. In fact the federal government never even 
consulted the province, let alone the cottage owners and the 
people that were affected. And that’s why that one blew up and  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

did not work. 
 
Consultation is the only way that we are going to succeed in 
having public input and arriving at good decisions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. On another 
section of the Bill, clause 32, it says: 
 

On the request of an officer, every person who has a 
licence shall immediately produce it for examination. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, if someone is out in the bush cutting trees, 
is he expected to carry his logging licence, his permits, around 
with him at all times? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes. The idea is to have the licence with 
you. And this may, in the bush, may mean that the licence is in 
the logging . . . or the camp headquarters or in a vehicle. And 
certainly if it is not there, we will give a certain amount of time 
to produce it. Similarly, if you fail to have your driver’s licence 
with you, you’re usually given a few hours to produce it. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have never 
seen one of these licences, so I don’t know what kind of a 
physical object we’re talking about here. Is it a significant piece 
of paper, or is it just the size of a driver’s licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  It’s a standard one-sheet piece of paper 
basically. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well perhaps, Mr. Minister, if the 
individuals who hold these licences have to carry them with 
them, you should be looking at somewhat smaller piece of 
paper, maybe even something that wouldn’t deteriorate carrying 
around in your wallet all the time while you’re working. 
 
An Hon. Member:  Something you could put on their 
forehead. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  That’s right. And perhaps the paper 
could be of a quality similar to that being used in hunting 
licences where they don’t deteriorate simply by wear and 
weather. 
 
Mr. Minister, under section 41, term supply and licences, it says 
here that: 
 

The minister, in accordance with regulations, may grant a 
term supply licence conferring the right to harvest 
specified forest products. 
 

What do you mean by that? I’m thinking of in the Hudson Bay 
area where one of the logging outfits there deals in peeler bolts. 
How does that apply to this particular piece of the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The clause is designed to assist the small, 
independent operators in obtaining a supply of wood. They may 
only operate part of the year, and they may need a wood supply 
for a few months. And it’s to address these concerns. It’s not 
expected to be used in the case of large companies. But an 
independent operator that would like to harvest wood for a few  

months, it’s an opportunity to provide a supply of wood for 
him. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, because I had 
a concern there that if you took a large section out of the forest 
of one particular type of product, that you could be developing 
a monoculture in that area, or you could have very young trees, 
one or two years old, and 50-year-old trees and nothing in 
between there. So I think it’s important to keep that in mind. 
 
Section 43, where it gives you the right to adjust the terms of a 
licence, and then it says that you: 
 

(b) shall pay to the licensee who holds the term supply 
licence, in accordance with the regulations, the value of all 
forest products to which that licensee is entitled . . . 
 

Who determines what fees that will be paid to the license holder 
if those wood products are denied him under terms that he 
would normally have accessed them in his licence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  The compensation rates will be set out in 
regulations, and those will be worked on during the coming 
year. And we certainly will be consulting, with industry and 
anyone else that may be affected by this clause, to come up with 
an appropriate rate and schedule. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you 
need some sort of a variable factor in there though that allows 
for adjustments in the market-place. If you set the schedule this 
year, five years down the road it may not be relevant 
whatsoever. I think it has to be market sensitive to the time of 
the change and to the long-term impact. 
 
If you won’t give someone a deposition to go in and take a 
special type of wood out of an area by another licence holder, 
that person may not have wanted to harvest that particular form 
of wood at this particular time, understanding that maybe five 
years down the road this particular type of product would have 
a greater value or that the trees would have grown to a larger 
degree and would now become a different type of product. So I 
think you have to take that into consideration also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, you are right. And we certainly want 
to look at all avenues when we develop these regulations, and 
we welcome all input. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Under section 
52, I wonder if you could explain why the government should 
be able to direct to someone who has wood residue products 
who they will sell or deliver those wood residue products to. 
Should they not have the opportunity to make their own 
marketing decisions as to who they would supply those 
products to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  By and large it will be market driven; 
however it gives us the opportunity to become involved to find 
a market or a way of utilizing this wood. The purpose is we do 
not waste the material, so we want to salvage as much as we 
can. And if need be, we will become involved and help the 
harvester find a market or a processor for the product. 



2638  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

(1245) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Your 
explanation though doesn’t jibe with what the Act says. It says 
you will direct that to a particular processor, direct that person 
to sell the wood residue to the owner of any processing facility 
that the minister may specify. 
 
It says you can tell whomever is cutting wood that their sawdust 
will be delivered to point A and sold to that person. They don’t 
have the choice even though perhaps processor B is offering 
more money. Nevertheless you could direct it to go to A. I think 
your position should be to facilitate finding a processor who 
would deal with the wood residues and also to say that all wood 
residues should be processed if they exceed a certain minimum. 
 
But when it comes to the government saying you will deliver all 
of your wood residues to processor A, I think that is getting a 
little Draconian if not a whole lot Draconian. The government’s 
role in this should be to say that the wood residues are used and 
then allow the person with the wood residue to find their own 
market. And if they need some assistance in finding a market, 
then the government could play a role in advising there. But I 
don’t think the government should be playing a role of directing 
the producers who have the wood residues as to which 
processor they must use. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I thank you. Also in this clause, it does 
specifically say that we will not cause undo financial hardship 
to either party. Plus we have an amendment to clause 52, and I 
apologize for not identifying that at your first comments. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Hopefully 
your amendment will allow the producers to make their own 
marketing decisions while still utilizing their residue, under 
protection of forest products, forests and trees. 
 
What provisions in this Act is available for the protection of 
products that one would not normally associate with forest 
products in that sense? I’m thinking of an article, or I heard on 
the radio, dealing with fungi, mushrooms in British Columbia. 
Is there some provisions in here for some temporary protection 
to be provided in those circumstances where in isolated cases 
there are special plants and animals that need some form of 
temporary protection until investigations can be carried out and 
perhaps more long-term measures put in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Yes, and in our legislation we certainly 
recognize the importance of other forest products, fungi, 
mushrooms for an example. And any commercial operator 
would have to have a licence to work in any particular area, and 
we would do an inventory prior to that to see if the area would 
sustain the commercial operations in addition to the local use. 
 
And we’re also looking at completing our representative areas 
network across the northern part of the province which will 
identify key areas, and we will ensure species’ diversity and 
abundance in that way as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Although my  

concern is more related to after the licence has been granted, 
something is discovered in an area that needs to be investigated. 
You simply don’t want to have clear-cutting going through the 
area before that investigation is carried out. What measures or 
what protections are available through this Act to temporarily 
isolate a small area so that an investigation can be carried out of 
that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Another good feature of this new Act is 
that the forest companies, the FMA holders, have to also in 
their inventory not only identify harvestable trees, but other 
important natural features and species and products that can be 
used. So this will be done in the overall inventory process 
which we’ll be involved in as well. 
 
So we will have a fairly good handle on where some of these 
particular other products from the forest are located and how 
much can be used. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is this 
inventory done prior to the granting to the of the licence, 
immediately after the granting of the licence, or is it added to on 
an ongoing as the forest company would utilize their privileges 
throughout their block? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Another new activity is that all FMA 
holders are required to do an environmental impact assessment. 
Some have completed this process. Others are just starting. So 
we’ll have a handle on that. 
 
Also every 10 years, a 20-year plan has to be submitted by the 
companies, and those 10-year plans . . . or 20-year plans every 
10 years will also identify these types of issues and concerns. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately 
what you describe would not deal with the circumstances that 
are being described in British Columbia where a licence was 
granted and an unusual feature was found later while 
production was ongoing. The people concerned about it don’t 
want to have to wait five years down the road for another 
review process to take place, because at that point in time that 
particular feature may no longer exist. 
 
So you need, I believe, some sort of measure in place in the Act 
to deal with very specific, localized circumstances until an 
investigation can be carried out to determine whether or not, 
say, something is an endangered species in that area  an 
endangered plant or something  whether it actually exists or 
whether or not it was just someone’s imagination that they had 
found a particular product in that area and raised a concern 
about it. 
 
I think you need to be able to set aside a very localized area on 
a temporary, short-term basis to be able to deal with any of 
those types of concerns that may arise. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Clause 60(1) does provide, under 
protection of forest products, forests and trees, the opportunity 
for an officer to go in and order harvesting or any damage that 
may be occurring in a fragile area to be stopped immediately, 
and an assessment could be done. And if found suitable, the  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

harvesting could continue. 
 
So we do have that option if a unique area is stumbled across; 
we can stop operations whether it’s a road, or tree cutting, or 
whatever the case might be. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister, that was the 
information I was looking for. 
 
Under section 62, dealing with insects and animals, you talk 
about the minister may make an order requiring the owner or 
occupant to take measures to control the insects or diseases or 
to dispose of trees or vegetable matter that may be 
contaminated. Just who would qualify as either the owner or the 
occupant in this particular clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I guess in general in the North, certainly on 
the Crown land, the province is the owner and the FMAs are the 
operator. So it would be up to either, or a joint effort to control 
problems. 
 
On private land an issue which has surfaced more recently is the 
Dutch elm disease. This does give us the opportunity to order 
the clean-up and control of Dutch elm disease on private land or 
in communities. So it’s basically whoever the owner of the land 
is, is responsible. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. My concern 
was if someone had a hunting lease in the area, or a fishing 
camp, are they the owner of a certain block of forest there that 
they would have to bear the costs of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  No. As you say, it would be a lease, so we 
would still be the owner. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. That will 
relieve some fishing camp owners and some hunter . . . people 
who have hunting camps in the North. 
 
There has been some concern, Mr. Minister, in the past about 
the stumpage fees that have been proposed under this particular 
Act. Who did you consult with when proposing the changes to 
the stumpage fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Obviously we are discussing this with 
industry. And because the discussions are in process and both 
parties have agreed not to discuss details, the discussions are 
ongoing and we will look to an appropriate solution. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Well thank you, Mr. Minister. This is an 
extremely important industry for Saskatchewan. I believe we 
have about 11,000 people employed in the industry, generating 
about a half a billion dollars worth of economic activity in the 
province. And I think we need to do everything we can to make 
sure that the industry remains a viable industry. 
 
We need to also be conscious of the fact that the province owns 
the Crown land and therefore it certainly deserves a return on 
that. But we have to also make sure that the industry remains in 
a strong and viable position. 
 

Part of this Act is setting out 20-year licences. But within that it 
allows the government to make changes to those licences in the 
effect of setting stumpage fees I believe, based on a 10-year 
cycle. Now when those stumpage fees are changed, Mr. 
Minister, at the 10-year time frame, what input do the 
companies or the licence holder have in that? Is it simply the 
government who sets the stumpage fee, or do the people who 
hold the FMAs, do they have the opportunity to negotiate those 
stumpage fees and to have direct input into what those 
stumpage fees will be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  These agreements will be renewed through 
negotiation. And we certainly value the forest industry and we 
want to try to arrive at fair negotiations. I guess if all else fails 
the government does have the power to initiate new fees or 
whatever. But our goal is to work with the industry to come up 
with agreeable solutions. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then if it’s 
your contention that you wish to negotiate this and provide 
amenable negotiations and an agreeable price on the stumpage 
fees, perhaps it would be desirable then to have a cap placed on 
the maximum changes allowed within those stumpage fees. I’m 
greatly concerned that we could run into a situation that 
occurred with workers’ compensation where some of the people 
involved in that had fee increases of up to 500 per cent. 
 
They didn’t have an option of negotiating it. They didn’t have 
an option of changing it. The government simply said, through 
the Workers’ Compensation Board this is what your new fee 
will be and you will pay it. 
 
So I think, Mr. Minister, that it’s important that there either be a 
cap or a ceiling placed on the amount of change. The initial 
negotiation for the stumpage fee will have been put in place 
when the licensee took out the licence. They have a 20-year 
agreement so you should have a cap in there or a ceiling on the 
maximum amount of change that would be allowed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly there’s a wide fluctuation in the 
value of forest products. Our goal is to work with industry. 
There’s an opportunity for industry to sign this agreement and 
we certainly will not be making any unreasonable demands or 
I’m sure the opposition of the day will be on our case. 
 
But we’re looking forward to working with industry, and it’s 
hard to put a cap on when you’re looking 10, 20 years down the 
road. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have some 
other concerns as they deal with some of the other aspects of 
this, but they deal with fire-fighting and pest control and some 
of the other items, and I think reforestation, that are impacted 
on this, and we can deal with them in estimates with the 
Environment department. 
 
And hopefully you will provide us the answers, and through 
regulations make any necessary changes. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



2640  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

Clause 2 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I’d like to propose an 
amendment to Clause 2 which reads as follows: 
 

Strike out clause (1)(e) of clause 2 of the printed Bill and 
substitute the following: 
 
“(e) ‘fees’ means any money, other than dues, including 
administrative penalties, interest charges and fees for 
renewal of forest products, reforestation, fire protection 
and suppression, forest inventory, seedlings and insect and 
disease control, that is owed pursuant to this Act, the 
regulations or a licence, to: 
 

(i) the Crown; or 
 
(ii) a forest management fund”. 
 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2641 
 June 14, 1996 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the 
 Management of Forest Resources 

 
The Chair:  When the committee recessed before the lunch, 
we had gave approval to the House amendment by the minister 
to clause no. 2. We had not okayed clause no. 2 as amended. So 
clause 2 as amended, is that agreed? 
 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 21 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott: — Mr. Chairman, I propose an amendment to 
clause 21 which reads as follows: 
 

Amend clause 21 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by adding the following subsection after subsection 
(4): 
 

“(5) Notwithstanding any other provision in this Act, 
where dues and the manner of payment are set out in a 
licence or agreement respecting a period mentioned in 
this section, no changes may be made during that 
period respecting those dues or the manner of 
payment except in accordance with the licence or 
agreement”; 
 
(b) by renumbering subsections (5) to (8) as 
subsections (6) to (9). 
 

The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Hamilton:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s my pleasure, on 
behalf of the member for Regina Dewdney, to introduce to you 
and through you to all my colleagues in the Assembly, 29 
students that are seated in the west gallery. They’re from grade 
3 and 4 at Stewart Russell School. They’ve had a tour and 
they’re now going to watch the proceedings for a few minutes 
longer and be on their way. 

 
They have with them today their teacher, Terry Thomas. And 
my eyes not quite being what they used to, I do believe that’s 
the same Ms. Thomas that had taught my son and daughter. 
And so I’m just very pleased to welcome her here, and the 
chaperons, Mrs. Kossatz and Mrs. Ingram. 
 
I’d like to have all members give the students, teachers, and  

chaperons a warm welcome to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 20 
(continued) 

Clause 21 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 21 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 22 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I propose an amendment to 
clause 22 which reads as follows: 
 

Amend clause 22 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by adding the following subsection after subsection 
(4): 

 
“(5) Notwithstanding any other provision in this 
Act, where fees and the manner of payment are set 
out in a licence or agreement respecting a period 
mentioned in this section, no changes may be made 
during that period respecting those fees or the 
manner of payment except in accordance with the 
licence or agreement”; 
 

(b) by renumbering subsections (5) and (6) as 
subsections (6) and (7). 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 23 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 26 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I propose an amendment to 
clause 26 which reads as follows: 
 

Strike out clause 26 of the printed Bill and substitute the 
following: 
 
“Fees for forest management 

26(1) The fees for the renewal, protection, development 
and management of forest products are to be paid, in 
accordance with section 22, to: 

 
(a) the Crown; or 
 
(b) a forest management fund established: 
 

(i) by the licensee; or 
 



2642  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

(ii) by any person designated by the minister. 
 

(2) Where those fees are paid into a forest management 
fund established and administered by the licensee or any 
person designated by the minister, the licensee or other 
person shall ensure that those fees are used for the 
purposes of renewal, protection, development and 
management of forest products as set out in the licence 
or regulations, as the case may be”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 26 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 27 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 33 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess there’s a 
few questions I have in this particular clause, when you look at 
the situation. And I’ve only got about maybe 5, 10 minutes here 
 and also an amendment. 
 
I guess the first question I have for the minister is in reference 
to an article that was shared with you dated June 7, 1996 in 
which it’s a personal viewpoint of a writer, a Saskatoon 
resident. And I can’t pronounce his name, but I believe it’s 
Thijs Kuiken. And I’m just going to quickly read just a few 
paragraphs of that if I may, and I quote: 
 

Last week, I flew from Buffalo Narrows to Dore Lake in a 
float plane and passed over kilometre after kilometre of 
nearly untouched wilderness, a beautiful patchwork of dark 
green spruce trees, light green aspen and grey-green 
muskeg interspersed with lakes and rivers. 

 
And they also spoke about the people that live in the area 
around Dore and Smoothstone Lakes, and I quote: 
 

The people . . . in the area . . . carry out a number of 
activities, including fishing, hunting and trapping fur 
animals. By and large, they have not had a major impact on 
the forest ecosystem. 
 

Then he goes on to talk about, you know, the wonderful land 
that we have and the beautiful trees and the fact that the 
northern part of our province is just an absolutely beautiful 
place to be. 
 
And he also goes on to state that: 
 

We who live in Saskatchewan are lucky because we still 
can choose whether we want to keep this forest as it is. 
Many people in the world have no such choice. 
 
For example, in the Netherlands where I used to live, most 
natural forests were cut down several centuries ago. What 
remain are man-made plantations, raised for the production 
of wood. In such plantations, the trees are planted in rows, 
hardly any plants grow on the forest floor and few birds or 
mammals are present. 

Then he goes on to talk about other areas like Guatemala where 
they’re cutting forest down at a alarming rate, and that of course 
is going to have a drastic effect on the pattern of rainfall. And 
then he also speaks again about his personal viewpoints: 
 

I do not wish to present these viewpoints here or to pass 
judgement on them. But I want to make clear that the 
forest is still there and that we who live in Saskatchewan 
can choose to use it wisely or not. 
 

Now these are some very positive, powerful statements by this 
writer. And I share that with you, Mr. Minister, to indicate to 
you the extreme balance that we must achieve between the 
development of the forestry industry as well as the sustainable 
management of that industry, plus the fact that we need to also 
look at the role that the northern people play in preserving some 
of the forests and certainly maintaining a positive balance. 
 
And the big thing when we speak about co-management, and 
we’ve been dealing with this issue on a number of occasions 
here, and I share with you a press release from Weyerhaeuser 
Canada. And I’d like to ask one of the pages to take this to the 
minister. 
 
And this is the extreme important matter that I speak about 
when we talk about your interpretation on the difference of 
co-management versus advisory committee. And I turn your 
attention, Mr. Minister, to the second page. And this letter is 
from Steve Smith, the vice-president of Weyerhaeuser. And I 
quote from his press release: 
 

Smith says the idea for the new committee was to provide 
advice to Weyerhaeuser in its planning. There are no plans 
for a committee or board that would have the power to 
decide where harvesting can take place, Smith says. The 
authority is vested in the Minister of SERM. 

 
In reference to some of the different ways that the people of the 
North view the roles of co-management and also the difference 
in the terms of how the different industries view the role of 
co-management. 
 
And I put it to you, Mr. Minister, first of all what’s your 
interpretation of co-management; and secondly, as Minister of 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), you do have that authority; is there any way 
through this Act that you can return the authority to the local 
co-management boards to really justify their position when it 
comes to the balancing needed for the environment versus 
business. 
 
(1415) 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I think the key word in your comments was 
balancing, and certainly we all want a sustainable forest 
industry; we all want jobs; we want economic opportunities. 
And it is a balancing act. And certainly the role of advisory 
boards, co-management boards, is to provide input, and we as 
well as industry are cooperating and working with groups, 
hearing what they have to say. And although perhaps the forest 
company does not have to adhere to every particular thing, a lot  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

of ideas brought forward are being incorporated. 
 
For an example, environment impact assessments were not 
required, but because of the people lobbying for such a thing, 
the forest companies are all . . . either have completed or are in 
the process of doing this. And we will continue to have this 
input from the public and there’ll be more input because people 
are demanding such. 
 
As you pointed out, other countries in the world don’t have the 
opportunity and choices which we still have before us. So our 
goal is to work with the public and industry and come up with 
the best balanced approach possible. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you. I guess in essence we can talk 
about co-management and you have a number of forestry 
companies operating in the North. There’s obviously got to be 
some guidelines or some framework to establish what a 
co-management board should be or have to look like. We 
shouldn’t leave it to the interpretation of the forestry 
companies. 
 
One forestry company could be doing really well in 
co-management while the other could completely disregard the 
whole system and the whole process saying, well we’ll put 
these advisory committees in, period. 
 
So I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that there has to be some 
effort, and I would strongly urge you to put in some kind of 
guidelines before this thing becomes implemented by next year, 
to try and determine what exactly is interpreted as a 
co-management board, and what authority the co-management 
board will have, especially when it comes into relation to the 
management of forest products. 
 
And certainly the northern native people have a vested interest 
in seeing that this whole industry is managed properly and this 
would really clear the confusion, and it would for once set a 
precedent saying that yes, we are concerned about the 
environment, and yes we will listen to the co-management 
board, and yes we will ask them to help us protect the forest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Certainly the definition of co-management 
boards . . . every one is different because every particular area 
that we have one, there’s different issues, different groups of 
people involved. The key thing is to get the stakeholders and 
the people at the table and then decide what the terms of 
reference will be, what they would like to achieve. 
 
And so we are certainly committed to working towards this 
goal. And the regulations, which you yourself are most 
welcome to participate in development of, we wish to address 
as many of these concerns as we can and do what’s best for all 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. In view of what 
you’ve said, I still have the very strong belief that there is a lot 
of confusion out there on the issue and authority of 
co-management boards. There are no clear rules, there are no 
clear guidelines, nor is there any interpretation for the role of 
co-management boards. 

The people of the North deserve greater control over the 
extraction of all resources, which includes forestry. And that 
this control can only be achieved through two means: 
ownership of the resource industries and/or the participation of 
the industry through clear laws that grant greater power to local 
co-management boards in this instance. 
 
The fishermen, the trappers, the wild rice users, cabin owners, 
tourism industry, and the community people, have equal, if not 
a greater, vested interest in balancing environmental concerns 
alongside forestry industry. 
 
The forestry industry has aspirations. And in order for us to all 
come to a true level of co-management in the pursuit of 
sustainable and equitable forest management, we must have 
good, solid co-management policies in boards, and powers. The 
people of the North must be finally heard. 
 
We know that government cannot guarantee a balance on its 
own. Therefore the impacted and affected people deserve and 
must have the opportunity to ensure that forests are for ever, 
and that our children and our grandchildren can continue to 
enjoy the rich, natural forests in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Therefore I move a proposed House amendment to: 
 

Amend clause 33 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 
after the words “the minister may enter into a forest 
management agreement with any person.” the words: 

 
“but whereas the excluded and impacted northern 
communities shall have equal or greater authority on 
management decisions of northern resources operating in 
their regions, but also seek partial ownership of the 
resource industries operating in northern Saskatchewan. 
Furthermore, in relation to this Act, there will be greater 
powers and authorities to local co-management committees 
to allow equal or greater influence with forestry and 
government parties on forestry management issues. 
 

Thank you. 
 
The Chair:  I thank the member for supplying us with the 
amendment earlier, and after looking at the amendment and 
relating it to the Bill, I find that the amendment to clause 33 as 
moved by the member from Athabasca is proposed in the form 
of a preamble and does not constitute an effective or operable 
amendment and is therefore out of order. 
 
I refer members to Beauchesne’s, 6th edition, citation 
698(4)(b). I rule the amendment as out of order. 
 
Clause 33 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Belanger:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s a bit of 
confusion as to the reason the amendment was called out of 
order. I would like to get further clarification on that matter, 
please. 
 
The Chair:  I will read the reason one more time. I would  



2644  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

assume that if the member wants to challenge the Chair there 
are proper . . . The amendment to clause 33 as moved by the 
member from Athabasca is proposed in the form of a preamble 
and does not constitute an effective or operable amendment and 
is therefore out of order. 
 
I refer members to Beauchesne’s, 6th edition, citation 
698(4)(b), and because of that rule, out of order. 
 
Clause 34 agreed to. 
 
Clause 35 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I propose an amendment to 
clause 35 which reads as follows: 
 

Amend subclause (b)(ii) of clause 35 of the printed Bill by 
striking out “in accordance with the regulations”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 35 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 36 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I propose new clause 36 
which reads as follows . . . 
 
The Chair:  Order, order. I think according to Beauchesne’s, 
any new clauses should be dealt with at the last. We will go 
through all the clauses first. And then if you’re adding a new 
clause, it’ll come at the end of the Bill. 
 
Clause 36 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 37 to 51 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 52 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  I propose an amendment to clause 52 
which reads as follows: 
 

Amend subsection (1) of clause 52 of the printed Bill by 
striking out “The minister” and substituting “Unless 
otherwise specified in a licence, the minister”. 
 

Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 52 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 53 to 75 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 76 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I propose an amendment to 
clause 76 which reads as follows: 
 

Amend clause (1)(e) of clause 76 of the printed Bill by 
striking out “22” and substituting “23”. 
 

Amendment agreed to. 

Clause 76 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 77 to 107 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 108 
 
Mr. Krawetz:  I move that: 
 

Clause 108 of the printed Bill is amended by deleting the 
words “on proclamation” where they appear therein and 
substituting the following words: 
 
“upon consideration and acceptance by the Committee of 
the Whole of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of 
regulations proposed pursuant to this Act”. 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 108 agreed to. 
 
(1430) 
 
Clause 36 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I propose a new clause 36 
for the Bill, which reads as follows: 
 

Add the following clause after clause 35 of the printed 
Bill: 
 
“Changes, amendments and alterations 

36(1) In this section, “terms” means those provisions 
in a management licence issued pursuant to section 19 
of The Forest Act or in a forest management 
agreement entered into after the coming into force of 
this Act respecting: 

 
(a) the rights of the holder of the licence or 
agreement for the harvesting of forest products; 
 
(b) the area within which the licence rights apply 
and the location, quantity and type of forest 
products specified in a licence or agreement; and 
 
(c) the compensation for the loss of improvements 
and forest products respecting land withdrawals. 
 

(2) No changes, amendments or alterations shall be 
made to terms set out in a management licence issued 
pursuant to section 19 of The Forest Act, except in 
accordance with the licence, until the first extension 
date of that licence after the coming into force of this 
Act. 
 
(3) At the first extension date of the licence mentioned 
in subsection (2) and at every second extension date 
after that, the licensee and the minister may agree in 
the licence to the manner of changing, amending or 
altering the terms, and no changes, amendments or  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2645 

alterations shall be made to those terms for the 
10-year period following that extension date except in 
accordance with that licence. 
 
(4) At each extension date mentioned in subsection 
(3), where the licensee and the minister do not agree 
in the licence to the manner of changing, amending or 
altering the terms, the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
may make regulations respecting those terms. 
 
(5) Subsections (3) and (4) apply, with any necessary 
modification, to a forest management agreement.” 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank the officials here today and for their work 
during the past years in bringing forward this very complex Act. 
And I appreciate their help. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like 
to thank the minister and his officials for coming in today and 
for answering our questions, and we look forward to working 
with them in the future and hope that this Bill fulfils the need 
that is out there in the manner that we all hope it prescribes. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 111  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life 
Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 112  An Act to amend The Teachers 
Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 96  An Act to amend  
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move the Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 97  An Act to amend  
The Department of Agriculture Act 

Hon. Mr. Shillington:  I move this Bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read the third time and passed under 
its title. 
 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the  
Management of Forest Resources 

 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Scott:  Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 20 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The committee reported progress on Bill No. 92. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of 
Labour Relations between Health Sector  

Employers and Employees 
 
Hon. Mr. Anguish:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to move second reading of The Health Labour 
Relations Reorganization Act. 
 
As all members know, part of the health reform process in 
Saskatchewan involved the creation of health district boards. As 
the health delivery system has been reorganized, there has been 
some concern and perhaps some confusion over the issue of 
union representation and jurisdiction. The health reform process 
has established new employment relationships. 
 
As the health district system continues to evolve and health 
services are integrated, old employment relationships will also 
need to evolve. I think we can agree it is desirable to promote 
the integration of the delivery of health services as well as 
develop consistency regarding the terms and conditions of 
employment amongst health sector employers and employees. 
Given that the need to examine collective bargaining structures 
in the health care system becomes quite clear, these are 
complex issues that cannot be resolved solely on the basis of 
existing practices and tradition. 
 
The Trade Union Act does not provide the Labour Relations 
Board with the necessary scope to enable it to address many of 
the specific issues faced by the parties in the health care sector. 
While our system works best if contentious issues can be 
worked out by negotiation and consensus, it is not always 
possible to resolve the issues in this way. 
 
When the health district boards were created four years ago, 
both the employers and unions determined that the best way to 
resolve the issues facing them was through bargaining and  



2646  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

consensus. This government is committed to that collective 
bargaining process. 
 
Both parties should be commended for what they have 
achieved. However, it has become apparent that not every issue 
could be resolved within the legislative framework of The 
Trade Union Act, yet the need for a resolution of these issues is 
beyond dispute. Hence the legislation before us here today. 
 
I want to point out to all members that both the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations — SAHO — and the 
health sector unions support this legislation and the 
appointment of a commissioner to address these issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the crux of this legislation. It is a way to 
have an independent, objective look at the outstanding labour 
relations issues in the health care sector. It is an attempt to 
resolve outstanding issues without the acrimonious debate and 
potential work stoppages. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us is a way to resolve 
outstanding labour relations issues in the health care sector 
fairly and effectively. This Act will require the appointment of a 
commissioner to look into the current collective bargaining 
structures in the health care sector. 
 
It requires the commissioner to consider many things, including 
new employment relationships that have been established as a 
result of the restructuring of the delivery of health services 
pursuant to The Health Districts Act; the need to promote the 
integration of the delivery of health services; the need to 
facilitate the development over time of consistency in terms and 
conditions of employment amongst health sector employers and 
employees; the history of trade union representation amongst 
employees of the health sector employers; and the need to 
promote orderly collective bargaining between health sector 
employers and employees. 
 
(1445) 
 
Perhaps at this point, Mr. Speaker, I should mention the scope 
of this legislation includes all district health boards and their 
major affiliates. This includes all denominational hospitals and 
other facilities approved under The Hospital Standards Act and 
the special care homes licensed under The Housing and 
Special-Care Homes Act. 
 
Members should also be aware that because no health district 
boards have yet been established in the North, many northern 
health services may not come under the scope of the 
commissioner’s inquiry. I think it is clear why this legislation is 
needed and what it will do. 
 
It is needed because the health system is changing. The 
collective bargaining structures within the system should reflect 
that change. In order to identify how those bargaining structures 
might best ensure harmonious employer-employee relations, the 
commissioner will examine all of the relevant issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to say a few words about how 
this legislation will in fact achieve its goals. The legislation  

before us is an enabling Act. While it allows for a variety of 
outcomes, none are guaranteed. The purpose of this legislation 
is to deal with some very real issues in the health sector, but it 
does not do this by presupposing a solution and then imposing 
that solution on the parties. 
 
Rather it establishes a mediated approach that makes possible a 
reasoned, comprehensive inquiry into the outstanding issues. 
And it provides a means whereby the results of that inquiry can 
be used to fashion a workable solution to the issues with which 
the respective parties must deal. 
 
The Act will require the commissioner to make regulations 
which will provide a new framework for collective bargaining 
in the health care sector. However, those regulations must be 
approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. And it will 
enable the Labour Relations Board to deal with implementation 
issues following the enactment of those regulations. 
 
During the commissioner’s examination, the jurisdiction of the 
Labour Relations Board to hear applications regarding 
appropriate bargaining units and the trade union jurisdiction 
will be suspended. The board’s jurisdiction will be reinstated on 
the earliest of, 90 days after the regulations are submitted to the 
minister, or the date the regulations are filed, or on a date set by 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both employers and employees in the health 
system have shown courage, they have shown vision and 
understanding, in this process. They have shown courage to 
meet the challenges of change head on. 
 
It would have been easy for either side to retreat to the 
traditional adversarial roles of collective bargaining, but they 
chose not to. They have shown an understanding that we must 
set aside adversarial roles to meet the challenge of change. 
 
Because of the vision they share, that of an effective health 
system meeting the needs of all, it’s important that narrow, 
partisan considerations be set aside. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to call on all members of the 
Assembly to support this legislation before us. And there are at 
least early indications that that support is there, because it’s a 
request made to this Assembly by parties on both sides of the 
issue who seek a remedy. 
 
Now is the time to examine how rational collective bargaining 
structures can best protect health interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. The Health Labour Relations Reorganization 
Act establishes the parameters for an inquiry into that question. 
It does not impose preconceived solutions. However, I am 
confident that with the help of the commission, the parties can 
find those solutions. And in doing so it will further strengthen 
the health system by providing the stability that that system 
needs. 
 
I want to commend both the Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations and the unions that represent their 
employees for their good faith and willingness to work together 
to find a common cause and a common solution. 



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2647 

Today those of us in this Assembly are called upon to do our 
part. That is what this legislation is all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly that his Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 
matter of this Bill, recommends it to the consideration of the 
Assembly. And I move that Bill No. 120, An Act respecting the 
Reorganization of Labour Relations between Health Sector 
Employers and Employees, be now read a second time. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Osika:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
thought we’d seen all the Bills this government would introduce 
a long time ago, particularly considering when they seem to 
want out of the House so badly. Perhaps it was just an 
opportunity for the Labour minister to have one last kick at the 
cat before he goes west, north, east, or whichever he may 
choose. 
 
In any case, Mr. Speaker, it seems a bit late into the session to 
be introducing this Bill. However, fortunately we . . . because 
this Act was in fact mentioned in the throne speech, we did 
some preliminary research on it. And we were also lucky 
enough to get some opinions and some legal advice on short 
notice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill seems to be a positive step for health care 
unions. Finally this government has decided to listen to what 
the people want. In this case it may only be because it has little 
effect on the government, or it may be because this Bill, like all 
other legislation they have introduced this session, gives even 
more power to the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we understand, this Bill was actually generated 
by the health care unions. They were looking for a more 
efficient bargaining process. The current system was full of 
jurisdictional issues and made the process confusing and 
probably less effective. After initiating the process, they got the 
support of SAHO, and then finally got the government 
involved. However the district health boards have not seen this 
legislation. 
 
I’m sure if the government let the people generate more 
legislation and took less of a top-down approach, we would 
come up with more laws that are supported. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the unions’ suggestion was to have a 
commissioner appointed who would make the decisions on the 
restructuring of unions. When the Health minister talked about 
this Bill last week, he assured people that this process would be 
independent from his government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a real concern about this Bill. If the 
government can indeed keep out of the process and let the 
review be independent, we will not object to the Bill. However, 
if the government plans on using this Bill to play controlling, 
political games, we will object. 
 
I’m absolutely certain that when the unions approached the  

government it was with the clear intent that the commissioner 
would remain free from government control. This is something 
we will be watching for when this legislation is implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, any questions that we have concerning this Bill, 
we can ask in Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I listened 
to the minister as he gave his reasons for the Bill, or the piece 
of legislation that has been brought to this Assembly at the late 
hours of a lengthened time period in the Assembly. And while I 
can concur with the fact that there appears to be some working 
arrangement between SAHO and the unions regarding the 
implementation of this Act and this Bill, there are still some 
questions to be asked. 
 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, I have a few concerns on the basis of 
what do the membership at the bottom of the ladder basically 
say about the Bill. When you look at the piece of legislation, the 
fact that the unions themselves are saying we need to have 
better ability or more of an ability to bargain and represent our 
membership — I can see some real problems emerging in the 
fact that we have . . . with regards to the number of different 
bargaining units across this province. 
 
And while there is certainly a positive attitude about getting 
into and having one arm to bargain, the problems that may 
arise, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that as we look at the changes in 
health reform and the changes in health care and the delivery of 
health care in this province, we have many people who may say, 
well on the top  as union members, if you will  may say, 
yes this sounds like a good piece of legislation. And it certainly 
answers some of the concerns we have about the process of 
jobs and the opportunity for jobs, because if the hospital I 
happen to be working in today happens to shut down some 
more beds and I’m on the bottom of the ladder in my hospital, 
by amalgamating the working process and bargaining process, I 
then have the ability to move from this specific hospital to 
another jurisdiction and find myself a job. 
 
But what people may not realize is, the person in this other 
hospital all of a sudden where they felt quite comfortable in the 
fact that their facility may stay open, that they would have a job 
as you amalgamate and form one union or one bargaining unit, 
all of a sudden these individuals may find they are not in that 
position of having that job specifically waiting there for them. 
 
And so it appears to me that there are some concerns that need 
to be raised and need to be addressed, Mr. Speaker. And we 
talked with SAHO yesterday, who certainly have been in 
contact with some of the unions. And we’ve had, as far as the 
union leadership, there’s quite a positive feeling towards this 
piece of legislation before us. As far as SAHO, there’s a 
positive feeling towards the piece of legislation before us. 
 
But as was just mentioned, one has to ask, what about the 
district boards in general and the people who were elected 
across this province, and the people who deal directly with the 
employees? If there's a concern I have, it’s the fact that I look at  



2648  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

the piece of legislation in front of us and there is no appeal 
from an order or decision of the board pursuant to this Act. 
 
And I can see, Mr. Speaker, as a representative in this 
Assembly, when individuals are all of a sudden confronted with 
the realities of this piece of legislation, whether it’s tomorrow 
or two or three years down the road, there are going to be 
people coming to me. What can you do to help me? I’m 
working in a facility that continues to function, and yet all of a 
sudden someone from 200 miles away has the ability to come 
in. And because of their seniority, I find myself without a job. 
And I find as well, I don’t even have an appeal process. There 
is no mechanism for me to appeal the decision. 
 
I also find that this piece of legislation certainly gives a lot of 
powers to the commissioner. Now if the commissioner is going 
to take the time to listen and take the time to really review and 
talk to people who will be affected and then come up with a 
sound decision that seems to be agreeable to everyone, then we 
can certainly agree with that. We can certainly appreciate that. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, as I review the Bill, there seem to be 
some areas of this Bill that seem to be fairly Draconian in the 
piece of legislation. And I feel that we should allow a little 
more of a time period to debate this Bill and to get some more 
feedback. 
 
And the reason I’m speaking here this afternoon is so that we 
can bring out some of these concerns and hopefully get some 
feedback from the people at the bottom level, and not just the 
union leadership but some of the membership and even 
directorships within the districts and those members of the 
boards that have been elected to represent the individuals. 
 
And to allow that process to take place, at least through the 
weekend and into the first part of next week, I would move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 (1500) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
The Chair:  Let’s begin by inviting the minister to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We’ll be 
assisted today in our deliberations by Vic Taylor, the assistant 
deputy minister of Social Services; by Richard Hazel, who is 
the executive director, family and youth services division; by 
Phil Walsh, who’s the executive director of the income security 
division; by Deborah Bryck, who is director of our child day 
care division; and Bob Wilhlidal, who is our director of the 
budget branch. 
 
Item 1 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and I welcome your officials today. 
 
Mr. Minister, the last time that we were looking at estimates in 
this House, I was asking some general questions, and I would 
like to resume some of those general questions. 
 
At the time that we adjourned the last time, I was talking about 
safe homes for victims of abuse that are available to women and 
children across the province. And I do believe you gave me a 
number of locations of those safe homes that were located 
throughout the province. 
 
What I would like to do right now . . . I believe I didn’t really 
specify what I was getting at there. I wanted to know how many 
of those safe homes are located outside of Regina and 
Saskatoon. There’s a safe home or some sort of shelter for 
women in the province, other than Saskatoon and Regina; and 
where their locations are, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chairman, outside of Regina and 
Saskatoon would be the following transition or interval or safe 
houses, safe homes for families fleeing domestic violence. 
 
They would be the Battlefords Interval House in North 
Battleford. The Moose Jaw Women’s Transition Association 
house . . . the Moose Jaw transition house in Moose Jaw. There 
is the Yorkton Women in Need Shelwin House in Yorkton. The 
La Ronge native women’s organization. The Southwest Crisis 
Services in Swift Current. Wichihik safe shelter . . . oh, check 
that, that’s in Regina. There is the Hudson Bay Crisis Centre. 
There is the Prince Albert and District Community Service 
Centre. 
 
Beyond that . . . Those are all funded by the Department of 
Social Services. There are two other safe houses in the province 
which are funded by the federal government — Indian and 
Northern Affairs Canada — and they fund the shelter in 
Meadow Lake and one in Fort Qu’Appelle. If you add to those, 
that list, the shelters in Regina and Saskatoon, we have a total 
of 13 in the province. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like 
you to refer . . . I’d like to refer you, rather, to my concern about 
safe shelters for children. And as you well know, I have a grave 
concern about children on the inner streets in Saskatoon and 
Regina and throughout the province for that matter. 
 
I guess we’re struggling to try to find a way where we can have 
a safe house for children, particularly child prostitutes, that are 
on the streets in Saskatoon. The numbers are escalating, and I 
do believe that we are working towards a civilized society and a 
society that does value not only our children but our women 
and our young girls because we have to acknowledge that in 
fact they do have great value if given a chance in this province. 
 
As far as funding for a continued outreach program out of 
Egadz in Saskatoon, I understand from talks with you just 
yesterday, that orders in council may be made or granted by 
Social Services in order to fund emergency situations or 
situations that have come up that merit, in your opinion, merit  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2649 

having those funds for. And so at this time, I can see no greater 
need really, because of the violence and so on that’s associated 
with this, but mainly the assault on human dignity that is also 
associated with this situation and this problem. 
 
So I would like to get some clarification on orders in council. 
From my conversation with you yesterday, I understand that 
orders in council have to be granted the year previous to in fact 
the funds being accepted. So in fact if Egadz would have asked 
you for money to finance the outreach program, funding of 
which is over by the end of this month, this month of June, they 
would have had to make a request for that a year previous. I’m 
presuming that with escalating numbers of people in trouble in 
that area, that they would have certainly done this. I think they 
would have asked for it. 
 
So I’m asking you if there was a request by Egadz and in fact 
the community of Saskatoon  inadvertently it is that  to 
fund the outreach program for the year 1996-97. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chairman, I want to just, before 
answering specifically the member’s question, I want to say 
how much I appreciate, and I think all members of the House 
appreciate, her concern for this issue and the concerns she has 
brought to this House about that issue. While I may not have 
available to me some of the solutions on an immediate basis as 
the member would desire, there is no question we appreciate 
her interest in this issue. 
 
And if I may say, many of the observations which the member 
from Humboldt has made around this issue I fully agree with. 
She brought to the attention of the House yesterday the need for 
we, as a community and a society, to deal with those men who 
are abusing the children of our communities, because it’s 
nothing but abuse. And we as a community and a society need 
to find mechanisms to deal with those individuals. 
 
As we look at the needs of the young children in this regard, we 
need to look at the broad package and we know that many 
people, particularly in Saskatoon where this issue is of much 
importance  in other communities as well, but particularly in 
Saskatoon  there has been a great deal of work done by 
agencies and groups within that community, around the mayor’s 
task force, and so on. 
 
The Egadz program, as the member will know, consists of a 
variety of programs. One of them has been the outreach 
program. Much of the Egadz program is funded by the 
Department of Social Services and has been for some time. I 
was checking my notes. The department provides $283,000 to 
Egadz for three separate programs: the drop-in centre, the 
back-to-school program, and the day support program. The 
outreach program, as I understand it, began and existed with a 
three-year project funding from the federal government which 
began in 1992, which funding essentially was ended in 1995. 
And Egadz, I think has been able to find, through internal 
resources, the ability to carry the program on. But the federal 
funding has disappeared and that has presented the challenge or 
the problem for Egadz. 
 
To the member’s very specific question, Egadz has not  

approached the Department of Social Services in a formal way 
or at least to the central office. There was an application made 
from Egadz to the Department of Justice. They sought some 
funding under the victims assistance program to continue this 
street outreach program. In doing their budgeting, that proposal 
was not approved by the Department of Justice. And I’m also 
aware that there has been some approach on a more local basis 
from Egadz to the Saskatoon region of the department. I think 
that’s more recently. 
 
Just to be clear with the member, Mr. Chair, in terms of how 
programs are initiated and funded. It is typical that if a 
community group has a project which they believe merits 
funding, that they would make application either through 
existing programs or through a direct approach to the 
department. So as we move into our budgetary planning for the 
budget year, we would consider all of those applications or 
program initiatives or suggestions as we put together the 
budget. 
 
And I don’t hesitate in saying there are always more worthy 
applications and programs than we’ll have the resources to 
meet. That’s almost inevitable. And every year we have to go 
through that very difficult process of trying to allocate the 
resources where we believe they can be best utilized. 
 
After the budget is established, some aspects of department 
work, the issuance of social assistance cheques, the payment of 
our workers and so on, become functions of the department. 
However, when we want to provide funding to a third party, we 
will do that through an order in council. But the order in 
council is simply authorizing payment of budgeted amounts to a 
third party. So we work from the global budget, although some 
of that money must be authorized through orders in council. 
 
Now this is not to say that in an extreme circumstance, the 
department could recommend to the cabinet an order in council 
calling for new monies. Now that, however, would represent an 
overexpenditure above and beyond what we would have 
budgeted. 
 
In terms of the Egadz youth project, and we’ve just not had an 
opportunity as yet to complete our conversations around this, 
I’m hoping that you and I could sit down together further 
around the Egadz and the outreach program and the possibility 
or potentials that might exist for a safe house in Saskatoon; that 
we might work together and that we might together approach 
our federal colleagues and see if there isn’t some means by 
which in some combination we could begin to address both the 
issue of the outreach work at Egadz, but perhaps even more 
important, the issue of a safe house in Saskatoon. 
 
Just on that subject, we have had at least some limited 
experience about the safe house concept in Saskatoon. There 
was established within the walls of the St. Paul’s Hospital an 
area which was described and suggested to serve as a safe 
house for children and youth in trouble; not simply in the area 
of child prostitution, but children and youth in crisis or 
difficulty in Saskatoon. 
 



2650  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

The experience there I think demonstrated a number of things. 
It was not entirely successful. That may have been simply 
because of its location in a large, formal institution. I think 
we’ve had some learnings from that. 
 
I think before we re-establish something like that, we’d look at 
all the options. You would understand that to provide a 
24-hour, 7-day-a-week, 52-week-a-year safe house is a 
relatively expensive proposal unless we can team up with some 
other existing programing perhaps. And we’d want to be 
careful, I think, if we were going to just establish a standalone 
safe house, that that would be the very best use of those 
resources, given all of the needs of those young people, 
children in need, in the inner city. 
 
I’m certainly willing to work with yourself, and I think the two 
of us can perhaps work with some of our federal colleagues to 
look at some real options. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Murray:  With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Murray:  Thank you very much. And I thank the 
Minister of Social Services and the member from Humboldt for 
the courtesy. 
 
Seated in the west gallery is a group of students which I’m very 
pleased to introduce on behalf of my colleague and friend, the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar. We have from Milden a group 
of 24 grade 10 and 12 students who are here visiting, spending 
some time in the Assembly, and having a tour of the building 
later on. They are accompanied by teachers and chaperons 
Nicole Lay, Trisha Groves, D.J. Bursaw, Debbie Sparks, 
Lorraine Fennell, and Donna Keith. 
 
I hope that you are going to have a fine time while you’re here 
in Regina and in the building, and I will ask all my colleagues 
to join me in extending a warm welcome to all of you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you kindly, Mr. 
Minister, for that explanation. As time goes on in this House, a 
lot of things fall in place and a better understanding of what has 
I guess transpired in the past and what has been successful and 
what hasn’t is certainly valuable to me. 
 
Mr. Minister, when you had talked about the federal  

government funding the outreach program for three years, was 
that money that they gave specifically for that program, above 
and beyond any other payments or any money that came from 
the federal government to the provincial government for social 
services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, Mr. Chair, I’m just consulting my 
notes again. And they indicate that in 1992, Egadz received a 
three-year project funding of 50,000 per year from the federal 
health promotions directorate. And so it was direct funding 
from the federal government to Egadz. That would be above 
and beyond any of the transfer payments to the province. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, on the 
document you have there with you, is it stated that that was 
under the name of a specific program or for what specific 
reason did the federal government grant this? Did they have 
some sort of funding available for programs of that type at that 
time that they don’t have at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I can share with you the information I 
have, and I don’t have a lot, about that program. It’s indicated 
here that it came from the federal health promotions directorate 
for the “purpose of assisting street youth meet their health 
needs”. I suspect that Egadz designed the outreach program sort 
of under those broad parameters that would have fell then under 
the parameters of the health promotions directorate. 
 
It indicates that the project has a prevention and education 
focus while assisting youth to access existing medical 
resources. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. You had made mention 
of the use of St. Paul’s or a portion of it for a program that was 
in place for awhile to assist youth at risk. I won’t get into any 
in-depth figures or what not. I’m not going to ask you those 
kind of things. But what I would . . . obviously the program 
didn’t work because of the institutional structure that you 
mentioned. That sort of leads myself to thoughts about White 
Spruce and how in fact that’s going to work in an institutional 
structure also. I think I’ll get to that after though. 
 
Is there any chance then, if in fact an institutional structure of 
that kind didn’t work, that perhaps a safe house or some kind of 
a complex that may be donated by the city of Saskatoon, as far 
as tax exemptions and possibly a donation of some sort of 
structure for this, is it feasible to think that the Department of 
Social Services if in fact the federal government would assist 
us with this in let’s say splitting the cost of the ongoing 
treatment and staffing and so on  would the department of 
Social Services . . . do you think the Department of Social 
Services here would be willing to look at the funding of the 
ongoing program that may be needed through the safe house 
set-up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think . . . of course the 
member will understand that the minister would not commit 
sight unseen to any program expenditure. In terms of the 
conversations that we might want to participate in, in looking at 
potentials in Saskatoon, around the potential of a safe house, I 
think you’re right. We should appropriately speak with the city  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2651 

of Saskatoon, the municipal body. We may want to be in 
conversation with the district health board who is doing a fair 
bit of their own kind of programing in that area. 
 
We’d certainly want to work with the groups that have been 
involved in the mayor’s task force and groups like Egadz. And I 
think together we would want to work with the federal 
government. 
 
The challenge is to put the concept of a safe house into the 
continuum of services. I think we both agree that a safe house 
alone is not the answer to the problem. It may provide some 
answer to the need of some, but clearly there is a broader 
problem we really have to put this in the context of. 
 
So I think all of that put together means that we just have to sit 
down and see what the options are. The potential that was 
hoped for in St. Paul’s is that here you have an institution that is 
open 24 hours a day and fully staffed. The potential of finding 
another option like that, I don’t know how great that is. But it 
certainly would assist the work if you can find some 
circumstance which already exists on a 24-hour basis and not 
have to staff separately to provide the work. 
 
I as minister, and I know the department, would sure be willing 
to look at whatever options we can maybe create to try and meet 
the need. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Chair, I ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, in the Speaker’s 
gallery, we have a wonderful group of students from Lintlaw 
School. They are students that are in grade 3 and 4, and they’re 
in Regina today to observe the proceedings of the legislature 
and to enjoy some of the other sights and happenings around 
Regina. 
 
I would like to welcome them, and along with them, their 
teacher, Gwen Olshewski, is here and chaperons Joy Guy, Carol 
Smith, Bob Schindel, and Colleen Foster. I do hope that they 
are all here, and they were all able to make it. 
 
Your MLA, Ms. Draude, could not be here today. Something 
came up, and she had to leave. So on her behalf, I would like to 
welcome you to the Assembly. And I hope that you have a great 
time in Regina, and I’d like the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming this group. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair:  Just before I again recognize the member, you, I 
suspect inadvertently, used the proper name of a sitting 
member, and I just draw that to all members’ attention; that’s 
not in the rule book. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just have to make mention 
to them; you are going to get your drinks after. I’ll  

meet with you a little bit later on. Thank you. . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I don’t know. I think being in the Assembly 
they may get bull burgers. But anyway. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
Item 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, we’ll go off the topic of the safe 
houses. And I’d be interested in knowing what your forecast is 
for the number of people that may be on social assistance at this 
time next year. 
 
It seems that this is growing, this number. There are currently 
over 82,000 people on social assistance in the province, and if 
there’s any way of calculating or estimating how many people 
there may be on social services, I would appreciate having that 
number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just to be clear. I think I heard 
the member suggest that in fact case-loads are going up when in 
fact they’re going down. Perhaps not moving down as quickly 
as any of us would like, but the fact of the matter is they are 
going down. 
 
Year over year . . . We’re now in the month of June . . . Well I 
guess . . . (inaudible) . . . No I can’t do June; we’re not finished 
June. Let me go back to the month of May. In the month of 
May, 1994-95, the total number of cases  this will be 
households, not individuals, but households  the number of 
households then were 41,284. In ‘95-96, the month of May, it 
was 41,236  a small, a small decline. But in this year’s May, 
it’s 40,850, for a decline of, year over year, 386. 
 
And we are showing these trends month after month, year after 
year, that the case-load is gradually reducing. I guess the best 
that I could do by way of projection for a year from now would 
sort of take that gradual reduction line and extend it and see 
where we might be. 
 
I’m hoping that as we move through the process of redesigning 
social assistance, that in fact we will see a more rapid decrease 
of the actual number of households, the actual number of cases, 
receiving social assistance. But we have seen, over the last few 
years and month over month, declines. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. As one goes through the 
days in this legislature, you’re not always too sure whether or 
not you’re hearing right or everything is changing with you. But 
I thought last week or the week before that one of the hon. 
members from the third party had spoken of welfare rolls on the 
increase  82,000 as compared to 80,000. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Just if I may, Mr. Chairman, to the 
member  and I know she has not been in the House that long 
 I’m just going to give her a little advice: never believe a 
Tory number. 
 



2652  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

No, in fact what the Leader of the Opposition was doing was 
taking the month of  and I should have the article in front of 
me  he was taking the month of December one year and 
comparing it to the month of May or March in another year. 
You will see the fluctuations in the course of a year. The 
accurate comparison needs to be made months, as opposed to 
the month in the following year, so that you accept these 
seasonal trends. 
 
I would suggest that the Leader of the Third Party was just 
playing a little mischief with the figures. But if you compare 
year over year, month to month, you will see a reduction in the 
numbers. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess people can play 
with numbers in any way or form. However the fact is, from my 
recollection  let’s not even refer to the third party  my 
recollection of reading some of the stats, there was 
80,000-and-some people on welfare as of December 1995. And 
I believe by the end of March it was, or March or April, it was 
82,000-and-some. 
 
So any way you cut it, we have, it seems to me, at this time 
82,000 people that are receiving welfare. I’m not speaking of 
households; I’m speaking of recipients, in total. So is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Okay, Mr. Chair, we’ll use  if the 
member prefers  we’ll use individuals rather than households. 
And let me again go through the figures for May to May, or if 
she wants, we can go back to December to December. But it is 
important, again I remind her, that you go month of one year to 
the same month in the next year because of the seasonal 
changes. 
 
If we look at May 1995-96, a full year ago, the total number of 
people receiving welfare in Saskatchewan  this is all 
individuals  was 84,269. In this May, the number is now 
83,100, for a reduction of 1,169 people. So May over May. 
 
Now if you go to December, for instance, of last year, you will 
find that in December  and this is traditionally the case  the 
case-load falls. And so in December of last year, yes, the 
case-load was 80,197. But if you apply that to the December 
before, it too is down about 300 . . . well not about, exactly 365 
people. 
 
So if you compare month to month, you will see the consistent 
reduction in the case-load, whether you look at households or 
individuals. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. So from my recollection 
of my question prior to this last question I gave you and your 
answer, your answer was that you expected that the welfare 
rolls would decline within the next year. And I would then take 
it that from your explanation now, if the welfare rolls went 
down from 84,000 last year to 83,000 this year, that you’re 
expecting it will decline by 1,000 within the next year  at 
least by 1,000  within the coming year. Is that correct? Would 
that be a proper assumption? 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, our officials remind me of an 
important caveat. While we’ve seen this gradual track down, 
and I guess if we were to just project it, we might see that same 
projection, but we do know as well that there are going to be 
changes. There are being changes made to unemployment 
insurance . . . or employment insurance now. 
 
And that may . . . because we’ve seen that happen in the past 
when unemployment insurance benefits are reduced at the 
federal level, that in past has brought significant numbers of 
new people into the welfare case load. And so we’re not yet 
sure what the most recent changes in UI (unemployment 
insurance), or employment insurance now, will mean to our 
case load. 
 
With that caveat, if we could remove that factor, I would expect 
the trend line to continue. In fact I’d hope that with some 
expansions in the economy and with the kinds of changes we 
hope to institute in how we deliver social services, we’ll in fact 
see more people coming out of social services. 
 
I’m also reminded that the Indian and Northern Affairs Canada 
is also reducing their funding this year by $10 million to Indian 
peoples across Canada, and that too may have some impact on 
our welfare case-load. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to go on to some questions about your discussion paper on 
redesigning social assistance. But before I do, I want to ask you 
one last question. Of all of the people that are on social 
assistance in this province, of the 82,000 that are on social 
assistance in this province, do you have any calculation of how 
many live in rural areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  The member asks about rural as opposed 
to urban case-load. Here we get into the little challenge of 
defining rural and urban. I tend to define urban as including the 
smaller cities of our province. So it becomes a little more 
complicated then because our department is organized in 
regions around the province and each region will contain 
perhaps an urban centre and a number of rural centres. 
 
It may be of interest to the member, and if she wishes, what I 
can do is send her a copy that describes by office the case-load. 
So you would see that in the Regina region itself there are 
19,741 individuals receiving benefits; in the Saskatoon region, 
25,795. So those two figures together about 44 or 45,000 
people would represent the case-loads in the two large urbans; 
the rest of the case-load throughout the province. But many of 
those cases will be located in cities like Moose Jaw, Prince 
Albert, Yorkton, North Battleford, and so on. 
 
What I will do, Mr. Chair, is have provided to the member at an 
early opportunity this, which gives her the specific numbers. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I have to 
leave momentarily. I’m going to turn over the questioning to my 
colleague from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 
to come back to the social assistance numbers for a minute and  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2653 

this I’m going to go month by month . . . month to the year. I’d 
like some numbers based on  you were talking December; 
I’m going to go January 1  for the years ’91 through ’96. 
 
I wonder if you’ve got numbers of cases for that time period. 
Then I’m going to make some comparisons, just check and see. 
I jotted down the ones you gave for May and then I think I got a 
couple regarding December. But if you could give me the 
numbers for ’91 through ’96 in January. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, we do not have that available 
to us. We can make it available to the member, the month by 
month going back right to ’91. What might be of interest to the 
member would be the average case-load over the course of the 
full year for each of those years. 
 
In 1991-92, the average case-load  and here we’re talking 
about households, not individuals but the case-load households 
 was 28,167; 1992-93, 32,904. Now note these numbers: 
‘93-94, 38,561; ‘94-95, 40,224; ‘95-96, 39,874. And our 
estimate for the current year will be 38,138. 
 
And I ask you to note the years ‘93-94, because you would 
recognize that in 1993-94, federal government unilaterally 
ceased their support to treaty Indians off reserve. And so all of 
those folks in our province then came on to our system, and we 
also saw then the changes to unemployment insurance that were 
made at the federal level which brought yet the case-load up. 
 
So after those federal changes, what we see is a steady decline 
 not as rapid I don’t think as any of us would wish  but a 
steady decline over the last two and three years. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, I 
would appreciate basically a month by month just to make that 
a comparison you were talking of. And if you’re going to do it 
just for January, maybe we could have, just so we can kind of 
graph it out as well for ourselves, as to what the numbers have 
been. And I’ll give you some time to do that. I appreciate that. 
 
The facts are, Mr. Minister, we have seen . . . and yes, you’ve 
indicated that part of the problem has arisen when the federal 
government shirked its responsibility for the aboriginal 
communities of this province. Not just this province, I think 
other provinces have faced the same thing. I guess the concern I 
have, Mr. Minister, and it should be a concern to you if it isn’t, 
is the comments that the Premier had made back prior to 1991 
about eliminating poverty. 
 
And I just pick up today’s paper, and I find it very interesting, 
headline in the paper is, “Christmas in July, a bid to restock 
food bank.” And we had a gentleman in our church last Sunday 
evening shared about something that he and his wife had gotten 
involved in since he’s retired from teaching, and something that 
came to their attention. 
 
They were just wondering what they could do with their time to 
maybe help somebody who was less fortunate. And they got 
involved in Souls Harbor down on Broad Street. I’m not sure if 
you’re aware of the program. I believe Souls Harbor actually 
operates totally independent of any government’s assistance.  

And he was amazed to find the people that were coming to seek 
the assistance of that program. 
 
And when I look at the headline here, it certainly doesn’t speak 
well of our society when we find the food bank in the province, 
at a time when it appears we should be maybe looking at an 
upswing, certainly the agricultural sector . . . and I think the 
problem even in the agricultural sector is while we look at grain 
prices today, Mr. Minister, most people just see the price, and 
they kind of read a dollar value on an income into a farm 
family’s pocket. But the expenses have also gone up, to a point 
that the bottom line hasn’t changed a lot. 
 
And I know that even some farm families I think were looking 
towards social assistance for some help. Because by the time 
they had all their bills paid and just paid the utilities, they 
weren’t left with a lot to operate. And in some cases they came 
to social assistance seeking some help at different periods in 
their lives. And it’s certainly unfortunate. 
 
I guess the question I have, and I wonder quietly in my own 
mind, if we’re endeavouring to try and help people, why have 
our rolls increased? And while you talk about this month 
they’ve decreased the . . . there’s a minor decrease in the month 
of May over May of last year, I noted by the article in the 
Leader-Post on May 30 there was actually 2,500 more on 
welfare than there were in December if you go comparing back 
months, three or four months, and so of course it shows the 
graphical line you have here. 
 
The thing I’m wondering about, Mr. Minister, is what are we 
doing and what are you doing to address the problem in the fact 
that why should we have food banks operating or why should 
we have Souls Harbor, if you will, operating? I think there’s 
nothing wrong with Saskatchewan people having an ability to 
give an offer of something that they’ve been blessed with. And 
I think Saskatchewan residents through the years have shown 
that they have an ability to reach out to those who are less 
fortunate. 
 
It would seem to me that there must be some problems in our 
society when we find numbers like this on an ongoing basis of 
people on assistance. Is it because there’s a lack of jobs? Is it 
because people have become accustomed to living on welfare 
and have just become so discouraged in the job opportunity? 
 
Or is it because it’s the way welfare metes out services or gives 
out services that people are . . . individuals are penalized that 
they would even take a minimum job and they’d lose their 
welfare. So at the end of the day, because they can’t meet it 
with the job they’ve got that may only pay 7 or $800 a month 
when if it’s a say  I’m just using a number  a family of 
three would be looking at a possibility of in the neighbourhood 
of 11 to $1200. And so therefore they’re on welfare rather than 
taking the job and then having, if you will, an income 
supplement, if I can only use that word. 
 
And I think maybe that’s part of your paper as well, that you’ve 
been talking about welfare reform in this province. And I’m just 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could make some comments. 
 



2654  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

I think, Mr. Minister, we have to go beyond just handing out 
services to people. I think we need to encourage people. I 
believe there are many people on welfare today who would feel 
much better about themselves if they were actually working or 
had the opportunity to work. 
 
And if the job that was available wasn’t quite enough to meet 
the needs of that family, that there was something that would be 
a bit of a supplement or a top-up like we have with senior 
citizens. 
 
And the other thing, Mr. Minister, as well I noticed a number of 
states . . . and certainly the province of Ontario is asking people 
to go to work. There are communities who . . . they just don’t 
have the funds to pay everyone to work, but they’re asking 
people on social assistance to come . . . here’s a job right now 
that’s available to you. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you 
could comment on maybe some of your ideas as to how we 
address this case-load and how we address the number of 
people on welfare. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Minister, it’s imperative we do it because if 
it just goes from one family to the next, it almost becomes an 
inter-generational thing where individuals just feel they’re 
almost like a failure in society. And some way or other, we’ve 
got to find ways of encouraging  and if it’s through education 
 and some assistance of finding ways for people to start 
giving them the opportunity to work. 
 
Because I know an experiment was done through the ‘80s and 
certainly in the community of . . . Whitewood was a good 
example where the community did take on some welfare 
recipients under a former program. And over a period of six . . . 
five years I believe it was, they hired . . . two individuals made 
application, had a couple of individuals on an annual basis. And 
every year, Mr. Minister, they had to hire somebody else. It 
wasn’t like going back to the person they had before. And in 
seven out of eight cases, Mr. Minister . . . is because that person 
who had been hired the previous year found full-time 
employment and was able to provide for themselves. There was 
only one individual who actually left the community because 
they got tired of being asked to go to work, went to another 
community that didn’t have the program so they could just 
continue to live off the program. 
 
And I think these are some things we need to look at. And I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if you could respond, because I don’t 
know if we like the numbers. I don’t know if you like the 
numbers as well. I think we need to find alternatives so that 
people don’t have to rely on welfare, but also can feel good 
about themselves if welfare is available to them to meet a 
specific need. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I much appreciate some of the 
comments that the member has made. He’s sort of given me 
quite a wide base on which to respond, and I’d like to touch, if 
only briefly, on some of the points that the member has raised. 
 
Let me just go back to his initial observation about the Souls 
Harbor. I would like to tell the member that I have had the 
experience to be at the Souls Harbor, to visit with Souls Harbor,  

and I took one evening the opportunity to be there at the supper 
hour. And the Souls Harbor here in Regina on Broad Street is 
doing a great work among some people who are very desperate 
in their needs. They’re providing a very hot and very nutritious 
meal to, on average, over a hundred people every evening. 
 
Souls Harbor, like many of the charitable organizations, are too 
struggling for funding and looking to the community and 
looking to government to continue their valuable work. And 
I’m hoping that we can work with Souls Harbor. They’ve got 
their own fund-raising program on right now, and I would hope 
the community of Regina and beyond would be very supportive 
of the Souls Harbor because they’re doing extremely important 
work. 
 
(1545) 
 
It is indicative of what the Saskatchewan spirit is, and that is to 
reach out and help our neighbour. We see that in our smallest 
communities; we see that in our largest communities; and it is 
really indicative of the Saskatchewan spirit. And as we look at 
the challenge of dealing with poverty in our province, it is my 
view that no one of us is going to accomplish this alone — no 
one level of government, no one charitable organization, no one 
municipality — but it will take a partnership and a working 
together to continue to work at poverty in our province. 
 
If I may say on behalf of government, we see this as a very 
significant part of our mandate and challenge. And I really, 
frankly, wouldn’t want to be part of a government or part of a 
legislature that didn’t see the urgency of which you speak, and I 
think we all feel, around the issues of poverty particularly as 
this issue relates to children. We have the very unhappy 
circumstance of statistically having the second highest rate of 
child poverty in our province all across Canada. 
 
This is not a happy circumstance. A happier circumstance is 
that we have the second lowest rate of poverty among seniors in 
our province. That’s a happier statistic certainly. But our 
situation in terms of children is not a happy situation, and I 
don’t . . . I’m sure all members would be committed to looking 
at options to change that. 
 
The member speaks of some of the causes of poverty and he’s 
absolutely right, there is not a single cause; it’s a many-faceted 
issue. We’ve seen significant changes in our economy, in a very 
rapidly changing economy over the last decade and longer. We 
know that much of the poverty is related to the educational 
levels of individuals who may not find themselves able to 
participate in the economy. 
 
We know that we live in a time of changing demographics — a 
fast-growing youth population, an urbanization in our province. 
We know that family structures have undergone significant 
change in household structures. 
 
And then as well, as the member points out, we have in our own 
system of social services and social assistance, some structural 
disincentives for individuals to escape the welfare cycle, to 
move to independence beyond the system. And the member 
points out one of those structural deficiencies in our  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2655 

current system, and that is, in my view, the deficiency which, 
rather than encouraging individuals to maximize employment 
earnings  in fact, by the way, we deduct now your extra 
earnings over $150, or whatever the amount  that becomes a 
disincentive to access your own private sector earnings or to 
access support payments from a matrimonial settlement. 
 
And so we are, as the member knows, through our redesign 
proposals, proposing as a significant part of that redesign the 
creation of a working income supplement, where in fact we 
would seek to supplement the income earned by an individual, 
whether it be in the workplace or through other sources of 
income. 
 
We also know that we need to combine all that we’re doing in 
Social Services with all that we’re doing in post-secondary and 
adult education, in the K to 12 system. We need to combine 
what we’re doing with all the good work that’s being done in 
re-establishing and building our economy. 
 
And when I look into this economy of ours and see how it is 
growing, we want to try to ensure, while we see this economy 
growing, that it does provide entry level opportunities for 
individuals. And on this front, there are some very exciting 
things happening. And I’ll just give the member one example. 
 
He will have heard by now, I’m sure, of the Temple Gardens 
Mineral Spa in Moose Jaw which has just opened, creating 
many new jobs in our community. Many of the people who are 
now working at the Temple Gardens Mineral Spa were people 
who were, to this point in time, unemployed. They undertook 
some very intensive training for the hospitality industry, and 
they are today working. And their children will know the 
support now of a working parent. 
 
While these indications don’t receive the big headlines, they are 
happening, and there are lots of signs of good news. 
 
I repeat again, I appreciate the member’s comments and his 
concern, and I think that working together within this House, in 
government, be it with the federal government and municipal 
governments, with business, with labour, and with the 
charitable groups like the Souls Harbor, we can begin to see 
some real change. 
 
The Chair:  Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Ward:  To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Ward: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery I have 
two of the finest constituents in Estevan. They also happen to 
be two of the finest constituency assistants in Estevan. My two 
assistants that share the job in my office is Mrs. Denise Wright 
and Mrs. Marnie McKnight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate those comments. But what is your government 
actively doing at this time? 
 
We’ve all heard, especially via the news media, that the 
province of Ontario is implementing a work program for 
welfare recipients. There was a Saskatchewan works program 
available in this province in the latter part of the ‘80s  and 
I’m not exactly sure when I referred to it a little bit  where a 
number of communities did take advantage of the program 
offering jobs to individuals in the community who were on 
social assistance. 
 
As a result of that program, there were many individuals who 
found their way off assistance because they had an avenue 
whereby they could certainly build their job-training skills and 
certainly build résumés whereby they could go to an employer 
and say well this . . . I’ve worked for this person. Or I’ve been 
. . . or it might have been a program that some people grumbled 
at. But I know there were many people that I talked to who were 
really appreciative of the program. 
 
Mr. Minister, what are you specifically doing today other than 
maybe looking at some things you may be doing down the 
road? Have you got anything, or any plans today, whereby 
you’re helping people try and find some alternatives to welfare 
assistance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I’m sorry when I was on my 
feet earlier I forgot to address some of that part of the member’s 
earlier statements. Some very specific things are happening 
now. 
 
Let me say this. We have not taken . . . in terms of those who 
are receiving benefits and who are living in poverty, we have 
not taken the direction of many of the other provinces in 
Canada, which has been to reduce the level of benefits for 
families or to reduce the level of benefits for children or to 
reduce the level of benefits for the disabled. 
 
We have not taken that course, even though we’ve seen that 
happen in other provinces. We have not either taken the course 
that we’ve seen happen at least in our neighbouring province of 
Alberta, which has been to provide to the poorest in Alberta 
one-way bus tickets encouraging those individuals to simply 
leave the province, which in fact did bring down their 
case-loads. 
 
We have continued to believe that we have a responsibility to 
our neighbours in poverty. 
 
In terms of programing to assist the movement from welfare to 
independence, we have, as the member will know because his 
government . . . And I would compliment he and other  



2656  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

members of his government that pioneered this although there’s 
been significant change in it. We have at work the New Careers 
Corporation which provides opportunities in significant number 
for people who are currently on welfare or receiving social 
assistance. 
 
Under New Careers there’s a number of programs being 
offered. There’s a career planning and job search program. 
There are a number of work preparation centres in the province. 
There’s the SSDP, the Saskatchewan skills development 
program. There is the community employment program. There 
is the work experience program. There’s young careers. And 
there’s simply a referral process through New Careers to jobs. 
 
All of these programs providing opportunities for individuals to 
gain training or education to better equip them then to move 
into the active job market. While they’re doing that, they for the 
most part are providing some very valuable community service 
to agencies across our province. The indication here is that this 
program last year will have offered opportunities for 8,740 
people. 
 
Now we also know that through the Department of Education 
we’ve had the JobStart-Future Skills programing going on. 
 
The member will know that those who are accessing social 
assistance are each provided a social worker. When there is the 
ability to work, each individual who has that ability, through the 
work of their social worker, is encouraged and in fact required 
to be searching the job market for opportunities. 
 
I do think, as we can move now to redesigning our social 
assistance system and as we look at changes in the training 
program and how we deliver the benefits, we can even build on 
this rather successful and substantive program. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, in regards to some of the discussion 
we’ve had regarding welfare recipients and individuals who 
might find themselves looking at social assistance or welfare 
for some help at a specific time, some specific complaints have 
been brought to my attention. And on one, I contacted your 
office. Unfortunately it’s not much that could really be done. 
 
This comes in regards to if a person has some kind of assets or 
some kind of assets that could be liquid assets. And in one case 
in particular, an individual who had been working ended up in a 
situation, I believe, where there was a separation in a household 
 a young family situation, actually. And this person while 
working had been putting money aside in an RRSP (registered 
retirement savings plan). And of course the policy in applying 
for assistance is that you’ve got to liquidate that fund. 
 
And I guess the concern I have, the question I have, Mr. 
Speaker, is what happens down the road? We’re basically 
asking . . . Someone has a specific need today. So you’ve got a 
little bit of money set aside for a retirement to kind of help you 
in the future, but we’re telling you today you’ve got to liquidate 
those funds before we can give you any type of assistance. 
 
Mr. Minister, if that person isn’t able to really actively get back 
into the job force, ends on assistance for a long extended . . . or  

an extended period of time and, God forbid, ends up on 
assistance till the time they start drawing a pension and all 
they’ve got is the old age security and maybe not much Canada 
Pension because they didn’t have really any opportunity to put 
into it, they’re left with basically just being totally dependent on 
government for all of their lives. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if we couldn’t review some 
of this. Now if you’re looking at an RRSP that has ballooned to 
a substantial sum of money, that may be one thing. But if we’re 
looking at fairly little or small sums of money, and we’re 
basically asking someone to draw down before he even has a 
chance to build, Mr. Minister, are we not just encouraging 
people to continue to live on assistance rather than giving them 
the opportunity to . . . while they had a chance to put some 
money away, to let that build so that they are not totally 
dependent on government all their lives? 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m wondering if you could respond to that, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I certainly can respond, Mr. Chair. It’s 
not a simple matter. We have in some ways, unfortunately I 
think, lost sight of the intention, the initial and underlying 
intention of what welfare or social assistance should be. 
 
When in the 1960s we more or less gave shape to the system we 
have today, it was intended to be a short-term relief for 
short-term need and that welfare ought to be the program of 
very last resort; that one would only access the welfare system 
in the most extreme circumstances and then only for a short 
period of time. Over the intervening years, unfortunately I 
think, we have come to conceive of welfare as being a life-time 
income security system for some. 
 
It is a difficult issue when someone comes to access or to apply 
for welfare benefits with assets of their own. And the debate 
becomes I guess on how many assets should one be able to 
keep. Of course we allow individuals to keep their homes and 
so on. But if there are financial assets and we allow individuals 
to hold those financial assets, is that not in some way then 
encouraging some dependence on the system? That’s the 
conundrum. That’s the difficulty. 
 
And if we are to allow some assets, and we do, what is the 
appropriate level? I know that . . . I don’t think anyone would 
agree, if there are substantial assets in a bank account or in 
RRSPs or in other financial instruments, that we would ask the 
taxpayer then, through the welfare system, to support those 
individuals. 
 
I recall being some months ago, at a meeting in Ottawa, and 
there was a big headline in the Ottawa newspaper about an 
individual in Hull, Quebec, who had saved a million dollars and 
was collecting social assistance. Well I don’t think anyone 
would suggest that that’s appropriate. 
 
So it is a challenge to find a balance that encourages 
independence from the system, that encourages to understand 
that the welfare system should be a program of last resort, and 
yet not so completely destitute and bankrupt that there is no  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2657 

hope then of future. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Chairman, I do have an extended length of 
questions. But seeing as the member from Humboldt was 
gracious enough to allow me in a little earlier, if she would like 
to ask some questions that are related or some more of her 
questions, I’m more than prepared to give her that opportunity 
and get into further debate after the member from Humboldt has 
raised some of her questions. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, in the budget 
I noticed that the amount of full-time equivalent staff is not 
increasing for the fiscal year. Is this correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. It seems though the amount being paid 
out for salaries on a whole is increasing by over $2 million for 
the 1996-97 fiscal year. Could you explain to me why more is 
being paid out for salaries when the number of employees has 
not increased and services are being cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  There would be perhaps some small 
other adjustments, but essentially the change would be because 
of the negotiated contract with our employees which has a small 
. . . the increase in it. 
 
Ms. Julé:  So am I to assume from that comment that there 
has been an increase in wages for the employees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes. Under the agreement bargained 
with SGEU (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) 
there are certain classifications which have had increase. That’s 
been part of the public sector bargaining, widely known and 
widely discussed. 
 
(1600) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess 
that’s where I find a lot of difficulty within myself, trying to 
justify increases in wages. And I understand what you have to 
contend with, but none the less, in this day and age when we 
can see that there are needs such as the Egadz outreach program 
and safe houses that are not being met, we do certainly have to 
all take part in this and share. And the Egadz centre, I think 
with just a mere $50,000 from this province could make quite a 
big change there for this outreach program to continue. 
 
Mr. Minister, there has been some concern on the part of 
teachers and social workers in rural, and for that matter in urban 
Saskatchewan over the lack of aid with regards to children at 
risk. And it has been made apparent to me that the 
government’s integrated services system isn’t working as 
effectively certainly as was hoped. 
 
Due to the fact that social workers have been cut back to part 
time in many rural areas, are there any provisions in this budget 
to ensure that teachers and others in a position of trust in rural 
areas will have access to social workers and social services 
promptly when dealing with children in need and families in 
crisis in rural areas? 

Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I think the member 
recognizes, by the preamble to her question, that we have been 
building and attempting to build a much more integrated 
approach through the child action plan, primarily between the 
Department of Social Services, the Department of Education, 
between our social workers, teachers in schools, and so on. In 
some circumstances now, we in fact have social workers 
working right in the schools. 
 
If the member is aware of particular instances where she feels 
or where those who have been in contact with her feel that the 
integration or the communication isn’t as good as it should be 
or there isn’t that opportunity for immediate contact, I would 
hope that in each and every one of our regions there would be 
opportunity for immediate contact in the event of family crisis 
or child protection issues. If you’re aware of some 
circumstances that are not functioning as well as we’d like them 
to, please let us know. 
 
Ms. Julé:  I shall do. Mr. Minister, is there any allocation of 
funds in the budget to provide for a similar service, hopefully a 
service that is more effective as far as integrated services are 
concerned, to provide a similar service to rural areas in the 
province as well? Because I have spoken to a number of 
schools in the rural areas, and to have prompt attention to their 
needs is far from adequate right now. And so I’m wondering 
whether or not there has been an addition to the budget to 
provide some sort of a betterment, I guess I would say, to 
integrated services in the rural areas of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the member . . . we’re just 
trying to get some more precise numbers. But the member will 
recognize that . . . or we can sure provide it for her. Under the 
action plan, the child action plan now, we try and bring together 
resources not just from the Department of Social Services 
budget, but also from Education, from Justice, from Health, 
focused around this integration of services. 
 
We don’t have the Education numbers with us specifically; 
we’ll get them here. But this year for instance, there are new 
monies identified under Social Services in the area of some 
child-youth issues. But also there’s some money coming in 
through Education for the integration of services. 
 
So it’s through a combination of budgetary efforts that we’re 
hoping to build on the system that we’ve now built and gained 
some confidence in knowing that it can work. We’re 
discovering it can work  that departments of government can 
work together. It can then work with community organizations, 
with local schools, with teachers, and provide better programing 
stretching those dollars that we all have so stretched already to 
an even greater extent and provide better service. So we’re 
convinced by the Child Action Plan, the experience we’ve had 
thus far that it really can work. 
 
There are new monies this year. Many of those new dollars in 
this area will be coming in through the Department of 
Education. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, do you 
yourself have meetings, I guess I would say, with the  



2658  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

supervisors or directors of services or regional directors on an 
ongoing basis? Or are there a specific number a year you have 
with them in order for them to channel some of their concerns 
through you? And . . . well I’ll leave it at that for now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, to the member, since 
becoming minister, although we sort of got ourselves into the 
legislature not too long after I assumed the position, but I have 
had the opportunity, number one, to travel as much as I possibly 
can into our various regions and meet both our regional 
managers, directors, and front-line staff in their workplace. 
There are yet some stops that I have to make before I complete 
that tour. 
 
I’ve also had the opportunity to meet with our regional directors 
as a group. The regional directors are brought together by the 
deputy minister and the associate and the assistant deputy 
minister on a regular basis . . . they come together. 
 
It’s my hope that when those meetings are occurring, if my 
schedule permits, that I can at least be there for a part of the 
meeting to have that conversation face to face with our regional 
people. I find it equally important that I speak with as many of 
our front-line providers as I possibly can. 
 
Now the Department of Social Services has a very large 
workforce in all aspects of the department, so I don’t propose 
that I could meet and speak with each. But as much as possible 
I try to be in the local workplace and meet the people in their 
local circumstances. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
like to pose some questions to you regarding vote 36, just 
discussing family and youth services. I’d like to focus 
specifically on some youth centres across the province and the 
funding that they’ve received. 
 
I’m going to start off today with the North Battleford youth 
centre, and I presume that this is under your jurisdiction, is it? I 
wanted to talk about some of the youth centres in the province 
and their funding. Is this funding your responsibility or is it the 
Minister of Justice, or is it a combination? Can you answer 
these questions for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Yes, it is our responsibility. Whether I 
can answer your questions, we’ll see. But yes, it’s my 
responsibility; it is the Department of Social Services 
responsibility. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the North 
Battleford youth centre, as we well know, has been in the past 
plagued with some problems. And I understand that there was a 
Jackson report by Marion R. Jackson done in 1992. I have still 
some concerns because I still get some ongoing complaints. 
This place should serve an extremely valuable purpose and it is 
needed. And I really want to ensure that the centre is doing all it 
was designed to do. 
 
So I would ask you first, in regards to the Jackson report, it was 
an independent review. All the costs of the review I understand 
were borne by the Department of Social Services. Can you tell  

me what the cost in fact of that review was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I’m going to invite the member if she 
would please just finish her comment again. I was a bit 
distracted. 
 
Yes, I’m certainly aware of the youth centre in North 
Battleford. I’m certainly aware of many of the concerns that 
have been raised about it, and I know that you’ve taken a 
particular interest in this yourself  the Jackson report; there 
has been an Ombudsman’s inquiry; and there has been some 
ongoing concerns raised, particularly about the open custody 
facility, some specific concerns raised by the Children’s 
Advocate. 
 
And I’ve been involved with discussions with the department. 
And the department, I can report to the member, has been very, 
very actively, very actively looking at the concerns around the 
Battleford youth centre. And we hope within a relatively short 
period of time to be able to be making some announcements 
that we hope will provide some lasting solutions. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
Jackson report revealed some deficiencies within the centre 
which have resulted in ineffective communication, basically, 
and inconsistent practices throughout the facility. Some of the 
shortfalls included a shortage of qualified staff, difficulty in 
attracting staff, orientation and training deficiencies, conflicting 
ideologies of service delivery between program staff, case 
management staff, and care staff; a lack of accountability, a 
lack of consistent application of policies and procedures. 
 
Ms. Jackson determined the need for development of a model 
of service which supports a more clearly defined philosophy 
between the balance of rehab, custody, and care requirements. 
And I do believe you probably have got some of the notes in 
front of you, maybe, about this report and what the 
recommendations were. 
 
Now there were 23 recommendations that were put forward by 
Marion Jackson. I want to know specifically how many of those 
recommendations were purposely worked towards and how 
many of them have yet to be looked at, I guess, or work towards 
in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I would want to say that the 
department has taken all of the recommendations very seriously 
and has tried to address each of those. We don’t sort of have a 
tally to say that no. 1 is done and no. 17 is half done or 
something, but each of the recommendations of the Jackson 
work has been taken very seriously by the department. 
 
I have in front of me some rather lengthy notes about activities 
that have been undertaken in light of the recommendations 
made by the Jackson report. Perhaps I can just share some of 
them with you to give you a sense of things that have happened. 
 
There are now, for instance, biweekly meetings of all unit staff 
to ensure that overall programing and administration are 
meeting the general needs of the resident population and 
specific needs of individuals. 



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2659 

There’s an in-house UMAC, a Union-Management Advisory 
Committee, which is now meeting regularly to discuss and 
propose resolution of any issues that may arise between the 
union and management. 
 
There is now an active in-house occupational health and safety 
committee which comprise both union and management 
representation, and that’s to try and address some of the 
physical plant issues impacting on the health and safety of the 
residents and staff. 
 
There are now regularly scheduled management team meetings 
including all of the supervisory staff to address the areas of 
general administration and program issues. 
 
The recommendations, I can assure the member, have been 
taken very seriously and I believe we’ve moved some real 
distance in meeting the goals of the Jackson report. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
Jackson report was done in  what did I say?  December, 
1992. So from the beginning of 1993 to 1995 there were 13 
staff members that just within those two years that were off on, 
I would say, fairly extensive stress leave. And of those members 
that were off on stress leave, it seems that a number of them 
had been assaulted by youth. Why do you think that is 
happening? Why such a large number of kids assaulting the 
staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I think the member even in her comment 
recognizes that some of that extreme difficulty now is 
somewhat dated; that there has been some change since we had 
that real problem. I understand from some of the materials that I 
have with me here today that at one point in 1993 the number of 
staff vacancies had reached 17. That’s how bad it got. 
 
Now I think we do recognize we’re dealing with here some 
very, very troubled youth, and in some cases very difficult 
young people. But I think we’ve also recognized as a result of 
the Jackson work and the Ombudsman and others that changes 
were required. 
 
Some of those changes have been made and we’re seeing now, I 
think, the result of some of those changes. The information I 
have now, or at least at the end of March, indicates that the staff 
turnover problem has significantly declined; that at the end of 
March there were only two social work positions vacant, one 
parental care supervisor, and they were presently in the hiring 
process. 
 
So while we saw that, as you described, the difficulties of ’93, 
hopefully now we’re coming to much more stability in the 
centres as a result of some of the things I’ve talked about and 
other things. 
 
(1615) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that 90 per cent of the clients at the North Battleford 
youth centre are aboriginal people. Has the private sector ever 
been given an opportunity to run this place, particularly I have  

in mind the North Battleford tribal council. Have they ever been 
approached with the opportunity of running the place? 
 
And if in fact there are 90 per cent of these clients that are 
aboriginal people, it seems to me that this would aid the 
aboriginal people in their desire to become responsible for their 
youth. Could you comment on that please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Let me say to the member, we recognize 
the high representation of aboriginal young people in the 
facility. And again as a result of some of the concerns that exist, 
there has been some significant change made in our efforts 
around staffing. There has been now some aboriginal 
programing put in place in the centre. We’re utilizing elders in a 
greater extent within the centre, and in fact have made efforts to 
involve aboriginal people in the staffing of the centre. 
 
To your question of whether we have considered working with 
one of the tribal councils, Battleford or P.A. (Prince Albert) 
Grand Council, the answer is yes. We have had discussions 
with the North Battleford tribal council. You’ll understand that 
we do have contractual obligations to our staff, and as these 
conversations proceed, we want to be sensitive to that and want 
to work carefully with the tribal council and with the existing 
staff and so on. 
 
We’re also working on a more broad base with the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) province-wide on 
looking at strategies to deal with young offenders, as we have 
worked with the tribal councils or bands, in some 
circumstances, to provide child and family services on reserve. 
 
In the North, we have arrangements and agreements with some 
of the bands to provide social assistance. And so we’re working 
in a variety of ways. 
 
We certainly don’t reject working with either the band council 
or the P.A. Grand Council or the FSIN. But it needs to be a 
careful process as we move towards it. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, for the 
sake of conserving some time, because I have a number of 
questions in front of me here and more extensive discussion 
than we can in fact take care of within the time limit, I think I 
would like to pose some questions to you of which I would like 
you to give me the answer in the days ahead. They will be of 
course documented through Hansard, so you can take it from 
there. 
 
The questions are: (1) what is the total annual cost of running 
the North Battleford youth centre; (2) what are the total 
administrative costs; (3) what are the programing costs; (4) how 
much of the budget is federally funded; (5) what percentage of 
the budget is provincially funded; (6) what is the total annual 
cost of staff salaries; (7) what is the salary earned by the 
director; (8) how many female employees are on staff; (9) what 
percentage of youth at the centre are of native ancestry; (10) 
how many native employees are on staff; (11) how many staff 
members at the North Battleford youth centre have Bachelor of 
Social Work degrees; (12) how many staff members have been 
on long-term sick leave since 1991, in total; (13) which you’ve  



2660  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

already answered, I had a question about which of the Jackson 
report recommendations have been implemented by the youth 
centre. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to continue today by asking some similar 
questions about the Dojack Youth Centre that is located in 
Regina. I understand that Dojack, and in fact Saskatoon and 
Regina youth and young offender facilities, get better resources, 
more money and programs, and more experienced staff. 
Whether or not that is completely the situation, I would like 
your comments on it first of all before I go on with more 
particular questions on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, if the member could just 
clarify a little, I believe she said Regina and Saskatoon, the 
Dojack and the Saskatoon facilities are getting more and better 
qualified staff than other . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . than 
North Battleford. I’ll ask my officials and . . . Well let me say 
while I’m on my feet, I would not suggest that that is the case. 
 
When we have opportunities for employment, those 
opportunities are advertised within the public service existing, 
and then they will be advertised to the public. And the positions 
will be advertised. And through the process of the Public 
Service Commission, for which I’m also responsible, I know 
that the selections are made on the basis of the best qualified 
applicants. 
 
Now we recognize that in North Battleford there has been, as 
we pointed out earlier, some significant vacancies and staff 
turnover in the last number of years and I think a certain . . . 
some difficulties within that centre. But I would not want to 
suggest for a moment that we have in one facility more 
qualified people than in another facility. I just don’t believe that 
to be the case. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I guess I 
make that . . . or I pose that question to you because I have not 
heard and neither have the people of the province heard of as 
many difficulties arising from out of the facilities in Saskatoon 
and Regina as they do out of the North Battleford facility. So 
there must be some particular reasons for that. And I think that 
although assumptions may not be fair at all times, sometimes 
the stark reality of what’s happening in front of us leads us to 
asking these questions and making that comparison. 
 
Mr. Minister, again I would like to pose some questions to you 
of which I would be happy if you could answer in the days 
ahead. These questions are in regard to the Dojack Youth 
Centre. The same questions almost apply here. What is the total 
annual cost of running the Dojack Centre? Number two, what 
are the total administrative costs? Number three, what are the 
programing costs? Number four, what percentage of the 
funding is federally backed? Number five, what percentage of 
the funding is from the provincial government? 
 
What is the annual cost of staff salaries? What is the salary 
earned by the director? How many female employees are on 
staff? And what percentage of youth at the Dojack Centre are of 
native ancestry? How many native employees are on staff? How 
many staff members at the Dojack Centre have Bachelor  

of Social Work degrees? And how many of the staff members 
have been on long-term sick leave since 1991? 
 
I would pose the same questions to you about Kilburn Hall in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Okay, I would like to move onto some talking about the 
discussion paper on the reform of Social Services. I have some 
questions about the evaluation of the system of Social Services. 
How often are programs offered by the Department of Social 
Services up for review and evaluation? The programs  how 
often are they up for review and evaluation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  I believe, Mr. Chair, at a minimum, 
every year. We are constantly trying to evaluate our programing. 
We have a very small but, I think, very effective research 
component within the department who, on a monthly basis, will 
be evaluating what’s happening. On an annual basis, as we go 
through the budgeting process, we have to look at everything 
we’re doing and say, is this the appropriate way to spend our 
budgetary expenses? 
 
Now in the broad stroke when we talk about sort of, as we are 
here in the redesign paper, overall redesign of the way we 
provide social welfare for instance, this doesn’t occur on this 
kind of scale as regularly. In fact I would argue we’ve been a 
little late in doing this broad evaluation of social assistance 
generally. This may be . . . this is about 30 years since we’ve 
given a real look at this. 
 
But in terms of specific programs and the way things are 
working, it is almost a constant evaluation for sure, once 
annually, as we go through the budget exercise. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there must 
be a process in place that has some mechanisms that are 
currently in place that ensure that programs, you know, that are 
presently taking place are working. So can you explain what 
those mechanisms are that you have in place that would ensure 
the general public that there in fact is evaluation taking place. 
How do you go about doing that? I just want to know. Some 
day I might be the Social Services minister, so I’d like to know 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Now, Mr. Chair, that is debatable. I 
guess if the member has a specific . . . an illustration she’d like 
us to pursue it might be a little easier to describe. 
 
But let’s take for instance a funding to a third party. We would 
ask our third party each year to report to the department the 
work that they’re doing at the community level. And we would 
be reviewing, for instance, the numbers of people they may be 
serving, the issues they’re trying to deal with. and then, in our 
own evaluations, be sure that we believe that that’s the 
appropriate place to be spending the tax dollar, getting the 
maximum benefit at the community level. 
 
We are evaluating constantly the numbers of people on welfare, 
the trends. And we see for instance in our evaluations of late a 
trend that we don’t like, and that’s seeing the numbers of young 
people coming on to welfare growing. That’s a trend we don’t  



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2661 

like to see. But we learn those trends, and we make those 
observations through the kind of evaluation. Sometimes it’s 
statistical evaluation. Sometimes it will be evaluation by our 
people working in the field, visiting projects and so on. 
 
(1630) 
 
In terms of, for instance, the important work this department 
does in child care and funding to third-party child care 
providers, we have a number of people in the department who 
work very closely with each of the day cares and the child cares, 
and we’ll be doing evaluations of what’s happening on the 
ground. So it’s both a statistic evaluation, an evaluation based 
on research, and then an evaluation that’s based on the 
face-to-face personal contact between department people and 
those that work in the field. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
concerned more about the effectiveness of programs. So if you 
have any documentation of evaluation that you have done on 
the effectiveness of programs, I would appreciate having those 
forwarded to me. 
 
Mr. Minister, getting back to the discussion paper and the 
proposals put forward, I don’t see a lot in there that would help 
northern Saskatchewan, that would be effective in northern 
Saskatchewan, just because of the geographics and the 
proximity of a number of the clients to towns, and they’re a 
distance from some of the villages and some of the towns. And 
there’s also I guess a lack of educational facilities for the 
training that you propose in the discussion paper. 
 
Are there going to be some special kind of programs 
implemented to help the people of the North, and have you 
made any plans for that? And if so, have you calculated any 
costs for that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I recognize with the member 
that we have some real particular challenges in the North of our 
province. Our case-load numbers are high in some of our 
northern communities, and there are some very challenging 
geographical factors in the North: small communities very 
widely dispersed across a large geography; particular challenges 
in finding employment, providing education, and so on. 
 
Let me say this to the member. The redesign proposals equally 
apply of course to anyone, no matter where they live in 
Saskatchewan. And so if we are talking about a child benefit, a 
Saskatchewan child benefit, or if we’re able to partner with the 
federal government in a provincial-federal child benefit; or if 
we can come, as the Premier has been suggesting, to the nation, 
that we should be looking at a national child benefit, that 
provision of course would apply to all the children in the North. 
There’s no exclusion of course. 
 
We do have existing, under the current social assistance 
program, some particular benefits targeted to the North. For 
instance we have a northern food supplement providing a 
$50-a-month supplement for those who live in the North for 
their food budget, recognizing that food costs in the North are  

more expensive than they are for those of us who live in the 
South. 
 
On the broader issue of the North, I think as government we can 
take some pride in having put together, under the minister 
responsible, a ministry now that looks at the issues of the North 
in totality, trying to draw together all of the issues facing the 
North. And clearly the issues of poverty in the North must be 
teamed with the issues of employment opportunities. 
 
The issue of poverty in the North has to be linked with the 
opportunity of educational opportunities for the North. And 
that’s what this ministry is trying to do  for the first time, or 
at least for the first time in a long time, trying to bring together 
under one ministry, all of those factors to both strengthen the 
economy, strengthen the educational opportunities, make it 
more possible for Northerners to achieve independence and 
security while remaining in the North. 
 
So there are some targeted programs under Social Services, but 
this too requires the integration that we’re seeing happening 
under the minister. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if you 
have any documentation of programs that have been established 
or that are in the works right now to work specifically with the 
people in the North in regards to social and economic 
assistance, I would appreciate having that kind of information. 
 
Mr. Minister, how much money, how much provincial money is 
presently being allocated to northern social services and social 
programs this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  If the member will agree, we will 
provide the exact amount that we provide under welfare or 
social assistance to the North. We wouldn’t have at our disposal 
the monies that would be spent by the Department of Education 
and Post-Secondary Education, but we can provide for the 
member the exact amount of money that will be provided to the 
North. And again what we can do is just send this very specific 
information. 
 
But if we use the northern case-loads, the total amount paid in 
March 1986 for the month of March under welfare would be 
two and half million dollars. This would be in the month of 
March ’96  two and a half million. So on an annual basis, 
that’ll to work out to somewhere near $18 million. We’ll 
provide . . . no check that, not 18 million  30 million. You 
see that’s the problem with me trying to do mathematics on my 
feet. We’ll provide for you these exact numbers. 
 
But that would only describe . . . not the total of social 
programing in the North because Health is spending money. 
Education is spending money. Justice will be spending money. 
This will be the social assistance payments only. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. If you could provide me with a 
combination of all of the monies, provincial monies going 
towards all those programs, somehow I would appreciate that 
 the education, the whole works. 
 



2662  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

I would like to ask a few questions on post-adoption services. 
It’s my understanding that in ‘92-93 there were 1,797 
post-adoptive services were provided. How many of these 
services are expected to be provided in ‘96-97, and at what 
cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I can maybe just run through 
the totals for the last number of years. In ‘92-93, as the member 
identified, there were 1,797 post-adoption services . . . or 
adoption services. In ‘93-94 the number was 1,886. In ‘94-95 it 
was 1,844; last year, ‘95-96, 1,752. So our estimation is it 
would be in that range. That seems to be kind of a consistent 
range year after year. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in regards 
to the child nutrition and development program, how many 
schools and community organizations receive grants through 
this program right now? And what is the cost to administer this 
program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, again if the member would 
permit, we can provide the information. There is a lengthy list 
of programs being funded. We unfortunately don’t have them 
numbered on the sheet, but there’s a lengthy list. We could 
provide the whole sheet, and the member will see that . . . or we 
can provide the whole list. The member will see that where the 
total funds expended will be in the neighbourhood of a million 
dollars. It was a little bit over a million in ‘94-95, a little bit 
under in ‘95-96, but in the neighbourhood of a million dollars. 
 
Someone has just found the number. It’s a total of 118 projects 
across the province. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Mr. Minister, in reference to the respite services 
program, what is the cost to run that program this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, perhaps I could ask the 
member to clarify her question. There will be a respite program 
under community living, and there’s also respite programs in 
Health. And the question is, is she requesting information of the 
respite program for the client that would be there under the 
auspices of community living? 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m going 
to give you the rest of my questions and hand them to you, and 
I’m going to have you answer them for me at another time. But 
I only have 5 minutes left, I’m told, and so I would like to just 
present a couple of my reflections about the workfare program. 
And they are reflections in fact of the people in my constituency 
and some throughout the province who have . . . are not 
concerned . . . they would like to see work for people on Social 
Services, but they’re wondering how this is going to happen. 
 
Mr. Minister, as quickly as possible, can you tell me again the 
total number of our youth between the ages of 18 and 
21-years-old that are on social assistance. I believe it’s 
something like 79,000, if I’m right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, the number of youth between 
18 and 21 will be between 5 and 6,000. Between five and six,  

not the total case load. 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you. So we would hope to get those youth 
to work somewhere. Okay. Now viewing the fact that economic 
activity is hoped for in the province but not exactly at its peak 
right now, I’m wondering how we’re going to get 6,000 jobs for 
people within that age group, let alone for people above that 
age group. I believe the training is a good thing. I see that it’s 
going to be in need of a great deal of funding, but at the same 
time, it’s a good thing. 
 
After training, I presume these people will be placed into jobs 
or else the training is for nothing. Okay. Once they’re placed 
into jobs, how are we going to ensure that there’s long-term 
jobs, because if they’re placed into some sort of a work project 
or a job and it’s going to be for a short period of time, just long 
enough maybe to get on unemployment insurance, the federal 
government is going to have to pay for unemployment 
insurance. Well that may be very well but in the final analysis 
the taxpayers are going to have to pay anyway, regardless of 
whether it comes out of provincial or federal funds. 
 
So most of the people out there are concerned about how we are 
going to end up with long-term, meaningful jobs for these 
people. It’s going to take quite some doing. Would you like to 
comment on that, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, just a quick comment. First to 
say that here we are talking about a proposal amongst a series 
of proposals and again I underline the word proposal. This 
proposal is advanced because I don’t think any of us are 
satisfied with the notion that more and more young people are 
coming onto welfare. 
 
In this proposal, the focus is equally if not more heavily 
weighted on providing educational opportunities for young 
people as work opportunities or work experience, but it needs to 
be a combination of both. Let me say, Mr. Chair, that I 
appreciate the member’s comments and I appreciate her 
observations on this and we are yet, if I may say, some distance 
from implementation of this kind of program. And many of the 
issues that the member raises has been raised with me in the 
community, and before we could move to this kind of program 
we’d want to have some very clear directions and answers to 
the things that she raises. 
 
(1645) 
 
Ms. Julé:  Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand there was a statement made by yourself or a member 
of your government that you were hoping to implement some of 
this program . . . or beginning in 1997. That’s not very far away. 
I don’t know . . . 
 
You know I would hope that it’s thoroughly thought through 
before we implement anything, because you’re hoping to have 
24,000 children I believe off of social assistance through some 
of your program or through implementation of some of this 
program. And I don’t want to see those 24,000 children without 
funding coming in, especially if it’s in relation to income 
support. 



June 14, 1996 Saskatchewan Hansard 2663 

Their mothers or their parents have to have income in the first 
place. A support is no good if there’s no income and if that is 
the only qualification that . . . or if that’s the only thing for them 
I can’t understand how we’re going to ensure that those 
children are not going to be left out in the cold. 
 
I thank you, Mr. Minister, and I would turn the questioning over 
to the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 
to come back to adoptions for questions. 
 
If I heard you correctly  I may have to be corrected on this  
I think I heard something about a million dollars that were used 
for adoption services last year. There was a million dollars 
came out when that question . . . and I’m not sure exactly what 
that was for. 
 
An Hon. Member:  That was child nutrition. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member:  Child nutrition. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Okay. I missed that one. What I’m wondering is, 
how many adoptions does the Department of Social Services 
handle in a year, or how many did it handle in the last year, and 
what amount of money do you have available to cover 
adoptions in the province  the ones that your department 
handles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I apologize for the delay. The 
total number of adoptions in 1995-96 was 28. We have a little 
difficulty in determining the amount of money spent, because 
the amount that will be spent in the department around 
adoptions will provide for the adoption services of traditional 
. . . but it also provides for all the post-adoptions services, the 
searches that are undertaken, and so that becomes a global 
budget in that area of the department. So it’s sort of hard to 
separate out specifically what is used to provide for adoptions. 
 
Mr. Toth:  What’s the total in that area of the department, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, I need to make a correction in 
what I said earlier. I didn’t describe . . . I was thinking about the 
budgetary numbers and I didn’t describe for the member the 
total number of adoptions. 
 
I think I indicated to the member there were 28  that’s special 
adoptions. Beyond that there were 26 infant adoptions; there 
were 20 international adoptions; so the total number of 
adoptions in the last calendar year was 74. 
 
Our difficulty, Mr. Chair, in trying to sort out the actual cost, 
we budget for the family and youth services of the department, 
and the staff of family and youth services will be working in the 
adoption area. 
 
If it’s acceptable to the member, I’m going to ask the 
department to try and do some arithmetic and sort . . . pull out 

what staffing costs may be directly related to the adoption 
programs. Today we have only the global numbers. If it’s 
satisfactory to the member that’s . . . and we can get that 
information to him. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Okay. I look forward to receiving that 
information, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I raise this question 
because it’s something that I’ve raised in the Assembly before, 
when it comes to the Christian Counselling Services and the 
adoption procedure that is offered through Christian 
Counselling. And I believe, Mr. Minister, your number for 
infant adoptions was 26, if I’m . . . And last year the Christian 
Counselling was involved in 21 infant adoptions at a total cost 
of $150,000 to operate their program  which is about 7,000, 
quick figures, per adoption. And, Mr. Minister, I’m raising it 
because I’ve had adoptive parents who have contacted my 
office and certainly contacted our caucus office. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Minister, we’ve also had young mothers 
who’ve contacted our office personally who have suggested that 
this program was a program that they really had a lot of respect 
for. Prior to being referred to, or it being suggested that . . . In 
one case, one young lady had indicated to our office that she 
was fully contemplating an abortion because she wasn’t feeling 
good about herself. The pressure of having to disclose and for 
her peers to realize that she was pregnant was so much . . . and 
the only services or the only information that seemed to be 
coming her way was have an abortion. It’s simple, quick, and 
it’s over, and you don’t have to worry about it. 
 
She started talking to the Christian Counselling Services and 
found out that there is more to think about. She thought about 
that new life that was beginning within her. 
 
And at the end of the day, she phoned us and said she was 
really supportive of the program because they helped her 
overcome some of the emotional stress that had entered her life 
as a result of the pregnancy. She gave birth to a beautiful child. 
And, Mr. Minister, she is now telling us that this little child that 
was born to her was adopted by a lovely family; that she was 
involved in choosing who would be the adoptive parents. And 
she had nothing but praise for the program. 
 
And in fact just two weeks ago, Mr. Minister, I had a young 
gentleman come into my office who also was in support of the 
program. Of course in his case it’s a little different. He and his 
wife would love to have a family, have been unable to have a 
family. They’ve just nicely started working with the Christian 
Counselling Services and now they find that the service . . . 
well it’s not going to be discontinued; the Christian Counselling 
Services is not getting any funding. And so he came to my 
office asking why, when they’re providing such a good service. 
 
And certainly this service has really provided a very stable . . . 
and given a good feeling to people who, those young mothers, 
who would like to have a child and would like to adopt that 
child out — and realize that their child has a beautiful home — 
to the adoptive parents who couldn’t have children. 
 
It’s been a very positive program. And there’s a couple out at 
Kipling. I’m sure the lady may have even written you. Her  



2664  Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 1996 

name is Sandra White. She’s been . . . and I’m pretty sure she’s 
been in contact with your office. And she has spoken very 
positively of this program. 
 
And so what I’m asking, Mr. Minister, when you talked, I think 
in the Assembly, you mentioned that you had to look for areas 
to cut funding. And I guess what I would ask of you is, when 
you look at the adoptions and you look at where your 
department is today  you have to pay personnel to provide the 
service  if you’d made comparisons, do you think that your 
department would be able to offer the same type . . . and the 
same wholesome, fulfilling role in the adoptive process as 
Christian Counselling? 
 
And as well, wouldn’t it be possible to work with this program 
to offer some assistance, whether you maintain the same level 
and continue to give them that bit of support so that they can 
meet the need out there, Mr. Minister? I realize . . . I think you 
have extended it till July 1 or whatever. But I’m wondering if 
your department will just take a closer look in view of the 
supportive role Christian Counselling has played in the 
adoption program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, let me say I’ve had, from the 
member and from others, correspondence and interest in the 
Christian Counselling Services. It’s been a tough budget. We 
did have to find resources to maintain other programing, and 
this was one of the tougher decisions. We did it I think on the 
basis that we do provide adoption services, that number, 
through the department. We have adoption workers across the 
province and so on. 
 
I can report to the member that we are continuing to work with 
Christian Counselling; that a fee-for-service proposal has been 
submitted by Christian Counselling. We’ve extended the 
transitional funding, as the member mentioned. And I’m told 
that the fee-for-service proposal will be coming to my attention 
for review or approval or denial in very short order. 
 
So we do look forward to a continuing working relationship 
with Christian Counselling Services, even though we are not 
able to continue our budgetary allocation to them. 
 
Mr. Toth:  Mr. Minister, when you mention a fee for service 
coming to your office for your perusal, I’m wondering exactly 
why would you be asking them to put a fee for service forward, 
or coming to you. Does your office have to give an approval for 
that? If people want to use the service, and are willing to pay 
the fee that is needed, why would they have to come to your 
office or to your department if you’re not going to be funding 
the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert:  Mr. Chair, by legislation, we need to 
provide a licence for any group to provide adoption services. 
For the member’s information, Christian Counselling is the 
only, only private adoption service that we license or have 
licensed in the past, and so it’s a matter of licensing from the 
department. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

The Speaker:  When will the committee sit again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Shillington:  Before responding to the question, 
let me take the occasion to wish everyone a happy Father’s Day. 
When we are in here, hour after hour, day after day, we 
sometimes forget these occasions. They’re important to 
members and their families. So let me wish everyone a happy 
Father’s Day, and with that I’ll say that the committee will meet 
again next sitting. 
 
The Speaker:  Next sitting. It now being near the hour of 5 
o’clock . . . and if I may first of all as well join with the 
Government House Leader in wishing a happy Father’s Day to 
the members of the Assembly who do know the joy of 
fatherhood, and for all members that this weekend may be one 
that you can share with the fathers in your life and with your 
families. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
 



   TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS  
PRESENTING PETITIONS  

Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
Gantefoer ..................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2619 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................2619 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS  
Clerk ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2620 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2620 
Hamilton..........................................................................................................................................................................2620, 2641 
Belanger ..........................................................................................................................................................................2620, 2642 
Jess .............................................................................................................................................................................................2620 
Hagel ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2620 
Flavel .........................................................................................................................................................................................2627 
McPherson ................................................................................................................................................................................2627 
Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2628 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2630 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2644 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2645 
Murray ......................................................................................................................................................................................2650 
Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2651 
Ward ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2655 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS  
Goodsoil and Meadow Lake Credit Unions’ 50th Anniversaries  

Sonntag ......................................................................................................................................................................................2620 
Father’s Day  

Julé ............................................................................................................................................................................................2621 
Successful Saskatchewan Hockey Career  

Wall ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2621 
Decline in South-west Area Economy  

Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2621 
Good News for Thunder Creek Constituency  

Hamilton....................................................................................................................................................................................2621 
New Developments in Stony Rapids  

Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................2622 
1996 Vintage Building Award  

Bradley ......................................................................................................................................................................................2622 
Mount St. Joseph Home Opens in Prince Albert  

Kowalsky ...................................................................................................................................................................................2622 
ORAL QUESTIONS  

Political Donations  
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2623 
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2623 

Condie to Queen Elizabeth Power Line  
McLane .....................................................................................................................................................................................2624 
Lautermilch ..............................................................................................................................................................................2624 

Occupational Health and Safety Regulations  
Goohsen .....................................................................................................................................................................................2624 
Romanow ..................................................................................................................................................................................2624 
Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................2625 

No-fault Insurance  
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2625 
Serby ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2625 

 



 

Long-term Care  
Bjornerud ..................................................................................................................................................................................2626 
Cline...........................................................................................................................................................................................2626 

ORDERS OF THE DAY  
WRITTEN QUESTIONS  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2628 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................2628 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS  
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE  

Bill No. 92  An Act respecting Elections  
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2628 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2628 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2629 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2632 

Bill No. 111  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act  
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2633 

Bill No. 112  An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act  
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2633 
Mitchell .....................................................................................................................................................................................2633 

Bill No. 96  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act  
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2633 
Aldridge .....................................................................................................................................................................................2633 

Bill No. 97  An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act  
Lingenfelter ...............................................................................................................................................................................2634 
Krawetz .....................................................................................................................................................................................2634 

Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the Management of Forest Resources  
Scott .................................................................................................................................................................................2635, 2641 
D’Autremont .............................................................................................................................................................................2636 

THIRD READINGS  
Bill No. 111  An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2645 
Bill No. 112  An Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2645 
Bill No. 96  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2645 
Bill No. 97  An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act  

Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2645 
Bill No. 20  An Act respecting the Management of Forest Resources  

Scott ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2645 
SECOND READINGS  

Bill No. 120  An Act respecting the Reorganization of Labour Relations between Health Sector Employers and 
Employees 

Anguish .....................................................................................................................................................................................2645 
Osika ..........................................................................................................................................................................................2647 
Toth ...........................................................................................................................................................................................2647 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE  
General Revenue Fund  
Social Services  Vote 36  

Calvert .......................................................................................................................................................................................2648 
Julé ..................................................................................................................................................................................2648, 2657 
Toth .................................................................................................................................................................................2652, 2663 
Shillington .................................................................................................................................................................................2664 
Speaker ......................................................................................................................................................................................2664 

 


